                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         CORPORATE TAXES AND RETAIL PRICES

                                         Scott R. Baker
                                       Stephen Teng Sun
                                      Constantine Yannelis

                                       Working Paper 27058
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27058


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020

The authors wish to thank John Barrios, Tony Cookson, Anthony DeFusco, Merle Erickson, Alex
Frankel, Paolo Fulghieri, George Georgiadis, Joao Granja, Kevin Hassett, Florian Heider, Sabrina
Howell, Ankit Kalda, Ja- cob Leshno, Rachel Ma, Neale Mahoney, Mike Minnis, Holger
Mueller, Jordan Nickerson, Josh Rauh, Jim Poterba, Rui Silva, Janis Skrastins, Ted Loch-
Temzelides, Michael Weber, Ed Van Wesep, George Zodrow, and Eric Zwick for helpful
comments as well as participants at the NBER Meetings on Business Taxation, Stanford
University, the Northwestern University Kellogg School of Management, the University of
Minnesota Carlson School of Manage- ment, the University of Chicago Booth School of
Business, Rice University, the University of Illinois Gies College of Business, Georgia State
University J. Mack Robinson College of Business, the SFC Cavalcade Asia-Pacific and the Labor
and Finance Group Meetings at the University of Chicago. Mark Zhenzhi He provided
exceptional research assistance. Researchers' own analyses are calculated (or derived) based in
part on data from The Nielsen Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided through
the Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at the University of Chicago
Booth School of Business. The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the
researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the
results reported herein.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Scott R. Baker, Stephen Teng Sun, and Constantine Yannelis. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices
Scott R. Baker, Stephen Teng Sun, and Constantine Yannelis
NBER Working Paper No. 27058
April 2020
JEL No. G38,H22,H25

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the impact of corporate taxes on barcode-level product prices using linked survey and
administrative data. Our empirical strategy exploits the dichotomy between the location of
production and the location of sales, providing estimates free from confounding demand shocks.
We find significant effects of corporate taxes on prices with a net-of-tax elasticity of 0.17. The
effects are larger for lower-price items and products purchased by low-income households and
weaker for high-leverage firms. Approximately 31% of corporate tax incidence falls on
consumers, suggesting that models used by policymakers significantly underestimate the
incidence of corporate taxes on consumers.

Scott R. Baker                                  Constantine Yannelis
Kellogg School of Management                    Booth School of Business
Northwestern University                         University of Chicago
2211 Campus Drive                               5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Evanston, IL 60208                              Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                        and NBER
s-baker@kellogg.northwestern.edu                constantine.yannelis@chicagobooth.edu

Stephen Teng Sun
City University of Hong Kong
sunteng2007@gmail.com
1        Introduction
As an accounting fundamental, higher corporate taxes must result in lower payments to share-
holders, lower wages, or higher product prices. This incidence of corporate taxes on workers,
consumers and capital is key to debates on tax policy. While a large body of work starting with Har-
berger (1962) focuses on the incidence of corporate taxes on shareholders, and more recent work
has studied the impacts on wages (Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch, 2018; Ljungqvist and Smolyansky,
2016) and avoidance through firm location choices (Giroud and Rauh, 2019; Suárez Serrato and
Zidar, 2016), no empirical work has yet examined the effects of corporate tax changes on consumer
prices.1 While the passage of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act instituted the biggest federal corpo-
rate tax cut in recent American history, the impact on consumers was unknown ­ models used by
policymakers assume that corporate taxes are fully incident on only capital and labor (CBO, 2018;
Cronin, Lin and Powell, 2013).
        This paper uses linked administrative and survey data to study the impact of corporate taxes
on barcode-level product prices, which is key in evaluating the incidence of corporate taxes on
consumers. We present the first estimates of how changes in corporate taxes affect retail prices,
finding that taxes levied on producers do impact the final retail sales prices of their products. This
finding stands in contrast to much early theoretical work which argued that, in a closed economy,
corporate taxes should be fully incident on capital (Harberger, 1962) and joins a growing literature
that recognizes the effects of corporate taxes on other economic stakeholders.
        There are two significant challenges to identifying the effects of state-level corporate taxes
on retail prices. The first is that corporate tax changes may be correlated with other factors that
determine retail prices. For example, states may be more likely to raise taxes during recessions,
when price growth is lower due to lower demand. The second challenge is simply that it has been
difficult to assemble a corpus of data with information both on retail prices and the tax nexus of
firms that produce those items. The tax rate in the location where the transaction occurs cannot be
relied upon as the applicable rate since firms that produce tradable goods are often located in states
other than the states where goods are sold.
    1
     Harberger (1962) argued that corporate taxes would be incident on capital in a closed economy. Later work argued
that when corporate and non-corporate firms produced the same good, the incidence can fall on labor and consumers
(Feldstein and Slemrod, 1980; Gravelle and Kotlikoff, 1989). See Auerbach (2006) for a review of classic work on the
incidence of corporate taxation.


                                                         2
    We deal with the first empirical challenge by utilizing the fact that if a firm has tax nexus
(employees and property) in one state, but sells products in multiple states, then the firm's profits
will be primarily subject to the tax laws of the state where the firm has nexus. We are able to use
tax changes in the states where firms' primary operations are located (the `nexus state'), and study
the impact on retail prices in other states in which their products are sold (which we refer to as a
`sold-state').
    In this manner, we avoid the issue stemming from the endogeneity of the local tax changes by
exploiting the dichotomy between the location of production and the location of product sales in
a similar spirit to Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003). This approach allows us to include retailer
by sold-state by year fixed effects. That is, we can compare items sold within the same retailer in
the same state and year, but whose producer firms face different levels of corporate taxation due to
their having different `nexus states'. Our fixed effects capture time-varying state-specific shocks
to retail prices such as local economic conditions where an item was sold. They also capture time-
varying retailer shocks which may affect pricing, such as a national retail chain facing financial
distress.
    To overcome the second empirical challenge and implement our empirical approach, we link
several datasets that enable us to observe barcode-level product prices, the location of each items'
producers, and tax rates. First, and most importantly, we link the Nielsen Retail Measurement
Services (RMS) scanner data, a representative sample of retail sales in all major metropolitan
areas to barcode data from GS1, the company which assigns an item a Universal Product Code
(UPC). This database contains the identity of the firm that produced an item sold. This provides
us with a link between the firm which produced an item and the item's final retail price across
different geographical locations and different retailers. We further identify firm characteristics
from the ORBIS database, which contains administrative and ownership data. Finally, we assemble
corporate tax rate information by using data from Giroud and Rauh (2019), which we extend to
2017 using the same set of sources as they used.
    Our empirical analyses are motivated by a simple model of corporate tax incidence. We find
an elasticity of retail price to the net of corporate tax rates (1 -  ) of approximately 0.17. This
means that a one percentage point increase in the corporate tax rate leads to a 0.17 percent increase
in retail product prices. The results remain stable when we include retailer by year, sold-state by


                                                   3
year, and retailer by sold-state by year fixed effects. While our data does not contain information
to identify the wage effects of corporate taxes, our model and empirical estimates allow for a back-
of-envelope calculation of the wage elasticity to be 0.43. This estimate is in line with the point
estimate close to 0.4, found in Germany by Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch (2018), which serves as a
plausibility check for our price effect estimation.
   Informed by our empirical estimate, we can gauge the incidence of corporate taxes on con-
sumers by relating the welfare change of consumers induced by a marginal change in the net-of-
tax rate to the sum of the welfare changes of consumers, workers and firm owners (Suárez Serrato
and Zidar, 2016; Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch, 2018). We find the incidence on consumers, workers
and shareholders is 31%, 38% and 31%, respectively. This stands in sharp contrast to the case
where we do not take into account the effect of corporate income tax on product prices; under this
assumption, workers and shareholders will bear 42% and 58% of the tax burden, respectively.
   We complement our main analysis with a graphical event study, using large state-level corpo-
rate tax changes, defined as tax changes greater than or equal to one percentage point (see Figure
1 for a map of tax changes). Our analysis indicates that, for both tax increases and cuts, the timing
of price changes following tax events reflects the events studied. We see little price movement in
the periods immediately before tax events, and we see prices rise or fall following tax increases
and cuts.
   Additionally, we repeat our analysis using a set of firms that are not subject to corporate taxes:
S-corporations (Yagan, 2015). S-corporations belong to another legal form of organization and
are required to pay personal income taxes rather than corporate income taxes. If our empirical
strategy identifying the causal effects of corporate tax changes is valid, we should only find price
effects of corporate taxes for C-corporations and not for S-corporations. On the other hand, if
changes in state corporate income taxes are correlated with unobserved supply-side shocks, then
both C-corporations and S-corporations should be affected. We find positive and significant price
effects for C-corporations seeing corporate income tax rate changes. In contrast, we see no price
effects for tax rate changes that do not affect the legal entity ­ neither for C-corporations following
personal income tax rate changes nor for S-corporations when corporate income tax rates change.
   We also conduct graphical analyses showing binned scatter plots of changes in retail prices
against changes in corporate tax rates across 100 quantiles for C-corporations and S-corporations.


                                                  4
Consistent with our parametric regression outcomes, we find a strong relationship between cor-
porate taxes and prices for C-corporations while a flat relationship between changes in prices and
changes in corporate tax rates for S-corporations.
   We conduct several further tests. First, we find no effect for items produced in states with
full sales tax apportionment. In these states, taxes are not apportioned by the firms' property and
payroll, and therefore changes in tax rates of certain states will only affect taxes on items sold in
that particular state. Since we already absorb sold-state by year fixed effects, we do not expect to
find any effect of changes in corporate taxes on prices for these states. We find it is indeed the case
in this placebo test. Second, we show that the effects are stronger in states with throwback and
throwout rules, which allow states to claw back taxes on untaxed sales from states with lower taxes.
Since a corporation's main tax nexus usually lies in the headquarter state due to the presence of
employees and properties, this rule will reinforce the effect of tax changes in the headquarter state
for products sold out of state. Third, our results are robust to controlling for various state-level tax
credits or grants that might be correlated with changes in corporate tax rates: (1) investment tax
credits (2) upper and lower bounds of R&D tax credits (3) job creation tax credit indicators and (4)
job creation grant indicators.
   We also demonstrate significant heterogeneous effects across products and firms. We find that
the lowest price goods tend to respond most to corporate tax changes, with average magnitudes
almost twice as high in the lower half relative to the upper half. Similarly, we find evidence
of a larger effect for UPCs commonly purchased by households with lower incomes relative to
those purchased by high-income households. Another dimension of heterogeneity we examine is
corporate leverage. Since corporate debt can be used as a tax-shield, product prices for firms with
higher leverage should be less sensitive to the corporate income tax changes. This is indeed what
we find. Lastly, we also find some purely suggestive evidence that the tax elasticity of price is
smaller in more competitive product markets, though not statistically significant.
   Our paper links closely to the literature studying corporate tax incidence. To our knowledge,
this is the first study to empirically estimate how corporate taxes affect product prices. Early work
starting with Harberger (1962) argued that, in a closed economy, corporate tax incidence is borne
almost entirely by capital. However, subsequent work has noted that in open economies business
taxes can impact investment and consumer prices (Kotlikoff and Summers, 1987). Gravelle (2013)


                                                   5
provides a review of much of the classic literature on corporate tax incidence.
   Newer empirical work has focused on the incidence of corporate taxes on firm location choice
and workers. Giroud and Rauh (2019) study how corporate taxes impact firm location choices and
employment reallocation, comparing S- and C- corporations, while Ljungqvist and Smolyansky
(2016) study the impact of corporate taxes on regional employment and income. Suárez Serrato
and Zidar (2016) estimate the incidence of corporate taxes on workers and owners and find that
roughly one-third of corporate taxes are incident on workers. Fajgelbaum, Morales, Suárez Serrato
and Zidar (2018) study spatial misallocation, taking into account worker and firm preferences.
   There is less empirical work on the direct incidence of corporate taxes on wages. In an im-
portant study, Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch (2018) use German data and find that corporate taxes do
indeed affect wages. Recent studies have also focused on how corporate taxes impact firm lever-
age (Heider and Ljungqvist, 2015), risk-taking (Ljungqvist, Zhang and Zuo, 2017) and corporate
innovation (Mukherjee, Singh and Zaldokas, 2017; Atanassov and Liu, forthcoming). We add to
this literature by providing, to our knowledge, the first direct estimates of the effects of corporate
taxes on product level retail prices.
   Our paper has important implications for the incidence and progressivity of corporate taxes.
Due to effects on prices, corporate taxes are more similar to sales taxes in their effects. Many
studies of corporate tax incidence ignore the impact on consumers, as do many models used by
policy makers. For example, the CBO (2018) assumes that corporate taxes are not incident on
households through consumer prices, but instead allocates incidence purely to owners of capital
and through labor income, with three-quarters being incident on shareholders. The US Treasury
model assumes an even higher incidence on shareholders, with more than four-fifths of corporate
tax incidence borne by capital income (Cronin, Lin and Powell, 2013). Our analysis reveals a strik-
ing result that approximately 31% of the total incidence of corporate taxation falls on consumers
through higher product prices, with capital owners bearing a similar amount.
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses our setting, presents a
stylized model and our main empirical strategy. Section 3 discusses the data used for our analysis.
Section 4 presents the main empirical results, and the incidence of corporate taxes on consumers.
Section 5 presents placebo analyses, and explores heterogeneity in product, household and firm
levels. Section 6 concludes and discusses avenues for future research.


                                                  6
2        The Price Effects of Corporate Taxes

2.1       Mechanics of State Corporate Taxation

State corporate tax rules vary from state to state, and typically states tax activities that occur within
their own borders.2 Firms thus have tax nexus in states where they have a physical presence, such
as establishments, sales, or employees. Multi-state firms must pay taxes in each state where the
firm has nexus, and taxes are apportioned as a fraction of federal taxable income.
        In our main empirical analysis, we exclude products sold in the same state where they are
produced, and our empirical strategy relies on comparing how the price of items sold in one state
is affected by tax changes in other states where an item is produced. Our main specifications
utilize an apportionment approach to define the appropriate corporate tax rate that is incident on a
producer. That is, we estimate the corporate tax rates a firm is subject to given the states in which it
has payroll employees and sales. Each state has different time-varying rules governing the weights
applied to each of these factors.3


2.2       Model

Our analysis begins with a stylized model demonstrating how corporate taxes impact prices, which
motivates our subsequent empirical analysis.4 We assume firms operate in a standard environment
similar to De Loecker (2011) and Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016), and that firms are monopolis-
tically competitive. Firms are endowed with some productivity level B , and combine labor, L and
capital, K to produce output y with the following production function, y = B · L · K 1- .
        Firms take input prices as given and the output price p is given by an inverse demand curve
from CES preferences with y = I · ( p
                                    p
                                    ¯
                                      ) , where p
                                                ¯ is the price level and is normalized to 1 and
 < 0, is the demand elasticity. The firm maximizes profits, which are taxed at a rate  . The firm
    2
      See Giroud and Rauh (2019) and Heider and Ljungqvist (2015) for a detailed discussion of corporate tax nexus.
The precise tax nexus also depends on whether a state has a throwback or throwout rule, under which sales of untaxed
activities in other states are included in the home states' tax base.
    3
      In the appendix, we follow Heider and Ljungqvist (2015) and Ljungqvist and Smolyansky (2016) and measure
corporate taxes at the level of a firm's headquarter state, demonstrating that our results are robust to alternative defini-
tions of the appropriate corporate tax nexus. The fact that a firm's headquarters state may not be the only state where
it has nexus may introduce some measurement error in our estimates. This would likely have the effect of attenuating
these results, leading us to underestimate the incidence of corporate taxes on consumers.
    4
      Appendix A provides further detail regarding the model.



                                                             7
thus solves:
                                       max(1 -  ) · (p · y - w · L) -  · K                                    (1)
                                        L,K


where w is the wage rate for labor and  is the rate of return for capital. For any given level of
taxes  , if we solve the above static problem, the firm's optimal price level in logs, ln(p) will be
given by
                         ln(p) = -(1 -  ) ln(1 -  ) + (1 -  ) ln() +  ln(w) + Z                               (2)

where Z is a constant. Appendix A provides the derivation details. Equation (2) shows that product
prices, p, depend on corporate taxes  and motivates our use of ln(1 -  ), i.e., the net-of-tax rate.
This particular functional form for the empirical analysis follows the public finance literature and
makes the coefficient readily interpretable as the net-of-tax elasticity (Suárez Serrato and Zidar,
2016; Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch, 2018).5


2.3       Empirical Approach

To isolate causal impacts of corporate tax changes on retail prices, we include state by retailer
by year fixed effects and compare retail prices of items within the same state and year and sold
by the same retailer but that are subject to different state-level corporate tax rates. We thus are
able to control for confounding factors like local demand fluctuations due to business cycles. The
remainder of this section outlines the approach in detail.
       Our empirical approach exploits the fact that a given producer generally has physical properties
and payroll that are more (and differently) geographically concentrated than their sales. That is,
if a firm has most of its employees and property in a state h, but sales spread across many states
s  S , then a firm's profits will be primarily subject to the corporate tax laws of state h. In contrast,
demand for a producer's products will be primarily affected by local economic conditions in the
states in which the product is sold.
       Our apportionment approach means that a given firm may be affected by the corporate tax rate
in several states, depending on the geographic spread of their property, payroll, and sales and the
applicable weights of the various states. For our purposes, the identifying variation will come from
the fact that changes in applicable state-level corporate tax rates affecting that firm will be divorced
   5
       Our results lead to similar conclusions if we use ln(1 -  ) or  as the primary independent variable.


                                                            8
from the economic fundamentals of the states where that firm distributes its retail goods. A product
i is produced by a producing firm and is sold at time t in state s by a retailer r, which operates
in multiple states. We estimate the following equation, which comes directly from the theoretical
model presented in Section 2.2, restricting to firms that we can identify as C-corporations.



                                                      c
        ln(pi,f,r,s,t+1 ) = r,s,t+1 + i,r,s +  ln(1 - f,t ) + 1 Xi,t+1 + 2 Xf,t+1 + i,f,r,s,t+1          (3)


    where pi,f,r,s,t+1 is the retail price of product i of firm f sold by retailer r in state s at time t + 1
    c
and f,t is the corporate tax rate relevant for firm f that produces an item. For all specifications,
 represents the sum of both federal and state level taxes. The applicable corporate tax rate for a
                 c
particular firm, f,t , is a sale and employee share weighted average of state corporate tax rates in
states in which it operates. See Section 3.6 for more details.
    We also include product specific controls Xi,t+1 , as well as controls Xf,t+1 for variables in the
states in which the producer's headquarters is located. These include logged forms of total product
level sales, state property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage
and insurance rates, as well as state unemployment rates. i,f,r,s,t+1 is an error term, which we
                                             c
assume is conditionally orthogonal to ln(1 - f,t ). We cluster standard errors at the headquarter
state level.
    We include product by retailer by sold-state fixed effects i,r,s for each item identified by a
UPC code. These absorb time invariant product-specific price factors. Note that since each item is
produced by one firm, these fixed effects also absorb the time invariant effects of the locations and
networks of their producers. For example, the fixed effects capture the fact that some producers
may be located in states with better transportation networks, which could lower product prices.
    An important feature of our strategy is the fact that we include retailer by sold-state by year
fixed effects r,s,t . These fixed effects absorb any time specific factors in the seller state such as
the effects of local business cycles, changing tastes in different regions, or the differential severity
of recessions in particular states. These retailer by time fixed effects also capture time-specific
retailer shocks, such as a major national chain declining in popularity or facing a financial shock.
    Our empirical specification thus compares items sold by the same retailer in the same state at



                                                     9
the same time, but whose producer companies face different levels of corporate taxation due to
their properties and employees being mostly located in different states. In general, products in a
retailer that are produced by affected out-of-state producers make up only a small fraction of total
goods sold in that retailer. Thus, any change in the price of an out-of-state good affected by a
corporate tax increase will likely have minimal impacts on the other goods sold in that retailer.
For instance, a retail store in Nevada has only a few items sold by producers in Tennessee who are
affected by a corporate tax change in Tennessee.



3        Data
Table 1 shows summary statistics for the main analysis variables. Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2
describe the main analysis variables and show the steps taken to link the various datasets and
construct our final sample.


3.1        State Corporate Tax Data

To assemble data on state-level corporate tax records, we utilize and extend data shared by Giroud
and Rauh (2019). In their paper, they construct a database of corporate taxes primarily from the
University of Michigan Tax Database (1977-2002), the Tax Foundation (2000-2011), and the "state
finance" chapter of the "Book of States." We extend this data from 2013 to 2017 utilizing the same
sources, primarily relying on the Tax Foundation. To complement our analysis of C-corporations
and corporate tax rates, we obtain personal income tax rate data from the NBER database for
placebo tests.
        Figure 1 displays the geographic distribution of changes in corporate tax rates that we rely
on for variation during our sample period. We see a substantial number of both increases and
decreases in tax rates. A sizable number of these changes in corporate tax rates are fairly large,
with 23 of the tax changes being 1% or more.6
    6
    Figure A.1 displays changes in the level of corporate tax rates at three points during our sample period. Figure
A.2 shows the distribution of state-level corporate tax rate levels near the two ends of our sample period and Figure
A.3 illustrates the distribution of changes during our sample period.




                                                         10
3.2       Nielsen Retail Measurement Services (RMS) Scanner Data

The Nielsen Retail Measurement Services (RMS) scanner data set is provided by the Kilts-Nielsen
Data Center at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The RMS data is gener-
ated by point-of-sale systems and our sample contains over 41,000 distinct stores from 91 retail
chains across 371 MSAs and about 2500 counties between 2006 and 2017. A distinctive feature
of this database is that it provides comprehensive coverage of the universe of products and the full
portfolio of firms.
       In comparison to other scanner data sets collected at the store level such as IRI Symphony
dataset, the RMS covers a much wider range of products and stores.7 The data set comprises
around 12 billion transactions per year worth, on average, $220 billion. Over the sample period,
the total sales across all retail establishments are worth approximately $2 trillion and represent
roughly half of all sales in grocery stores or in drug stores, about a third in mass merchandisers
(Argente, Lee and Moreira, 2018). The stores are spread throughout the United States, covering
98% of Designated Market Areas (DMAs; similar to MSAs).
       We utilize the RMS scanner data to construct a database of prices at the annual retailer-state-
UPC level. For each good, we construct an annual price from the weighted average (based on the
number of units sold at each price) of all goods purchased in a year. After merging with tax and
firm data, the final C-corporation sample accounts for about 11% of UPCs and 17% of aggregate
sales in the RMS database.


3.3       GS1 Barcode Data

The GS1 Company data allows us to derive UPC level linkages between items and their produc-
ers (Argente, Lee and Moreira, 2018), giving a relatively comprehensive match for retail-good-
producing firms. The GS1 Company offers a method to map UPCs to products and individual
producers in order to help firms manage their inventory. Each UPC acts as a unique identifier for
a product (e.g., an individual 20-ounce plastic bottle of Coca-Cola Classic) and allows us to link
   7
     In the appendix, we show that the results are robust to using Nielsen Homescan dataset. This dataset is more
restricted than the RMS, as it collects information on the realized purchases of 40,000-60,000 US households and
covers less than 60% of the products the RMS covers in a given year. However, the Homescan panel is constructed
as a representative sample of the American population and is tracked through the inclusion of numerous demographic
indicators, including the location of the household. We report results using the Homescan data mirroring our main
results in Appendix Table A.3.

                                                       11
purchase and price in the RMS data to information about the firm that produced each item, as well
as the location of a given firm's headquarters. UPCs (barcodes) are nearly ubiquitous for products
carried by the retailers that we study and, if they are in a relevant industry, will be available for
essentially all goods that a given producer manufactures. Moreover, the linkages should be unique
for a product and are generally unchanged over time.
   The link between UPC code and producer is driven by the first 6 to 9 digits of the UPC, known
as the `company prefix.' However, the number of digits contained in this company prefix is not
fixed across UPCs and firms. Thus, for each UPC, we extract its first 6 to 9 digits as four company
prefix candidates. Then we match these candidates to the pool of company prefixes in order to
create possible UPC-producer links. According to the GS1, "As the GS1 Company Prefix varies in
length, the issuance of a GS1 Company Prefix excludes all longer strings that start with the same
digits from being issued as GS1 Company Prefixes." Essentially, for one particular UPC code with
its associated four company prefix candidates, there will be only one candidate fully matched to
the company prefix pool. Our matching algorithm confirms this unique relationship. In the end,
we use the GS1 Data Hub to exactly match 83% of the UPCs in the data to a GS1 company prefix.


3.4   Orbis Data - Firm Location and Structure

We construct our database on firm characteristics primarily through the use of the Orbis database,
developed by Bureau van Dijk (BvD). This database contains administrative and ownership data
on 130 million firms across the globe. It covers both public and private firms, offering us an
opportunity to identify the incorporation type of producers in our pricing database.
   Orbis collects data on both public and private firms from administrative and other sources and
organizes them in a consistent format. This includes information on the legal form/incorporation
type that a given firm has undertaken, as noted by the `Standardized Legal Form' and `National
Legal Form' variables. Unfortunately, these variables do not definitively determine whether a firm
is a C-corporation or an S-corporation and we are forced to also supplement these variables with
information on the number and type of shareholders in order to infer the incorporation type.
   We first utilize the legal forms to categorize all public companies as C-corporations. We treat
partnerships as an S-corporations and non-profit organizations and public authorities as firms that
are exempt from corporate taxes altogether. For the rest of the unidentified producers, we resort to

                                                 12
information about their shareholders. We download the legal form information and the shareholder
information of firms at the most recently available date. There is a reporting lag in Orbis data of
roughly two years. Since we downloaded the data in 2019, the latest available year is 2017 or
occasionally 2016.
   According to the definition of S-corporations (26 U.S. Code 1361.(b)), they should not have
more than 100 shareholders and their shareholders should be individuals, not other firms or holding
companies. Consequently, we treat producers who have more than 100 shareholders or who have
non-individual shareholders as C-corporations, i.e., firms ineligible to be taxed as S-corporations.
Due to data limitations, what we identify is essentially whether a firm is eligible to elect to be taxed
as an S-corporation. However, whether the eligible firms execute this option is unobserved to us.
   For those firms that satisfy the shareholder requirement, they can still elect to be taxed as a C-
corporation, rather than choose to pass the income to their shareholders. Therefore, this approach
enables us to relatively accurately measure C-corporations, while S-corporations could only be
more noisily identified. For this reason, we use accurately identified C-corporations for baseline
analysis and use the noisily identified S-corporations to conduct placebo tests in similar spirit to
Giroud and Rauh (2019) and Yagan (2015).
   To match our categorized Orbis data to our database of prices, we make use of matching soft-
ware on the web platform of Orbis. This system automatically matches firms according to names,
locations, industry and other information. Since firms could operate in multiple locations, we re-
strict the matching criteria to company names and industries. We also conduct hand-matching on
firm names to supplement the matching for the largest firms in our sample. In the end, we match
approximately 80% GS1 producers and over 90% of all the UPCs in our pricing data.


3.5    Reference USA (Infogroup) Data

Broadly, Infogroup provides data on tens of millions of businesses in the United States at both
aggregated and disaggregated levels. These data are collected by Infogroup in a variety of ways,
from public statistics up to direct phone calls and emails to businesses. In particular, we use data
from Reference USA (owned by Infogroup) to establish the geographic spread of business activity
within a given firm, as measured by the location of employees in a firm across states. We use this
geographic distribution of employees and sales to compute the weighted average tax rate for a firm.

                                                  13
3.6       State Tax Apportionment

Each state that levies a corporate tax uses a formula to determine the fraction of a firm's activities
occurred in that state for tax purposes. In general, states attempt to measure this concept using a
weighted average of the fraction of sales, property, and employees a firm has in that state. These
apportionment weights vary significantly across states and over time. Thus, the actual corporate
tax rate that a firm is subject to is itself a weighted average of these state-level tax rates. For a
firm operating in many states, they may be affected by changes in corporate tax rates in any one of
those states, but will be most heavily affected by corporate tax rates in the state in which they have
a majority of their operations.
       We follow Heider and Ljungqvist (2015), and approximate the effective tax rate according to
the geographic distribution of sales and employment. We match the producers from GS1 database
to the Reference USA dataset, which tracks firms' sales and employment at the establishment level.
This allows us to compute firm's nexus-based tax rate as follows:


                                  c                1 Ef,s,t      1 Sf,s,t        c
                                  f,t =        (               +             ) × s,t                               (4)
                                           s
                                                   2 Ef,total,t 2 Sf,total,t
          c
where the f,t is the nexus-based corporate tax rate for firm f in year t. Ef,s,t and Sf,s,t are firm f 's
number of employees and sales in state s in year t, while Ef,total,t and Sf,total,t are the total number
                                                    c
of employees and sales across all states in year t. s,t is the state i's corporate tax rate in year t.
       In addition to the state-level corporate tax rates, we extract apportionment rates and throw-
back or throw-out rules from the Commerce Clearing House's State Tax Handbooks up through
2017. We also collect Data on state investment incentive programs during 2006 and 2017 (i.e.,
tax credits for investment, R&D, and job creation, as well as job creation grant programs) from
three sources: individual state-level Department of Economic Development websites, Department
of Revenue websites, and legislature websites. The numbers are also double-checked with State
Tax Rule Books when available.8
   8
     We show in the Appendix Table A.4 that the results are also robust to utilizing a different measure of tax nexus,
based on a firm's headquarter location only. The point estimates are slightly smaller in terms of absolute value, which
is consistent with a firm's headquarter location being a noisy proxy for the true tax nexus.




                                                           14
4     Main Results

4.1     Main Estimates of Tax Elasticity

Table 2 presents estimates of equation (3), using ordinary least squares. All specifications include
UPC by retailer by sold-state fixed effects, and other controls noted in Section 2.3. Standard errors
are clustered at the headquarter state level.9 Column (1) includes controls and UPC by retailer by
sold-state fixed effects as well as year fixed effects to control for macroeconomic conditions. The
estimates suggest large changes in retail prices stemming from corporate tax changes (measured as
the change in state and federal corporate tax rates), with an elasticity of prices to net of corporate
tax rates of approximately 0.17. The estimate is statistically significant at the 0.01 level.
    To further control for state-specific economic conditions, column (2) includes sold-state by
year fixed effects. These capture state-specific temporal factors, for example the housing boom
and bust being more severe in certain states (for instance, Stroebel and Vavra (2019) show that
local real estate prices impact retail prices.) Column (3) uses retailer by year fixed effects. The
retailer by year fixed effects address firm-specific temporal shocks. For example, firm financing
shocks may impact retail prices (Kim, 2018). Here, the estimated elasticity is also similar to the
estimate in column (2). Column (4) includes both sold-state by year and retailer state by year fixed
effects. Finally, column (5) adds in sold-state by retailer by year fixed effects. The results again
remain very similar to those in column (4), and significantly different from zero at the 0.01 level.
    Figure 2 shows the timing of price effects following large tax changes. This exercise serves
as a test of our identification strategy, and the timing of observed results should coincide with
the timing of tax changes. We define a large tax event as an increase or decrease of more than
one percentage point, following Giroud and Rauh (2019). There are 23 large tax changes in our
sample, including 10 tax increases and 13 tax cuts.
    We re-estimate our main specification, replacing the main treatment with an indicator of a time
period before and after the large tax event, scaled by the change of tax rate.10 The shaded area
    9
      Appendix Table A.5 shows that the main results are robust to sales weighted regressions. Results using firm-level
clustering are reported in Appendix Table A.6.
   10
      Specifically, the figure plots coefficients n are from the following specification: ln(pi,f,r,s,t ) = r,s,t + i,r,s +
   n=-2 n 1[t = n] × ln(1 - f,t ) + 1 Xi,t + 2 Xf,t + i,f,r,s,t . Appendix Figure A.4 presents a simpler exercise,
   n=3                               c

showing the price response following large tax cuts and increases. The figure shows a statistically insignificant rise
following tax increases, and a statistically significant fall in prices following tax cuts.



                                                           15
denotes a 95% confidence interval. We indeed find that the timing of observed effects lines up
with large tax changes. That is, we see insignificant effects in the years prior to the tax event but
substantial price effects following the tax change.


4.2       Plausibility Check on Magnitudes

In the previous section, we utilize a reduced form estimation to measure the elasticity of prices
to corporate taxes. However, one should not interpret our estimates as 1 -  , the capital share of
gross output. Tax increases have a direct effect on wages, which we do not observe, so we can not
separately identify the effect of taxes on wages.11 In fact, our empirically identified price elasticity
Ip will be equal to 1 -  - Iw in absolute value, where Iw is the wage elasticity.12
       We take the value of  (the labor elasticity) to be 0.58 (Giandrea and Sprague, 2017), and
informed by our empirical estimate of Ip , we can back out Iw = 0.43. This estimate is close
to Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch (2018), who find the corporate income tax estimate of wage to be
around 0.4 in Germany. We take this back-of-envelope calculation as evidence that our estimate
for the price elasticity to corporate taxes is of reasonable magnitude.
       We can extend the model in section 2.2 to include intermediate goods in the production function
and use the model as well as estimates from the literature to separately identify the intermediate
input good price elasticity. Ex ante, this should be weakly lower than the product price elasticity, as
intermediate goods may be sourced in the same state a firm is located, or another state.13 Our data
can not separately identify wage or intermediate input price change. Therefore our identified price
incidence includes wage incidence, which we denote Iw , and intermediate good price incidence is
denoted by IM . Our empirically identified price incidence Ip will be equal to - + Iw + (1 -  -
 )IM .
       We follow Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) and can set the values of  (the labor elasticity)
  11
      Indeed wages could directly affect product prices as shown in Equation 2. However, to the extent that changes in
wages are due to changes in corporate taxes, the effect on prices is already captured by our empirical strategy through
the log-linear term of ln(1 -  ). In unreported analyses, we further control for higher-order terms of  to allow for
potential non-linear effects of corporate taxes on wages, and find results unchanged. It is also worth noting that, since
an increase in corporate taxes leads to lower wages and wages and product prices are positively correlated, this at best
introduces a non-first-order underestimate bias into our empirical estimate.
   12
      We assume capital owners supply capital perfectly elastically at the national rate, consistent with Suárez Serrato
and Zidar (2016).
   13
      In the extreme case where all intermediate goods are sourced out of states that do not witness any tax change, the
intermediate good price elasticity could be 0.


                                                          16
and 1 -  -  (where  is the capital elasticity) accordingly using BEA's 2012 data on shares of
gross output by industry. These indicate that for private industries, compensation and intermediate
inputs account for 28.5% and 45.6% respectively of the shares of gross output. Fuest, Peichl and
Siegloch (2018) estimate that Iw is around 0.4, and given our estimate of Ip = -0.17, this implies
that the intermediate good price elasticity IM = -0.055. As firms' intermediate inputs could be
sourced locally or nationally, this -0.055 is a reasonable value of intermediate price incidence
compared with the output price elasticity of -0.17.
   Alternatively, we could back out a range of the wage incidence of corporate taxes by assuming
two extreme cases for intermediate goods: in one case all intermediate goods are sourced nationally
and there is no price incidence on intermediate goods due to local tax changes, IM = 0, then the
identity gives Iw = 0.312; in the other case, all intermediate goods are sourced locally and there
is a same level of price incidence as output, IM = -0.17, then the identity gives Iw = 0.585.
The back-of-envelope calculated range of labor incidence from 0.312 to 0.585 is within the 95%
confidence internal of Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch (2018), which is estimated for the incidence of
corporate taxes on wages in Germany and lies between 0.168 and 0.630.


4.3    Incidence of Corporate Taxes on Consumers

Our empirical analysis estimates the elasticity of the output price with respect to the net-of-business
                   dp (1- )
tax rate, p =    d(1- ) p
                            .   Armed with this estimate, we quantify the incidence of corporate
taxes on product prices as the share of the total corporate income tax burden bourn by consumers.
We enrich the setting in Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch (2018) by allowing for the welfare change
of consumers induced by a marginal change in the net-of-tax rate, along side workers and firm
owners.
   More specifically, we consider three types of agents: (1) the consumer in state s and (2) the
worker and (3) the firm owner, both in state h. We assume that (h = s), which is consistent
with our empirical setting. Consumers maximize the utility function U (Cs , Ls ) given the budget
                          p
constraint: p · Cs = (1 - s )ws Ls , where p is the price for the consumption good, Cs is consumption
          p
quantity, s is personal income tax rate, ws is the wage received by consumer and Ls is the quantity
of labor. Since the consumer we are concerned with is not from the state where there is a tax shock,
we assume the wage and labor supply, ws and Ls , will not change. We can write the indirect utility

                                                  17
function as Vcons (p) and a change in consumer utility as a result of a change in the product price is
given by dVcons = -Cs · dp, by the envelope theorem.
    The worker in state h will maximize the utility function U (Ch , Lh ) given the budget constraint:
              p
p · Ch = (1 - h )wh Lh , where for simplicity we assume only wages are affected. Then the
indirect utility is given by V ((1 -  )w) and the change in worker utility induced by tax change
                 p                                                                         c
is dVwkrh = (1 - h )Lh · dwh . A representative firm in state h faces a corporate tax rate h and
                           c
maximizes profits,  = (1 - h )(pF (K, Lh ) - wh Lh ) - rK , over capital K and labor L. We
similarly apply the envelope theorem and solve for the marginal effect in welfare for firm owners:
            c
dVfh = (1 - h )F (K, Lh )dp - (pF (K, Lh ) - wh Lh )d .
    The share of consumers, workers and firm owners in the overall burden of a marginal change
in the corporate tax rate is given by the respective share of their own marginal effect in welfare
out of the total sum dVcons + dVfh + dVwrkh . For example, the share of the tax burden bourn by
                                  dVcons
consumers is Icons =      dVcons +dVfh +dVwrkh
                                               .
    The share of consumers in the tax burden can be expressed as:

                                                           scon p
                Icons =                     p                     c           c
                                                                                                                     (5)
                           scon p - (1 -    h )slabor w   - (1 - h  )p - (1 - h )(1 - slabor )

                        pCs                                                                             wh Lh
    Here, scon =     pF (K,Ls )
                                  is the consumption share over total output and slabor =             pF (K,Lh )
                                                                                                                   is the
labor share over total output. p is the tax elasticity of price and w is the tax elasticity of wage.
The price elasticity and wage elasticity to the net of tax rate are two sufficient statistics to calculate
marginal welfare changes of consumers, workers and firms.14
    Our data allows for identification of the output price elasticity, which we find to be p = -0.17
and we take the wage elasticity from Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch (2018) so that w = 0.4. Using
this, we can calculate that the incidence on consumers, workers and shareholders is 31%, 38%, and
31%, respectively.15 The results suggest that approximately one third of corporate tax incidence
falls on consumers, potentially making corporate taxes more similar to sales taxes and hence much
less progressive.
   14
      We also use scon = 0.675 from BEA's consumption share of GDP, slabor = 0.58 from Giandrea and Sprague
           p                                                                           c
(2017), h    = 0.40 as personal income tax rate including federal and state taxes, and h = 0.55 as the sum of federal
and state level corporate income tax rate. Appendix A provides further derivation details.
   15
      If we do not take into account the effect of corporate income tax on product prices, the resultant incidence falls
primarily (58%) on capital. This is largely consistent with Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016) ­ as they find that the
incidence of the corporate tax falls 65-70% on capital ­ as well as with CBO and Treasury estimates.


                                                          18
5     Placebo Analysis and Heterogeneity

5.1    Placebo Analysis: S- and C- Corporations

So far, we have focused on C-corporations, which are subject to corporate income taxation. A
natural placebo test is to repeat our analysis on other firms that produce goods for retail sales
but do not pay corporate taxes (Yagan, 2015; Giroud and Rauh, 2019). In the United States, S-
corporations fill this role as they are subject to personal income tax rates on their earnings. Figure
3 shows annual price changes and tax changes across 100 quantiles for both C-corporations and S-
corporations. The left panel shows the relationship for C-corporations and the right panel displays
the same relationship for S-corporations.
    While all firms that we classify as C-corporations will be properly classified, there is some
classification error for S-corporations. This is discussed in more detail in Section 3.4, and will
result in classifying some C-corporations as S-corporations. This measurement error would likely
bias us away from finding a zero result for firms classified as S-corporations. In these panels, we
find a strong relationship between corporate taxes and prices for C-corporations, consistent with
the evidence presented in Section 4.1. However, we see a flat relationship between changes in
prices and changes in corporate tax rates for S-corporations. The fact that we see no impact of tax
changes on firms that do not pay corporate taxes suggests that any possible source of bias in our
estimates must impact only C-corporations, but not S-corporations. This relationship is tested and
confirmed in a regression framework in Table 3, where we include the full battery of fixed effects
as in our main specifications.
    Another version of our placebo test can be conducted by replacing the corporate income tax rate
with personal income tax rate in equation (3). That is, we test whether the prices of C-Corporation-
produced retail goods are responsive to personal income tax rates. We present our results in Table
A.7. The coefficients are close to zero in magnitude and not statistically significantly different
from zero, confirming that the changes in state-level corporate income tax rates are not capturing
other time-varying shocks that coincide with changes in product prices.




                                                 19
5.2    Variations in Sales Apportionment

States differ significantly in their corporate tax apportionment regulations. One important dimen-
sion along which apportionment rules differ is on the share of a firm's sales that are in a particular
state. Some states, such as California, apportion corporate tax income entirely by sales revenue
within a state. In these states, corporations pay taxes on profits apportioned by the share of sales
in a state. For states with full sales tax apportionment, we would not expect to find a significant
effect of state corporate taxes on prices, as we absorb sold-state by year fixed effects, and changes
in a firm's corporate tax rate will only affect taxes on items sold in-state, which we dropped.
   Table 4 explores these apportionment rules. The table shows estimates similar to those in the
main specification, interacting ln(1 - c,f,t ) with a dummy for whether producers' headquarter
state's sales apportionment ratio is 100%. For such states, the effect of the headquarter state
corporate taxes on the product prices should be low ­ the relevant corporate tax rate is the one
where sales are made rather than where they are produced. For states that apportion corporate
taxes purely by the share of sales, there is no significant combined effect of corporate taxes on
prices (eg. adding coefficients in rows 1 and 2).
   This provides further evidence that our observed effects are driven by changes in corporate
taxes, rather than other confounding factors correlated with state tax changes. Appendix Table A.8
presents a variant of this, restricting our main analysis to states with 100% sales apportionment.
Consistent with the findings in Table 4, we find no significant effect of corporate tax changes
among this sample.


5.3    Variation in Throwback and Throwout Rules

States' apportionment rules also differ in the sense that several states have throwback and throwout
rules for apportionment when calculating taxable income. Under throwback rules, some states like
California require firms to add back sales that are to buyers in a state where the company has no
nexus to taxable income. Throwout rules achieve a similar goal and also target `nowhere sales',
which are sales to buyers in a state where the company has no nexus. Under a throwout rule, states
require firms to subtract the `nowhere sales' from total sales, thereby increasing the apportionment
weights. We thus expect stronger effects of corporate tax changes in states with throwback and


                                                    20
throwout rules.
    Table 5 presents estimates similar to our main specification, interacting with an indicator
of whether a producer headquarter state has a throwback or a throwout rule, respectively. For
throwout, the interaction effects are negative and statistically significant at the 5% level, though
the results are generally not significant for throwback, but are consistently negative across both
interactions. This provides suggestive evidence consistent with throwback and throwout rules gen-
erating higher retail price pass-through.


5.4     Additional State Controls

While our state by year fixed effects rule out any time varying sold-state specific demand channel,
they do not capture time varying producer state factors that could be correlated with corporate
tax changes. One potential concern is that corporate tax increases or cuts may be coupled with
corresponding changes in state policies that could impact firms. For example, states may couple
increases in corporate tax rates with increases in R&D tax credits or job creation tax credits. We
note that our placebo tests using S-corporations suggest this is not the case, as S-corporations are
not similarly affected as C-corporations. Here we conduct an additional test, adding additional
controls for producer state policy changes.
    Table 6 explores this concern, by adding the following producer state controls used in Heider
and Ljungqvist (2015): (1) investment tax credits (2) upper and lower bounds of R&D tax credits
(3) job creation tax credit indicators and (4) job creation grant indicators.16 The elasticity estimates
remain statistically significant, and there is a slight increase in magnitudes when producer state
controls are added. This suggests that the effects are not driven by observable producer state
policy changes that coincide with corporate tax changes.


5.5     Good-level Heterogeneity in Pass-through

Table 7 exploits some dimensions along which the effect of corporate taxes on retail prices differs
across goods. We break down the UPCs in our sample at the median according to two differ-
   16
      The data on state investment incentive programs are primarily collected from three sources. First, state Department
of Economic Development websites, second, Department of Revenue websites and finally state legislature websites.
When possible, we double-check estimates with State Tax Rule Books.



                                                          21
ent metrics. In Panel A, we divide the sample of UPCs according to the average income of the
households who purchased that item. The Nielsen Consumer Panel data tracks household income
according to income bins that vary at an annual level. We use the midpoints of these bins and
construct the weighted average of household income for the average customer for each UPC. We
extract this information from the Consumer Panel and supplement it to our RMS sample. Then,
we sort the UPCs into halves according to this metric.
   In general, we find larger effects for UPCs commonly purchased by households with lower
incomes relative to those purchased by high-income households. Here the results are not as con-
sistently statistically significant, but the point estimates are still substantial, associated with pass-
through of corporate tax changes approximately 80-120% greater than those of products purchased
by high-income households.
   In Panel B, we look for differential responses across UPCs depending on how expensive the
products are, on average. That is, for each UPC we measure the average price paid by households
across all time periods in our sample. We then split the UPCs into two groups, interacting the
corporate tax changes with indicators for the lower-priced group (the highest-price group is the
baseline category). We find that the lower priced goods tend to respond more to corporate tax
changes, with average magnitudes about twice as high as with the higher-priced set of goods.
The difference is also statistically significant at a 5% level, suggesting a robust pattern of higher
pass-through for lower-priced goods.


5.6    Heterogeneity in Leverage

US tax law makes interest rate payments on debt deductible for corporations. Thus a natural
implication is that firms with higher levels of debt can benefit from tax shields, making them less
sensitive to changes in corporate tax rates. Table 8 provides evidence that this is indeed the case.
We merged our sample by company name with Compustat to obtain information on leverage, which
resulted in a reduced sample. The table interacts corporate tax rates with an indicator of whether a
firm is above or below the median debt ratio in the sample (0.24). We find that the effects tend to
materialize on firms with lower levels of leverage. For firms with higher leverage, which can take
larger debt tax shields, we see no statistically significant effect of changes in corporate tax rates on
product prices.

                                                   22
5.7    Robustness and Competition

Finally, in the appendix we show that our results are robust to a number of alternative specifications.
We show in Appendix Tables A.9 and A.10 that our results are robust to including two-digit SIC
code by year fixed effects and product group by year fixed effects. As mentioned previously, in
Appendix Table A.4 we also demonstrate that our results are robust to using an alternative measure
of corporate taxes, the state headquarter tax rate, as in Heider and Ljungqvist (2015).
    Market concentration can play an important, but theoretically ambiguous role in price pass-
through depending on the sign of the elasticity of marginal surplus (Weyl and Fabinger, 2013). Ta-
ble A.11 interacts corporate tax rates with an indicator of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)
being below the sample median, where the HHI is calculated within each product group market.
Given the national representativeness of the RMS, the market share should be a good approxi-
mation of the real market share. We discuss further details of computing the HHI in Appendix
section C. We caution that the results in Table A.11 should be treated as purely suggestive, as re-
tail prices and HHI could be jointly determined. The results suggest lower pass-through in more
competitive markets, although the effects on the interaction between corporate taxes and HHI are
not statistically significant.



6     Concluding Remarks
This paper provides evidence that corporate taxes impact retail product prices, and that a significant
portion of corporate tax incidence falls on consumers. We link firm-level data to individual product
prices and to changes in a firm's apportioned tax rates to examine their effects on retail prices. A
one percentage point increase in a state-level corporate tax rate leads to an increase in affected
retail prices of approximately 0.17 percent. Our analysis exploits state-level tax changes, and the
fact that goods produced in a firm located in one state are sold in another state. This allows us to
include sold-state by retailer by year fixed effects, thus avoiding a large number of potential biases
and demand-side concerns.
    The fact that corporate taxes affect product prices, as well as payouts to shareholders and
wages, has important implications for tax policy. In particular, models used by policymakers
like the CBO and US Treasury may underestimate the incidence of corporate taxes on consumers

                                                  23
(CBO, 2018; Cronin et al., 2013). If corporate taxes are partially incident on consumers, rather
than primarily being borne by shareholders and workers, these taxes may be much less progressive
than is commonly asserted. This is especially true since we find that lower priced goods and goods
purchased by low income households are the ones most sensitive to changes in corporate taxes.
   There remain several fruitful avenues for further exploration. First, our analysis necessarily
focuses on trade across US states, which are essentially small open economies. Much of the early
theoretical debate on corporate tax incidence focused on differences between open and closed
economies. Effects may be different at the national level, where there are different opportunities
for tax avoidance or adjustments in corporate structure. Second, market structure could play an
important role in price pass-through of taxes. This may make higher or lower corporate taxes in
more or less competitive industries optimal. Third, while we focus on retail goods, incidence may
be very different in other sectors or in services.




                                                     24
References
Argente, David, Munseob Lee, and Sara Moreira, "Innovation and product reallocation in the
  great recession," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2018, 93, 1­20.
Atanassov, Julian and Xiaoding Liu, "Can corporate income tax cuts stimulate innovation?,"
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming, pp. 1­51.
Auerbach, Alan, "Who bears the corporate tax? A review of what we know.," Tax Policy and the
  Economy, 2006, 20, 1­40.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan, "Enjoying the quiet life? Corporate governance
  and managerial preferences," Journal of Political Economy, 2003, 111 (5), 1043­1075.
Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, "Product creation and destruction: Evidence and price
  implications," American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (3), 691­723.
CBO, "The distribution of household income, 2014," Congressional Budget Office Staff Report,
  2018.
Cronin, Julie Anne, Emily Lin, and Laura Powell, "Distributing the corporate income tax:
  Revised U.S. Treasury methodology," National Tax Journal, 2013, 66 (1), 239­262.
Einav, Liran, Ephraim Leibtag, and Aviv Nevo, "Recording discrepancies in Nielsen Homescan
  Data: Are they present and do they matter?," Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 2010, 8
  (2), 207­239.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D, Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suárez Serrato, and Owen Zidar,
  "State taxes and spatial misallocation," The Review of Economic Studies, 2018, 86 (1), 333­
  376.
Feldstein, Martin and Joel Slemrod, "Personal taxation, portfolio choice and the effect of the
  corporation income tax," Journal of Political Economy, 1980, 88 (5), 854­866.
Fuest, Clemens, Andreas Peichl, and Sebastian Siegloch, "Do higher corporate taxes reduce
  wages? Micro evidence from Germany," American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (2), 393­418.
Giandrea, Michael D and Shawn A Sprague, "Estimating the US labor share," Monthly Labor
  Review, 2017.
Giroud, Xavier and Joshua Rauh, "State taxation and the reallocation of business activity: Evi-
  dence from establishment-level data," Journal of Political Economy, 2019, 127 (3).


                                              25
Gravelle, Jane and Laurence Kotlikoff, "The incidence and efficiency costs of corporate taxation
  when corporate and noncorporate firms produce the same good," Journal of Political Economy,
  1989, 97 (4), 749­780.
Gravelle, Jennifer, "Tax Incidence," National Tax Journal, 2013, 66 (1), 185­214.
Harberger, Arnold, "The incidence of the corporation income tax," Journal of Political Economy,
  1962, 70 (3), 215­240.
Heider, Florian and Alexander Ljungqvist, "As certain as debt and taxes: Estimating the tax
  sensitivity of leverage from state tax changes," Journal of Financial Economics, 2015, 118 (3),
  684­712.
Kim, Ryan, "The effect of the credit crunch on output price dynamics: The corporate inventory
  and liquidity management channel," Working Paper, 2018.
Kotlikoff, Laurence and Lawrence Summers, "Tax incidence," Handbook of Public Economics,
  1987, 2, 1043­92.
Ljungqvist, Alexander and Michael Smolyansky, "To cut or not to cut? On the impact of cor-
  porate taxes on employment and income.," Working Paper, 2016.
  , Liandong Zhang, and Luo Zuo, "Sharing risk with the government: How taxes affect corpo-
  rate risk taking," Journal of Accounting Research, 2017, 55 (3), 669­707.
Loecker, Jan De, "Product differentiation, multiproduct firms, and estimating the impact of trade
  liberalization on productivity," Econometrica, 2011, 79 (5), 1407­1451.
Mukherjee, Abhiroop, Manpreet Singh, and Alminas Zaldokas, "Do corporate taxes hinder
  innovation?," Journal of Financial Economics, 2017, 124 (1), 195­221.
Stroebel, Johannes and Joseph Vavra, "House prices, local demand, and retail prices," Journal
  of Political Economy, 2019, 127 (3).
Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos and Owen Zidar, "Who benefits from state corporate tax cuts? A
  local labor markets approach with heterogeneous firms," American Economic Review, 2016, 106
  (9), 2582­2624.
Weyl, E Glen and Michal Fabinger, "Pass-through as an economic tool: Principles of incidence
  under imperfect competition," Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 121 (3), 528­583.
Yagan, Danny, "Capital tax reform and the real economy: The effects of the 2003 dividend tax
  cut," American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (12), 3531­63.


                                               26
                                                         Figure 1: Change in State Corporate Taxes
     Notes: This figure shows the change in state corporate tax rates between 2004 and 2017. Source: Giroud and Rauh (2019) and Tax Foundation.
27
                             Figure 2: Prices Following Large Tax Changes
Notes: This figure shows the impact on product prices of a one percentage point or greater change in corporate tax
rate over time (scaled by the actual change of tax). The figure plots coefficients n from the following specification:
ln(pi,f,r,s,t ) = r,s,t + i,r,s + n=-2 n 1[t = n] × ln(1 - f,t
                                    n=3                             c
                                                                       ) + 1 Xi,t + 2 Xf,t + i,f,r,s,t . The solid line
denotes point estimates. The shaded area denotes a 95% confidence interval. Standard errors are clustered at the
headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen and GS1.
         1
         .5
     Log Price
          0
         -.5
         -1




                 -2            -1                0             1                       2                  3
                                             Year around Tax Change




                                                         28
                                                                Figure 3: Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices
     Notes: This figure shows percentile binned scatter plots of changes in prices Log (P ricet+1 ) and changes in corporate tax rates Log (1 - c,t ), inclusive of federal and
     state taxes. The left panel shows results for C-corporations, which pay corporate tax rate, while the right panel shows results for S-corporations, which pay at individual
     income tax rates. Retailer by sold-state by year fixed effects are absorbed. Source: Nielsen and GS1.
                0                       C-corporations                                                                   S-corporations




                                                                                                    0
                -.025




                                                                                                    -.025
                    -.05




                                                                                                        -.05
         Log(Price)




                                                                                             Log(Price)
          -.075




                                                                                              -.075
                -.1




                                                                                                    -.1
29




                -.125




                                                                                                    -.125
                -.15




                                                                                                    -.15
                           -.15   -.1     -.05              0           .05        .1                          -.2     -.1                   0                    .1
                                                  Log(1-)                                                                         Log(1-)
                                                            Table 1: Summary Statistics
     This table shows summary statistics for the main analysis sample. Observations are at the UPC- retailer chain - sold-state - year level. The
     sale-weighted price is the average price of one UPC sold by a particular retailer at a state in one year, and it is weighted by the sold quantities.
     The sales are the dollar sales of a UPC product sold by a retailer in a state in a given year. Other variables are defined in the Appendix Table A.1.
     This panel shows all data, while the panel in the next page shows data for firms identified as C-corporations. Source: Nielsen and GS1.

                                                                                                    (1)
                                                                                               Total Sample
                                                                     Mean            Std. Dev.   25th Pctl. Median                    75th Pctl.
           Sale-Weighted Price                                        6.71             10.89        2.29       3.99                      7.59
           Sales                                                   7,317.68          45,365.99     68.36     479.59                   2,924.36
           Nexus-Based State Corporate Tax Rate                       8.48              3.52        6.90       7.92                      8.84
           Nexus-Based Total Personal Income Tax Rate                41.82             6.26        39.01     40.79                      44.05
           State General Revenue (thousands)                      96,456,818        74,206,349 41,213,212 62,004,987                 146,972,023
           State Total Revenue (thousands)                        121,659,712       100,923,735 45,684,189 83,631,798                185,619,993
           Property Tax Revenue (thousands)                         598,295           982,175         0       8,052                    815,756
           Unemployment Rate                                          6.80              2.21        4.90       6.30                      8.30
30




           Unemployment Insurance Rate                                7.88              1.80        6.20       8.15                      9.00
           Unemployment Insurance Base Wage                         12,455             7,523       8,000      9,000                    12,960
           GDP (millions)                                           945,926           736,557     386,626   620,931                   1,427,813
           Throwout                                                   0.05              0.24        0.00       0.00                      0.00
           Throwback                                                  0.41              0.49        0.00       0.00                      1.00
           Observations                                                                         91,292,801
                                                    Table 1: Summary Statistics (Continued)
     This table shows summary statistics for the main analysis sample. Observations are at the UPC- retailer chain - sold-state - year level. The
     sale-weighted price is the average price of one UPC sold by a particular retailer at a state in one year, and it is weighted by the sold quantities.
     The sales are the dollar sales of a UPC product sold by a retailer in a state in a given year. Other variables are defined in the Appendix Table A.1.
     This panel shows data for firms identified as C-corporations. Source: Nielsen and GS1.

                                                                                                      (1)
                                                                                               C-Corporations
                                                                      Mean           Std. Dev.    25th Pctl.  Median                 75th Pctl.
            Sale-Weighted Price                                        6.71            10.02         2.49       4.29                    7.59
            Sales                                                   8,300.06        49,363.87       88.45     615.71                 3,602.16
            Nexus-Based State Corporate Tax Rate                       8.93             3.79         7.06       7.98                    8.84
            Nexus-Based Total Personal Income Tax Rate                41.56            5.62         38.98      40.23                   44.05
            State General Revenue (thousands)                      95,856,593       69,232,832 41,353,995 62,101,023                140,881,819
            State Total Revenue (thousands)                        120,780,465      93,938,634 46,771,460 87,341,858                185,619,993
            Property Tax Revenue (thousands)                         515,822         907,795           0        250                   755,937
            Unemployment Rate                                          6.75             2.15         5.00       6.30                    8.30
31




            Unemployment Insurance Rate                                8.14             1.69         6.20       8.50                    9.10
            Unemployment Insurance Base Wage                         12,150            7,251        8,500      9,000                  12,000
            GDP (millions)                                           927,294         688,497       396,348    609,634                1,355,581
            Throwout                                                   0.03             0.17         0.00       0.00                    0.00
            Throwback                                                  0.32             0.46         0.00       0.00                    1.00
            Observations                                                                         46,643,119
                               Table 2: Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices

The table shows the relationship between retail prices and corporate taxes using OLS regressions. Retail prices are measured
in the geographic location where a good is sold. Corporate taxes are measured via an estimate of tax nexus. The inclusion
of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include logged forms of total product level sales,
state property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and insurance rates, as well as state
unemployment rates. The sample is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-corporations. Standard errors are clustered at
the firm headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen and GS1. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                           (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)
                                       Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)
     Log(1 -  c )                      -0.168         -0.166          -0.170          -0.168         -0.169
                                        (0.0620)       (0.0610)        (0.0548)        (0.0542)       (0.0538)
     Controls                               X              X               X               X              X
     UPC×Retailer×Sold State                X              X               X               X              X
     Year                                   X
     Sold State×Year                                       X                               X
     Retailer×Year                                                         X               X
     Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                           X
     Observations                      46,643,119     46,643,119      46,643,119     46,643,119      46,643,119




                                                          32
                    Table 3: Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices: Placebo Estimates

The table shows placebo estimates by repeating the main analysis for S-corporations, which do not pay corporate taxes. Retail
prices are measured in the geographic location where a good is sold. Corporate taxes are measured via an estimate of tax
nexus. The inclusion of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include logged forms of total
product level sales, state property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and insurance rates,
as well as state unemployment rates. Standard errors are clustered at the headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen and GS1.
*p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                            (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)
                                       Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)      Log(Price)
     Log(1 -  c )                        -0.0375        -0.0414        -0.0501         -0.0498         -0.0506
                                        (0.0602)        (0.0609)       (0.0539)        (0.0541)        (0.0547)
     Controls                                X              X              X               X               X
     UPC×Retailer×Sold State                 X              X              X               X               X
     Year                                    X
     Sold State×Year                                        X                              X
     Retailer×Year                                                         X               X
     Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                           X
     Observations                      36,964,871      36,964,871     36,964,871      36,964,871     36,964,871




                                                          33
                           Table 4: Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices, Sales Apportionment
     The table shows the relationship between retail prices and corporate taxes, interacted with a dummy of whether producers'
     headquarter state's sales apportionment ratio sales = 100%. Retail prices are measured in the geographic location where
     a good is sold. Corporate taxes are measured via an estimate of tax nexus. The inclusion of controls and fixed effects is
     denoted beneath each specification. Controls include logged forms of total product level sales, state property tax revenues,
     total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and insurance rates, as well as state unemployment rates. The sample
     is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-corporations. Standard errors are clustered at the headquarter state level. Source:
     Nielsen and GS1. *p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                                             (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                          Log(Price)       Log(Price)      Log(Price)      Log(Price)      Log(Price)
     Log(1- c )                                            -0.205           -0.205          -0.241          -0.240          -0.242
                                                           (0.106)          (0.106)         (0.0972)        (0.0966)        (0.0954)

     Log(1- c ) ×    1{Sales apportion = 100%}               0.198            0.201           0.287           0.285           0.287
                                                            (0.184)          (0.182)         (0.179)         (0.178)         (0.177)

     1{Sales apportion = 100%}                              0.0883           0.0900           0.142          0.142           0.143
                                                            (0.100)         (0.0998)        (0.0984)        (0.0980)        (0.0972)
34




     Controls                                                  X                X               X               X               X
     UPC×Retailer×Sold State                                   X                X               X               X               X
     Year                                                      X
     Sold State×Year                                                            X                               X
     Retailer×Year                                                                              X               X
     Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                                                 X
     Observations                                         46,643,119      46,643,119      46,643,119      46,643,119       46,643,119
             Table 5: Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices, Throwback and Throwout

The table shows the relationship between retail prices and corporate taxes for producers whose headquarter state's sales appor-
tionment applying a throwback or a throwout rule (1{throwout}, 1{throwback}). Results in the two panels are from separate
regressions. Retail prices are measured in the geographic location where a good is sold. Corporate taxes are measured via
an estimate of tax nexus. The inclusion of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include
logged forms of total product level sales, state property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base
wage and insurance rates, as well as state unemployment rates. The sample is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-
corporations. Standard errors are clustered at the headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen and GS1. *p < .1, ** p < .05, ***
p < .01.
                                           (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
                                       Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)
    Log(1 -  c )                       -0.166          -0.165         -0.168          -0.167         -0.168
                                        (0.0618)        (0.0608)       (0.0548)        (0.0542)       (0.0538)

    Log(1 -  c ) × 1{throwout}            -0.126          -0.130        -0.188          -0.189         -0.194
                                          (0.103)         (0.102)       (0.0923)        (0.0916)       (0.0909)
    Log(1 -  c )                         -0.152         -0.151         -0.154          -0.153         -0.155
                                         (0.0566)        (0.0554)       (0.0507)        (0.0500)       (0.0496)

    Log(1 -  c ) × 1{throwback}          -0.139          -0.137         -0.134          -0.134         -0.130
                                         (0.132)         (0.132)        (0.124)         (0.124)        (0.124)
    Controls                                X               X              X               X              X
    UPC×Retailer×Sold State                 X               X              X               X              X
    Year                                    X
    Sold State×Year                                         X                              X
    Retailer×Year                                                          X               X
    Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                            X
    Observations                       46,643,119      46,643,119     46,643,119      46,643,119     46,643,119




                                                         35
                                         Table 6: Corporate Taxes, Retail Prices, with Additional State Controls
     The table shows the relationship between corporate taxes and retail prices across products, adding additional state-level controls. These controls include state
     investment tax credits, R&D taxes and job creation tax credits and grants. State-level controls are measured at the state headquarter level. Retail prices are
     measured in the geographic location where a good is sold. Corporate taxes are measured via an estimate of tax nexus. State-level tax incentive related state-level
     variables are those used in Heider and Ljungqvist (2015): (1) investment tax credits (2) upper and lower bounds of R&D tax credits (3) job creation tax credit
     indicators and (4) job creation grant indicators. The inclusion of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include logged forms of
     total product level sales, state property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and insurance rates, as well as state unemployment
     rates. Standard errors are clustered at the firm headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen and GS1. *p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                                                      (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                                                                  Log(Price)      Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)
                                 Log(1- c )                       -0.175          -0.173          -0.177         -0.176          -0.177
                                                                   (0.0582)        (0.0572)        (0.0550)       (0.0544)        (0.0541)
                                 Controls                              X               X               X              X               X
                                 UPC×Retailer×Sold State               X               X               X              X               X
                                 Year                                  X
                                 Sold State×Year                                       X                              X
                                 Retailer×Year                                                         X              X
36




                                 Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                           X
                                 Producer State Controls              X               X              X               X               X
                                 Observations                     46,643,119      46,643,119     46,643,119      46,643,119      46,643,119
                                          Table 7: Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices - Pass-through Heterogeneity

     The table shows the relationship between corporate taxes and retail prices across products with different average customer incomes and average retail prices. 1{<Median
     Income} is an indicator of whether an item is purchased by a household below the median income in the sample. 1{<Median Price} is an indicator of whether an item is below
     the median price in the sample. Retail prices are measured in the geographic location where a good is sold. Corporate taxes are measured via an estimate of tax nexus. The
     inclusion of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include logged forms of total product level sales, state property tax revenues, total and
     general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and insurance rates, as well as state unemployment rates. The sample is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-corporations.
     Standard errors are clustered at the firm headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen and GS1. *p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                                                           (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
                                                                       Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)
                             Log(1- c )                                 -0.0979         -0.0972         -0.114          -0.113         -0.114
                                                                        (0.0550)        (0.0539)       (0.0584)        (0.0578)       (0.0577)

                             Log(1- c ) ×    1{<Median Income}          -0.119          -0.118         -0.0892         -0.0887        -0.0887
                                                                        (0.0533)        (0.0544)       (0.0566)        (0.0568)       (0.0561)
                             Observations                              45,359,352      45,359,352     45,359,352      45,359,352     45,359,352
                             Log(1- c )                                  -0.0589         -0.0605        -0.112          -0.111         -0.111
                                                                        (0.0682)        (0.0675)       (0.0629)        (0.0625)       (0.0620)
37




                             Log(1- c ) ×    1{<Median Price}           -0.215          -0.210          -0.113         -0.113          -0.116
                                                                         (0.0683)        (0.0669)       (0.0481)       (0.0484)        (0.0492)
                             Controls                                        X               X              X              X               X
                             UPC×Retailer×Sold State                         X               X              X              X               X
                             Year                                            X
                             Sold State×Year                                                X                              X
                             Retailer×Year                                                                 X               X
                             Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                                   X
                             Observations                              46,643,119      46,643,119     46,643,119      46,643,119     46,643,119
                                                      Table 8: Corporate Taxes, Retail Prices, and Debt
     The table shows the relationship between corporate taxes and retail prices across products with different debt ratio or leverage. Retail prices are measured in the
     geographic location where a good is sold. Corporate taxes are measured via an estimate of tax nexus. 1{<Debt} is an indicator of whether a firm is below the
     median debt ratio. We compute the debt ratio as the ratio of the sum of current and long-term liabilities over total assets. Debt information is collected from
     Compustat. The inclusion of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include logged forms of total product level sales, state
     property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and insurance rates, as well as state unemployment rates. The sample is restricted
     to firms that we can identify as public firms in Compustat. Standard errors are clustered at the firm headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen, GS1 and Compustat.
     *p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                                                       (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)
                                                                    Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)
                              Log(1- c )                              0.123           0.119         0.0900         0.0868          0.0799
                                                                     (0.331)         (0.328)        (0.275)        (0.273)         (0.271)

                              Log(1- c ) × 1{<Median Debt}            -0.104          -0.104        -0.162          -0.161         -0.160
                                                                     (0.0998)        (0.0967)       (0.0762)        (0.0756)       (0.0748)

                              1{<Median Debt}                        -0.0976         -0.0972        -0.135          -0.134         -0.133
                                                                     (0.0724)        (0.0700)       (0.0556)        (0.0550)       (0.0543)
38




                              Controls                                   X               X              X               X              X
                              UPC×Retailer×Sold State                    X               X              X               X              X
                              Year                                       X
                              Sold State×Year                                            X                             X
                              Retailer×Year                                                             X              X
                              Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                               X
                              Observations                          22,115,113     22,115,113      22,115,113     22,115,113      22,115,110
A     Model and Incidence

A.1    Model Details

This appendix provides further context for our motivating model, and derives the main expres-
sion in section 2.2 which provides a basis for our empirical strategy and subsequent analysis of
incidence. We assume firms operate in a monopolistically competitive environment similar to
De Loecker (2011) and Suárez Serrato and Zidar (2016). Firms are endowed with some productiv-
ity level B , and combine labor, L and capital K to produce output y with the following production
function,
                                           y = B · L K 1-                                      (6)

Firms take input prices as given and the output price p is given by an inverse demand curve from
CES demand with y = I · ( p
                          p
                          ¯
                            ) , where p
                                      ¯ is the price level and is normalized to 1 and  < 0, is the
demand elasticity. The firm maximizes profits, which are taxed at a rate  . The firm thus solves


                                max(1 -  ) · (p · y - w · L) -  · K                            (7)
                                L,K



where w is the wage rate for labor, and  is the rate of return for capital.
    Inserting the price equation into the objective function yields the firm's problem:

                                               1    1
                               max(1 -  )(y µ I -  - w · L) -  · K                             (8)
                                L,K



    Where the markup µ  [ 1
                          
                            + 1]-1 is constant due to CES demand. The solution yields for L:

                                           1
                                           y µ  -1
                                              · ·I  =w                                         (9)
                                            µ L

    We solve for K and obtain a similar expression:

                                       1
                                      y µ 1 -  -1       1
                                         ·    · I  = (    )                                   (10)
                                       µ    K          1-

    Combining 8 and 10 with the firm's production function y = BL K 1- and solving for p



                                                   39
yields the equation below, which directly motivations our main estimating equation and empirical
strategy.
                    ln(p) = -(1 -  )ln(1 -  ) + (1 -  )ln() + ln(w) + Z                               (11)

where Z is a constant and given by

                                      1
                     Z = -ln(B ) - ln( + 1) - (1 -  )ln(1 -  ) - ln( )                                (12)
                                      


A.2     Incidence Calculations

We further extend the framework of Fuest, Peichl and Siegloch (2018) and consider three agents
in this setting: the firm owner at state h, the worker from state h and the consumer from state s
(h = s). We evaluate the tax burden by relating the welfare change of consumers paying higher
prices induced by the corporate tax change from other states to the sum of welfare changes of firm
owners, workers and consumers.
   The firm owner's welfare change relates to the following value function:

                                          c
                        Vf = maxK,Lh (1 - h )(pF (K, Lh ) - wh Lh ) - rK                              (13)


Here the K is capital, Lh is the local labor amount employed by the firm at state h and r is the
                                                                   Vf          Vf
return rate on capital. Taking the differential, and noting that   Lh
                                                                        = 0,   K
                                                                                    = 0 from optimization,
we have dVf is equivalent to:

Vf                c    Vf                    c    Vf        Vf    c   Vf        Vf      c
   · (Kp dp + Kh
               c d ) +
                  h       · (Lh,p dp + Lh,h
                                          c d ) +
                                             h       · dp +  c
                                                               · dh =    · dp +    c
                                                                                     · dh
K                      Lh                         p         h         p          h
                                                                                (14)
   The term above can be rewritten as:

                              c                                        c
                         (1 - h )F (K, Lh )dp - (pF (K, Lh ) - wh Lh )dh                              (15)


   The consumer's welfare change stems from each consumer maximizing the utility function
U (Cs , Ls ), subject to the budget constraint: p · Cs = (1 -  p )ws Ls , where p is the price for the
goods, Cs is the quantity purchased,  p is the personal income tax, ws is the wage received by


                                                  40
consumer and Ls is the labor. Since the consumer in our analysis is not from the same producer
state where there is a tax shock, we assume the wage and labor supply, ws and Ls , will not change.
The consumer's welfare will be changed only by the price of products purchased. Then, the value
function of the consumer is a function of the price:


  Vcons (p) = U (Cs , Ls ) - (pCs - (1 -  p )ws Ls ) = U (Cs , Ls ) - (pCs - (1 -  p )ws Ls )            (16)


   Note that  = 1 is due to the assumption that the marginal utility of income is normalized to
                                                                               Vcons          Vcons
unity. Taking the differential of the value function, and noting that here     Ls
                                                                                       = 0,   Cs
                                                                                                      = 0 are
due to optimization, we have:

               Vcons             Vcons             Vcons        Vcons
    dVcons =         Cs,p · dp +       Ls,p · dp +       · dp =       · dp = -Cs · dp                    (17)
               Cs                Ls                p            p

   The local worker in the producer state maximizes the utility function, U (Ch , Lh ), subject to
                           p
the constraint, pCh = (1 - h )wh Lh . We assume locally that the price of goods will not change,
therefore welfare of the worker is changed only due to the wage, wh , received, and the value
function of the worker is a function of the wage. The corresponding value function is:

                                          p                                       p
 Vwkrh (wh ) = U (Ch , Lh ) - (pCh - (1 - h )wh Lh ) = U (Ch , Lh ) - (pCh - (1 - h )wh Lh ) (18)


   where  is unity for the same normalization purpose as in the consumer problem. Taking the
                                                  Vwkrh          Vwkrh
differential of the value function, where again   Lh
                                                          = 0,   Ch
                                                                         = 0 due to worker optimization,
we have:

           Vwkrh               Vwkrh               Vwkrh         Vwkrh              p
dVwkrh =         Ch,wh · dwh +       Lh,wh · dwh +       · dwh =       · dwh = (1 - h )Lh · dwh
           Ch                  Lh                  wh            wh
                                                                                            (19)
   We can thus write the share of the tax burden on the consumer, the firm and the worker using
the above framework. The tax burden share of the consumer would be the following formula:

                                                      dVcons
                                  Icons =                                                                (20)
                                            dVcons   + dVwrkh + dVf




                                                     41
    As a consequence, the incidence on consumers is given by:

                                                              dp
                                                          -Cs d
      Icons =         dp        p                              dp
                                                                                                                   (21)
                  -Cs d  + (1 - h )Lh dw
                                       d
                                        h        c
                                          + (1 - h )F (K, Lh ) d  - (pF (K, Lh ) - wh Lh )

                                                                                                                dp
                                                                                                                 p
    The paper estimates the price elasticity with respect to corporate tax as: p =                            d(1- )   =
                                                                                                               1-
                                                                    dwh
dp
d
   (- (1-
        p
          )
            ).   The wage elasticity is given by wh =                wh
                                                                   d(1- )   =   dwh
                                                                                 d
                                                                                        -
                                                                                    (- 1wh
                                                                                           ).     Combining the rele-
                                                                    1-

vant elasticities into equation (21), we have the incidence formula:

                                                          pCs p
  Icons =                       p                     c                      c
             pCs p - (1 -       h )wh Lh wh    - (1 - h )pF (K, Lh )p - (1 - h )(pF (K, Lh ) - wh Lh )
                                                                                                    (22)
                                                                                     pCs
    Moreover, the consumption share over the output is scon =                     pF (K,Lh )
                                                                                             ,   and the labor share is
             wh Lh
slabor =   pF (K,Lh )
                      .   Inserting the shares into the incidence, we have:

                                                             scon p
                 Icons =                     p                      c           c
                             scon p - (1 -   h )slabor wh   - (1 - h  )p - (1 - h )(1 - slabor )
    Similarly, the incidence on the worker is given by:

                                                             dVwrkh
                                        Iwrkh =                                                                    (23)
                                                  dVcons    + dVwrkh + dVf

                                                    p
                                            -(1 - h   )slabor wh
                    =               p                      c           c
                      scon p - (1 - h )slabor wh - (1 - h    )p - (1 - h )(1 - slabor )
    And the incidence on the firm owners' can be written:

                                                            dVf
                                          If =
                                                 dVcons   + dVf + dVwrkh

                                                c           c
                                       -(1 - h    )p - (1 - h )(1 - slabor )
                     =                  p                   c                c
                                                                                                                   (24)
                          scon p - (1 - h )slabor wh - (1 - h )p - (1 - h      )(1 - slabor )
    To quantify the magnitude of the corporate tax pass-through, we use our estimated elasticity p
with other economic statistics into the formula above. The parameters we used are:

   1) scon = 0.675


                                                          42
    2) slabor = 0.58

    3) w = 0.4

       c
    4) h = 0.55

       p
    5) h = 0.40

Combined with the estimated price elasticity with respect to the tax, p = -0.17, we calculate the
tax incidence on consumers, firm owners and workers are 31%, 31%, and 38%, respectively.



B        Nielsen Consumer Panel
In our main analysis, we use the Nielsen Retail Measurement Services (RMS) data. We repli-
cate our main findings with a sample of the Nielsen Consumer Panel, which surveys consumers
rather than retailers. The Nielsen Consumer Panel (NCP; formerly known as `Homescan' data)
contains 40,000-60,000 American households across 52 metropolitan areas, spanning the years of
2004-2017 and covering almost 2 million unique items purchased. The panel is constructed as a
representative sample of the American population and is tracked through the inclusion of numerous
demographic indicators, including the location of the household.
       Nielsen attempts to ensure high levels of participation among households in the panel through
regular reminders that go out to households, encouraging them to report purchases and trips fully.
Prizes, both monetary and in-kind, are utilized to incentivize high levels of continued engagement
among participant households, and households that seem to be reducing levels of reporting are
removed from the sample periodically. Including these non-compliers, about 20% of households
exit from the sample each year, with the average tenure in-sample being about 4 years.17
       The NCP mostly covers trips to pharmacies, grocery stores, and big-box/mass-merchandise
stores. Consequently, the products generally span groceries, drugs and sundries, small electronics
and household appliances, home furnishings (though generally not large furniture), garden and
kitchen equipment, and some soft goods. While somewhat limited in scope (eg. the data excludes
services, rents and mortgages, restaurants), the NCP covers a substantial fraction of household
  17
    Broda and Weinstein (2010) and Einav, Leibtag and Nevo (2010) provide more detail and analysis of the NCP. In
general, they find accurate coverage of household spending and non-imputed prices.


                                                       43
spending on non-services: approximately $375 of spending per household per month. This consti-
tutes about 30% of all household expenditures on goods in the CPI basket. The ultimate matched
sample takes account of 65% annual sales (65% monthly sale) of the persistent sample and thus,
covers 15% annual sale of the Homescan database. This matched sample also covers 50% unique
UPC in the persistent sample which is 2% UPC in the Homescan database.



C     Market Structure
We investigate the heterogeneity of the pass-through regarding the market competition. To measure
the level of market competition, we calculate the HHI index for each product market, using the
product group information in the Retailscan data. Retailscan offers detailed categorization of each
product. There are 125 product groups and 1,075 product modules stored in the Nielsen RMS
data. Product group is a broader categorization, while product module is a more granular definition.
Examples of product group are beer and coffee, candy, whereas the corresponding product modules
are light beer, near beer, coffee - soluble flavored and so on.
    We define each combination of product module - retailer - state as a separate market and cal-
culate the HHI for each of them at different years. We first aggregate a company's sales in one
market in one year and then estimate the market share. By summing up the square of market
shares, we obtain the HHI for the market in each year. Note that we have distinguished the prod-
uct market across different regions. This market concentration measure will reflect geographical
heterogeneity and is more informative in representing the competition level in the local product
market.
    The product module of one UPC may change within one year, and since we aggregate the
product prices within one year into one observation, it is not obvious to assign a product market
to the yearly observation if the product module changes. Therefore, based on our main sample,
we further restrict to UPCs that don't change their categorization within one year. This restriction
makes the number of observations drop by 0.6%. In our final sample, the median of the HHI is
0.15, and the mean of the HHI is 0.26, with standard deviation of 0.28. Results are suggestive of a
lower tax pass-through in a more competitive market.




                                                  44
                            Figure A.1: State Corporate Taxes Over Time
Notes: This figure shows corporate tax rates across states in 2004, 2010 and 2017. Maximum corporate tax rates are
displayed. Source: Giroud and Rauh (2019) and Tax Foundation.


                                                      2004




                                                      2010




                                                      2017




                                                       45
                                                                Figure A.2: Distribution of Tax Rates
     Notes: This figure shows the density of state corporate tax rates tax rates in 2005 and 2017.
                                            2005                                                                       2017
                   .3




                                                                                                         .3
                   .2




                                                                                                         .2
         Density




                                                                                               Density
                   .1




                                                                                                         .1
46




                   0




                                                                                                         0
                        0                      5                          10                                  2   4   6             8   10   12
                                            Corporate Tax                                                              Corporate Tax
                             Figure A.3: Distribution of Tax Rate Changes
Notes: This figure shows the change in state corporate tax rates between 2005 and 2017.
        .4
        .3
     Density
      .2.1
        0




               -5                            0                               5            10
                                                     Corporate Tax




                                                        47
                                                       Figure A.4: Prices Following Large Tax Changes
     Notes: This figure shows the impact on product prices of a one percentage point or greater change in corporate tax rate over time. The left panel shows the response
     following an increase, while the right panel shows the response following a decrease. The figure plots coefficients i from the following specification: ln(pi,f,r,s,t ) =
     y + n=-2 n 1[t = n] + 1 Xi,t + 2 Xf,t + i,f,r,s,t . The solid line denotes point estimates. The shaded area denotes a 95% confidence interval. Standard errors are
              n=3

     clustered at the headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen and GS1.
                                         Increase                                                                          Decrease
                .4




                                                                                               .2
                .2




                                                                                               0
                                                                                           ln(Price)
        ln(Price)




                                                                                            -.2
                0
48




                                                                                               -.4
                -.2




                                                                                               -.6
                      -2       -1          0            1          2         3                         -2         -1          0            1          2         3
                              Years Before and After Large Tax Change                                            Years Before and After Large Tax Change
                           Table A.1: Main Variable Descriptions

Name                             Source               Description
Price                            Nielsen Homescan     Price of a UPC sold by a retailer in a state. The price data
                                                      is aggregated to compute the weighted average price of
                                                      that item sold at this retailer in each state. The price is
                                                      weighted by the quantity sold.
Sales                            Nielsen Homescan     Annual sale for each UPC- retailer-sold-state pair.
Corporate Income Tax             Various              The state corporate income tax rate for each state in
                                                      different years. This is obtained from the State Tax
                                                      Handbook, the Tax Foundation (2006-2011), the Book
                                                      of States, and the state Tax Policy Center (2013-2017)
Personal Income Tax              NBER                 The state personal income tax rate for each state.
Nexus-Based Corporate Tax Rate   Infogroup            We aggregate the state corporate tax rates to the firm
                                                      level according to its distribution of sale and employee.
                                                      The company's sale share and employee share in each
                                                      state are obtained from Infogroup.The nexus-based per-
                                                      sonal income tax is computed analogously.
Property Apportionment           State Tax Handbook   Weight assigned to the property factor in the apportion-
                                                      ment formula. The multi-state firms must apportion
                                                      its profits according to the formula when deciding how
                                                      much tax it should pay.
Sales Apportionment              State Tax Handbook   Weight assigned to the sales factor in the apportionment
                                                      formula. The multi-state firms must apportion its profits
                                                      according to the formula when deciding how much tax
                                                      it should pay.
Throwback                        State Tax Handbook   Indicator of whether a state has adopted a throwback rule
                                                      when calculating taxable income. Under the throwback
                                                      rule, the state requires the firms to add sales that are to
                                                      buyers in a state where the company has no nexus.
Throwout                         State Tax Handbook   Indicator of whether a state has adopted a throwout rule
                                                      when calculating taxable income. The sales that are to
                                                      buyers in a state where the company has no nexus are
                                                      called nowhere sales. Under a throwout rule rule, the
                                                      state requires the firms to subtract the nowhere sales
                                                      from total sales (the denominator), and thereby increas-
                                                      ing the apportion weights.
Property Tax Revenue             Census               Total property tax revenue in a given year.
State Total Revenue              Census               Total state tax revenue in a given year.
State General Revenue            Census               Total state general revenue in a given year.
GDP                              BLS                  State GDP in millions of dollars.
Unemployment Insurance Base      State UI Laws        Maximum wage base subject to state unemployment in-
                                                      surance tax.
Unemployment Insurance Rate      State UI Laws        Maximum unemployment insurance rate at each state in
                                                      a given year.
Unemployment Rate                BLS                  State unemployment rate.




                                                 49
                                          Table A.2: Summary Statistics for Sample Construction
     This table describes the main analysis sample. It shows the number of observations after each data merge, along with the number of product codes,
     producers, C-Corporations and basic summary statistics for total sales.


     Sample                                       # Obs.          # UPCs        # Producers # C-Corps                       Total $ Sales
                                                                                                                 Mean      25th Median         75th

     Full UPC Sample                           264,194,038 1,990,373                  -               -          8,684      70       516       3,243
     Matched GS1 Sample                        227,702,908 1,561,623               40,183             -          7,871      65       471       2,953
     Matched Orbis Sample                      207,795,462 1,413,159               32,656           4,996        7,436      63       454       2,823
     Matched Infogroup Sample                  96,590,167   748,074                17,150           2,976        7,744      70       492       3,041
     Exclude Sold In-State                      92,510,596  713,590                15,530           2,836        7,306      69       479       2,920
     Matched Control Variables                 91,292,801   697,792                14,781           2,713        7,318      68       480       2,924
     C-Corporations                             50,097,156  271,482                 2,713           2,713        7,850      73       535       3,258
     Final Sample (drop singleton obs)         46,643,119   220,388                 2,437           2,437        8,300      88       616       3,602
50
          Table A.3: Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices Using Nielsen Homescan Data

The table replicates the analysis in Table 2 and also accounts for apportionment factors. Retail prices are measured in the
geographic location where a good is sold. Corporate taxes are measured as the average tax rate weighted by the apportionment
factors. The inclusion of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include logged forms of
total product level sales, state property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and insurance
rates, as well as state unemployment rates. The sample is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-corporations. We restrict
the products to those that have been consumed in one retailer chain at one state for at least 24 consecutive months, to minimize
the effects of rapid entry and exit of products. Standard errors are clustered at the headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen and
GS1. *p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                            (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)
                                        Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)
      Log(1- c )                         -0.217          -0.220         -0.205         -0.180          -0.194
                                         (0.0898)        (0.0884)       (0.0780)       (0.0783)        (0.0851)
      Controls                               X               X              X              X               X
      UPC×Retailer×Sold State                X               X              X              X               X
      Year                                   X
      Sold State×Year                                        X                              X
      Retailer×Year                                                         X               X
      Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                           X
      Observations                        352,328        352,328         352,328        352,328        352,328




                                                           51
                    Table A.4: Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices, Alternative Tax Nexus (HQ)
     The table shows the relationship between retail prices and corporate taxes. Retail prices are measured in the geographic
     location where a good is sold. Corporate taxes are measured based on apportionment formulas and the state where a firm is
     located. The inclusion of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include logged forms of
     total product level sales, state property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and insurance
     rates, as well as state unemployment rates as well as state-level tax incentive variables used in Heider and Ljungqvist (2015).
     The sample is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-corporations. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Source:
     Nielsen and GS1. *p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                                     (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                 Log(Price)      Log(Price)      Log(Price)      Log(Price)      Log(Price)
                    c )
              Log(1-HQ                           -0.101          -0.0984         -0.0988         -0.0979         -0.0982
                                                  (0.0373)        (0.0366)        (0.0379)        (0.0375)        (0.0367)
              Controls                                X               X               X               X               X
              UPC×Retailer×Sold State                 X               X               X               X               X
              Product Group × Year                    X               X               X               X               X
              Sold State×Year                                         X                               X
              Retailer×Year                                                           X               X
52




              Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                              X
              Observations                       46,367,279      46,367,279      46,367,279      46,367,279      46,367,279
                             Table A.5: Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices, Sales Weighted
     The table shows the relationship between retail prices and corporate taxes using OLS regressions. Retail prices are measured
     in the geographic location where a good is sold. Corporate taxes are measured via an estimate of tax nexus. The inclusion
     of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include logged forms of total product level sales,
     state property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and insurance rates, as well as state
     unemployment rates. The sample is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-corporations. Standard errors are clustered at
     the firm headquarter state level. Results are weighted by sales. Source: Nielsen and GS1. *p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                                    (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
                                                Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)
              Log(1 -  c )                      -0.164          -0.163         -0.165          -0.164         -0.165
                                                 (0.0588)        (0.0578)       (0.0530)        (0.0525)       (0.0522)
              Controls                               X               X              X               X              X
              UPC×Retailer×Sold State                X               X              X               X              X
              Year                                   X
              Sold State×Year                                        X                              X
              Retailer×Year                                                         X               X
              Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                           X
53




              Observations                      46,643,119     46,643,119      46,643,119      46,643,119     46,643,119
                      Table A.6: Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices, Clustering at Firm Level
     The table shows the relationship between retail prices and corporate taxes. Retail prices are measured in the geographic
     location where a good is sold. Corporate taxes are measured via an estimate of tax nexus. The inclusion of controls and fixed
     effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include logged forms of total product level sales, state property tax
     revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and insurance rates, as well as state unemployment rates.
     The sample is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-corporations. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Source:
     Nielsen and GS1. *p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                                     (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                 Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)      Log(Price)      Log(Price)
              Log(1 -  c )                        -0.168         -0.166          -0.170          -0.168          -0.169
                                                  (0.0830)       (0.0816)        (0.0768)        (0.0760)        (0.0758)
              Controls                                X              X               X               X               X
              UPC×Retailer×Sold State                 X              X               X               X               X
              Year                                    X
              Sold State×Year                                         X                              X
              Retailer×Year                                                          X               X
              Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                             X
54




              Observations                      46,643,119      46,643,119      46,643,119      46,643,119      46,643,119
                                   Table A.7: Placebo Test Using Personal Income Tax
     The table replicates the analysis in Table 2 using personal incomes taxes, which C-corporations do not pay. Retail prices are
     measured in the geographic location where a good is sold. Personal taxes are measured at the state in which a company is
     headquartered. The inclusion of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include logged
     forms of total product level sales, state property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and
     insurance rates, as well as state unemployment rates. The sample is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-corporations.
     Standard errors are clustered at the headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen and GS1. *p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                                    (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
                                                Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)
              Log(1- p )                         -0.0254        -0.0247         -0.0162        -0.0160         -0.0159
                                                 (0.0245)       (0.0244)        (0.0231)       (0.0230)        (0.0231)
              Controls                               X              X               X              X               X
              UPC×Retailer×Sold State                X              X               X              X               X
              Year                                   X
              Sold State×Year                                       X                              X
              Retailer×Year                                                         X              X
              Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                          X
55




              Observations                     46,619,664      46,619,664     46,619,664      46,619,664     46,619,664
                              Table A.8: Placebo Test Using 100% Sales Apportionment
     The table replicates the analysis in Table 2 for firms headquartered in states with 100% sales apportionment. Retail prices
     are measured in the geographic location where a good is sold. Personal taxes are measured at the state in which a company
     is headquartered. The inclusion of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include logged
     forms of total product level sales, state property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and
     insurance rates, as well as state unemployment rates. The sample is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-corporations.
     Standard errors are clustered at the headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen and GS1. *p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                                               Log(Price)
              log(1 - c )                          0.136          0.139          0.199           0.200           0.201
                                                  (0.373)        (0.369)        (0.324)         (0.322)         (0.319)
              Controls                               X              X              X               X               X
              UPC×Retailer×Sold State                X              X              X               X               X
              Year                                   X
              Sold State×Year                                       X                              X
              Retailer×Year                                                         X              X
              Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                          X
56




              Observations                     22,504,354      22,504,354     22,504,354      22,504,354     22,504,352
                                         Table A.9: Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices, SIC × Year Fixed Effect

     The table shows the relationship between retail prices and corporate taxes using OLS regressions. Retail prices are measured in the geographic location where a good
     is sold. Corporate taxes are measured via an estimate of tax nexus. The inclusion of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include
     logged forms of total product level sales, state property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and insurance rates, as well as state
     unemployment rates. Additionally, we include the 2-digit SIC by year fixed effects. The sample is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-corporations. Standard
     errors are clustered at the firm headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen and GS1. *p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                                                      (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)
                                                                  Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)     Log(Price)
                                 log(1 -c )                        -0.276         -0.272          -0.230         -0.229         -0.229
                                                                    (0.106)        (0.104)        (0.0925)       (0.0912)       (0.0908)
                                 Controls                              X              X               X              X              X
                                 UPC×Retailer×Sold State               X              X               X              X              X
                                 Two Digit SIC × Year                  X              X               X              X              X
                                 Sold State×Year                                      X                              X
                                 Retailer×Year                                                        X              X
                                 Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                         X
57




                                 Observations                     45,436,515     45,436,515     45,436,515      45,436,515     45,436,515
                                 Table A.10: Corporate Taxes and Retail Prices, Product Group × Year Fixed Effect

     The table shows the relationship between retail prices and corporate taxes using OLS regressions. Retail prices are measured in the geographic location where a good
     is sold. Corporate taxes are measured via an estimate of tax nexus. The inclusion of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include
     logged forms of total product level sales, state property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and insurance rates, as well as state
     unemployment rates. Additionally, we include the product group by year fixed effects. The sample is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-corporations. Standard
     errors are clustered at the firm headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen and GS1. *p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                                                      (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
                                                                  Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)
                                 log(1 -c )                       -0.152          -0.150         -0.140          -0.140         -0.141
                                                                   (0.0437)        (0.0431)       (0.0426)        (0.0423)       (0.0417)
                                 Controls                              X               X              X               X              X
                                 UPC×Retailer×Sold State               X               X              X               X              X
                                 Product Group × Year                  X               X              X               X              X
                                 Sold State×Year                                       X                              X
                                 Retailer×Year                                                        X               X
                                 Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                          X
58




                                 Observations                     46,367,279      46,367,279     46,367,279     46,367,279      46,367,279
                                          Table A.11: Corporate Taxes, Retail Prices and Market Concentration

     The table shows the relationship between retail prices, corporate taxes and market concentration.Retail prices are measured in the geographic location where a good is
     sold. Corporate taxes are measured via an estimate of tax nexus. The inclusion of controls and fixed effects is denoted beneath each specification. Controls include
     logged forms of total product level sales, state property tax revenues, total and general state revenue, state GDP, UI base wage and insurance rates, as well as state
     unemployment rates. The sample is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-corporations. We extract product module information and calculate the HHI within
     each product module market. The product module market is defined by product module, sold-state and the retailer. Then, we divide goods into two groups according to
     their market concentration. The sample is restricted to firms that we can identify as C-corporations and that have market concentration information. Standard errors are
     clustered at the headquarter state level. Source: Nielsen and GS1. *p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
                                                                        (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)
                                                                     Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)     Log(Price)      Log(Price)
                               Log(1- c )                            -0.350         -0.342          -0.293         -0.290          -0.288
                                                                      (0.127)        (0.124)         (0.101)        (0.101)         (0.0984)

                               Log(1- c ) *   1{ <Median HHI}          0.198          0.191            0.134          0.132           0.129
                                                                       (0.104)        (0.103)         (0.107)        (0.107)         (0.105)
                               Controls                                   X              X               X              X               X
                               UPC×Retailer×Sold State                    X              X               X              X               X
59




                               Year                                       X
                               Sold State×Year                                           X                              X
                               Retailer×Year                                                             X              X
                               Sold State× Retailer×Year                                                                              X
                               Observations                          46,367,280     46,367,280      46,367,280     46,367,280     46,367,280
