                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 FINANCIAL EDUCATION AFFECTS FINANCIAL KNOWLEDGE AND DOWNSTREAM
                             BEHAVIORS

                                         Tim Kaiser
                                      Annamaria Lusardi
                                       Lukas Menkhoff
                                        Carly J. Urban

                                      Working Paper 27057
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27057


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We thank participants of the 5th Cherry Blossom Financial Education Institute in Washington,
D.C., and Michael Collins, Andrea Hasler, Rachael Meager, Olivia Mitchell, and Pierre-Carl
Michaud for many helpful comments. We thank Shawn Cole, Daniel Fernandes, Xavier Giné,
John Lynch, Richard Netemeyer, and Bilal Zia for providing details about their studies. Financial
support by DFG through CRC TRR 190 is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Tim Kaiser, Annamaria Lusardi, Lukas Menkhoff, and Carly J. Urban. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Education Affects Financial Knowledge and Downstream Behaviors
Tim Kaiser, Annamaria Lusardi, Lukas Menkhoff, and Carly J. Urban
NBER Working Paper No. 27057
April 2020
JEL No. D14,G53,I21

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the rapidly growing literature on the causal effects of financial education programs in a
meta-analysis of 76 randomized experiments with a total sample size of over 160,000 individuals.
The evidence shows that financial education programs have, on average, positive causal treatment
effects on financial knowledge and downstream financial behaviors. Treatment effects are
economically meaningful in size, similar to those realized by educational interventions in other
domains, and are at least three times as large as the average effect documented in earlier work.
These results are robust to the method used, restricting the sample to papers published in top
economics journals, including only studies with adequate power, and accounting for publication
selection bias in the literature. We conclude with a discussion of the cost-effectiveness of
financial education interventions.

Tim Kaiser                                      Lukas Menkhoff
Department of Economics                         Humboldt-University of Berlin
University of Koblenz-Landau                    Germany
Landau 76829                                    and DIW Berlin
Germany                                         lmenkhoff@diw.de
and DIW Berlin
kaiser@uni-landau.de                            Carly J. Urban
                                                Department of Agricultural Economics
Annamaria Lusardi                               and Economics
The George Washington University                Montana State University
School of Business                              P.O. Box 172920
2201 G Street, NW                               Bozeman, MT 59717
Duques Hall, Suite 450E                         and Institute for Labor Studies (IZA)
Washington, DC 20052                            carly.urban@montana.edu
and NBER
alusardi@gwu.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27057
1      Introduction

       The economic importance of financial literacy is documented in a large and growing

empirical literature (Hastings et al. 2013; Lusardi and Mitchell 2014; Lusardi et al. 2017;

Lührmann et al. 2018). Consequently, the implementation of national strategies promoting

financial literacy and the design of financial education initiatives and school mandates have

become a high priority around the world. Many of the largest economies, including most OECD

member countries, as well as India and China, have implemented programs enhancing financial

education in order to promote financial inclusion and financial stability (OECD 2015).

Together, these financial education programs seek to reach more than five billion people in

sixty countries, and the number of countries joining this effort continues to grow.

       Despite the many initiatives to foster financial literacy, the effectiveness of financial

education is debated in quite fundamental ways. Much of the debate stems from the fact that

the limited number of early rigorous experimental impact evaluations sometimes showed muted

effects, and these early findings have contributed to the perception of mixed evidence on the

effectiveness of financial education (see, for example, Fernandes et al. 2014). However,

empirical studies on financial education have grown rapidly in the past few years. To account

for the large increase in research in this field, we take stock of the recent empirical evidence

documented in randomized experiments and provide an updated and more sophisticated

analysis of the existing work.

       Our main finding is clear-cut: financial education in 76 randomized experiments with a

total sample size of more than 160,000 individuals has positive causal treatment effects on

financial knowledge and financial behaviors. The treatment effects on financial knowledge are

similar in magnitude to the average effect sizes realized by educational interventions in other

domains, such as math and reading (see Hill et al. 2008; Cheung and Slavin 2016; Fryer 2016;

Kraft 2019). The effect sizes of financial education on financial behaviors are comparable to


                                               2
those realized in behavior-change interventions in the health domain (e.g., Rooney and Murray

1996; Portnoy et al. 2008; Noar et al. 2017) or behavior-change interventions aimed at fostering

energy conserving behavior (e.g., Karlin et al. 2015).

       Specifically, the estimated (weighted average) treatment effect is at least three times as

large as the weighted average effect documented in Fernandes et al. (2014), which examined

13 Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs). The analysis from our more sophisticated meta-

analysis, which accounts for the possibility of cross study heterogeneity, results in an estimated

effect of financial education interventions that is more than five times as large as the effect

reported in Fernandes et al. (2014).

       Additionally, we calculate the effect sizes resulting from these interventions and show

that they are of economic significance. Our results are robust, irrespective of the model used,

when restricting the sample to only those RCTs that have been published in top economics

journals, when restricting the sample to only those studies with adequate power to identify small

treatment effects, and when employing an econometric method to account for the possibility of

publication selection bias favoring the publication of statistically significant results.

       In contrast to earlier studies, we do not find differences in treatment effects for low-

income individuals and the general population. We also do not find strong evidence to support

a rapid decay in the realized treatment effects, though we do not find support for the

sustainability of long-run effects either.

       For completeness and to asses the external validity of the findings, we also discuss the

findings from recent evaluations of financial education mandates and school financial education

programs operated at scale.

       With this work, we make four main contributions. First, we provide the most

comprehensive analysis of the burgeoning work on financial education by using the most

rigorous studies: randomized control trials. Second, we focus on a critical feature of empirical




                                                 3
analyses on micro data: the heterogeneity in the programs and the many differences that

normally one finds in the programs; for example, differences in target groups, quality and the

intensity of interventions. Third, we discuss the magnitudes of the effects in terms of economic

significance and consider the per participant costs of programs. Fourth, we provide a thorough

discussion of topics raised in previous work, i.e., how to assess the impact of financial education

and whether education decays with time. We believe that this work can provide useful guidance

for those evaluating future financial education programs.

       The paper has seven sections: section 2 serves as a primer on statistical meta-analyses;

section 3 describes our method; section 4 presents descriptive statistics of our data; section 5

presents the results of our analyses; section 6 discusses the economic significance of our effect

sizes and the cost-effectiveness associated with these effects; section 7 concludes.



2      Background


       As the amount of evidence from rigorous empirical studies in a given field grows over

time, there is an increased need to synthesize and integrate the existing findings to reach a

consistent conclusion. Traditionally, economists have relied on narrative reviews, where

experts on a given literature select and discuss the most relevant findings. The advantage of

such an approach is that the experts are expected to have a good understanding of the existing

studies and can add value by summarizing, interpreting, and linking together the most

convincing (internally valid) studies in a narrative review. Examples of widely cited narrative

reviews in the financial education literature are Fox et al. (2005), Collins and O'Rourke (2010),

Xu and Zia (2012), Hastings et al. (2013), and Lusardi and Mitchell (2014).

       As empirical literatures grow larger, however, narrative literature reviews can become

difficult, since it is hard to describe a large number of empirical estimates and discuss all of the

possible sources of heterogeneity in reported findings. Meta-analyses have thus become more


                                                 4
common in economics when aggregating findings from many studies. Some examples of recent

meta-analyses in economics include Meager (2019), which studies microcredit expansions, and

Beuermann and Jackson (2018), which examines the effect of going to parent-preferred schools.

Meta-analyses can serve as a complement to narrative reviews when there is a sufficiently large

number of well-identified studies on the same empirical research question. A meta-analysis--

a systematic, quantitative literature review--is well suited to obtain an estimate of the average

effects of a given program and to study the heterogeneity in reported findings (Stanley 2001).

       As noted earlier, Fernandes et al. (2014) was the first meta-analysis performed in the

field of financial education. We differ from this initial and well-cited study in three major ways.

First, we update the dataset to incorporate the many papers that have been written since the

meta-analysis by Fernandes et al. was published. As Figure 1 shows, the field grew

exponentially after 2014, so previous reviews cover only a small part of the work that currently

exists. Second, we attempt to replicate the findings in Fernandes et al. (2014), and we provide

estimates more common in meta-analysis literature, which account for heterogeneity in effect

sizes across studies. This takes into consideration, for example, the intensity of the program.

Third, we have chosen to focus solely on what are considered the most rigorous sources of

evidence, i.e., randomized experiments. RCTs provide more consistent internal validity than

observational and quasi-experimental studies, especially since there are no universally accepted

instruments for financial literacy, and one can debate whether existing non-randomized trials

have made use of convincing empirical strategies addressing endogeneity of selection into

treatment. Judging the quality of quasi-experimental studies and determining which to include

or exclude from the meta-analysis gives researchers an additional degree of freedom that we

wish to remove. Importantly, the number of RCTs has grown from just 13 in the Fernandes et

al. (2014) review to 76 as of 2019. In those 13 studies, the authors found the weakest effects of




                                                5
financial education interventions reviewed in their work. Fernandes et al. (2014) assert that

these studies provide the strongest evidence against financial education.

                                        < Figure 1 about here >

       In addition to Fernandes et al. (2014), there have been three follow-up meta-analyses on

financial education programs: Miller et al. (2015); Kaiser and Menkhoff (2017); and Kaiser and

Menkhoff (2019). These meta-analyses present a more nuanced view of financial education

interventions than the original paper by Fernandes et al (2014) by including additional studies

and accounting for differences in program design and outcomes studied. This study will build

upon those, but it expands the contribution by focusing solely on RCTs, including additional

years of data, deepening the methodological discussion (including new robustness checks),

providing a thorough discussion of economic significance, and incorporating information on

program costs. By contrast, Miller et al. (2015) focus on less than 20 studies and put emphasis

on examining impact differences across outcomes. Kaiser and Menkhoff (2017) concentrate on

the determinants of effective financial education interventions, while Kaiser and Menkhoff

(2019) focus on financial education interventions in schools.



3      Methods


       This section describes our inclusion criteria for the papers on financial education

(Section 3.1), the details we use in constructing our database of effect sizes (Section 3.2), and

the specifics of the empirical model we employ (Section 3.3).



       3.1     Inclusion criteria

       In order to draw general conclusions about a given literature, one has to conduct a

systematic search of the literature and apply inclusion criteria that are defined ex-ante. We

conducted a search of all relevant databases for journal articles and working papers (see


                                               6
Appendix A for the list of the studies we considered and a summary of the data we extracted

from those studies), and apply three inclusion criteria to the universe of records return in this

set. Criteria of inclusion: (i) Studies reporting the causal effects of educational interventions

designed to strengthen the participants' financial literacy and/or leading to behavior change in

the area of personal finance; (ii) studies using random assignment into treatment and control

conditions; (iii) studies providing a quantitative assessment of intervention impact that allows

researchers to code an effect size estimate and its standard error. Where necessary information

is partially missing, we consulted additional online resources related to the article or contacted

the authors of the studies. We only consider the main results discussed in the text, and we do

not code redundant effect sizes (e.g., effect sizes arising from other specifications of a given

statistical model in the robustness section). Table A1 provides a list of all the studies considered

in our analysis.



       3.2     Constructing the database

       Our analysis aggregates treatment effects of financial education interventions into two

main categories. First, we code the effect of financial education on financial literacy (i.e., a

measure of performance on a financial knowledge test) since improvement in knowledge is

usually the primary goal of financial education programs (Hastings et al. 2013; Lusardi and

Mitchell 2014) and is expected to be one of the channels via which financial behavior is

influenced. We do not include self-assessments of changes in financial knowledge as an

outcome.

       Second, we code the effect of financial education on financial behaviors. These

behaviors can be further disaggregated into the following categories: Borrowing, (retirement)

saving, budgeting and planning, insurance, and remittances. It is useful to know, for example,




                                                 7
which behavior is more easily impacted by financial education. Table A3 provides an overview

of the categories and definitions of outcome types.

         We code all available effect sizes per study on financial knowledge and behavioral

outcomes. We include multiple estimates per study if multiple outcomes, survey-rounds, or

treatments are reported. We only extract main treatment effects reported in the papers. Thus,

we do not consider estimates reported in the "heterogeneity-of-treatment-effects-section"

within papers, such as sample splits or interaction-effects of binary indicators (e.g., gender,

income, ability, etc.), with the treatment indicators. We aim to only consider intention-to-treat

effects (ITT), unless these are not reported. If only local average treatment effects (LATE) or

the treatment effect on the treated (TOT) are reported, we included these in our analysis and

check for statistical differences, as described in Appendix B. 1

           This process leads to the inclusion of 76 independent randomized experiments described

further in Section 4.



           3.3      Empirical model

           A major challenge in every meta-analysis lies in the heterogeneity of the underlying

primary studies and how to account for it. In the financial education literature, heterogeneity

arises from several sources; in our sample, randomized experiments on financial education

programs have been conducted in 32 countries with varying target groups (see Table A1 in

Appendix A). Moreover, the underlying educational interventions are very diverse, ranging

from provision of an informational brochure to offering high-intensity classroom instruction;

outcomes are also measured at different points in time and with different types of data.

Accommodating this heterogeneity is important in order to draw general conclusions about the

findings.



1
    We also show results for the sample of studies reporting the ITT in Appendix B.


                                                         8
        When there is such heterogeneity in the studies under consideration, meta-analyses

require certain assumptions about the sources of variance in the observed treatment effect

estimates. Consider a set of  randomized experiments, each of them reporting an estimate of a

causal (intention to treat) treatment effect relative to a control group. 2 Assuming no

heterogeneity in true effects implies that the observed estimates of a treatment effect are

sampled from a distribution with a single true effect 0 and variance  2 , as in the following

meta-analysis model:

                                                  = 0 +                                                              (1)

where  is an estimate of a treatment effect in the th study, 0 defines the common true effect,

and  is the study level residual with  ~(0, 2 ). Thus, the estimate of the common true effect

is given by estimating the above model with weighted least squares using inverse variance
                   1
weights ( = 2 ). While this may be a reasonable assumption for some empirical literatures,
                   


such as medical trials with identical treatment, dosage, and procedures for measuring outcomes,

this is clearly not a reasonable assumption in the context of educational interventions, which

tend to be quite diverse.

        A more reasonable approach in an educational setting would be to assume heterogeneity

between studies, hence assuming a distribution of possible true effects, allowing true effects to

vary across studies with identical within-study measurement error. The weighted average effect




2
 Because each study  may report its treatment effect estimate in a different unit (i.e., a different currency or on
different scales), we convert each estimate to a (bias corrected) standardized mean difference (Hedges' g), such
                                                                     M -MC              (nT -1)  2 +(nC -1)  2
that the treatment effect estimate  is standardized as  =                    with  =                             , i.e., the
                                                                      SDp                      2 + 2 -2
mean difference in outcomes between treatment (M  ) and control (MC ) as a proportion of the pooled standard
deviation ( ) of the dependent variable. nT and  are the sample size and standard deviation of the treatment
group, and  and  are for the control group. Additionally, the standard error of each standardized mean
                                                   2
                                                   
                                   nT +nC
difference is defined as:  =                +                .
                                   nT nC        2(nT +nC )




                                                                 9
then does not represent a single true effect but instead the mean of the distribution of true

effects. Thus, the model can be written as:

                                             = 0 +  +                                                     (2)

with  ~(0,  2 ) and  ~(0, 2 ).  2 is the between-study variance in true effects that is

unknown and has to be estimated from the data, 3 and  is the within-study standard error of

the treatment effect estimate  that is observed for each study . Subsequently, weighted least

                                                                                2 -1
squares is used to estimate 0 with inverse variance weights defined as  = ( 2 +  ) .

Thus, instead of estimating one common effect, the goal is to estimate the mean of the

distribution of true effects.

        While the illustration so far has considered cases in which each study contributes one

independent treatment-effect estimate, this is generally not the case in the financial education

literature. Instead, studies may report treatment effect estimates from multiple treatments and a

common control group within studies, at multiple time-points and for multiple outcomes.

Therefore, we extend the model above to incorporate multiple (and potentially correlated)

treatment effect estimates within studies:

                                             = 0 +  +                                                     (3)

 is the  th treatment effect estimate within each study . 0 is the mean of the distribution of

true effects,  is the study-level random effect with  ~(0,  2 ),  2 is the between study

variance in true effects, and  ~(0, 2
                                     ) is the residual of the  th treatment effect estimate


within each study . This model allows between-study heterogeneity in true effects but assumes

that treatment effect estimates within studies relate to the same study-specific true effect. This




3
  There are several possible algorithms to estimate the between-study variance  2 . Our approach uses the method
of moments estimator (see Harbord and Higgins 2008), but iterative approaches, such as (restricted) maximum
likelihood or empirical Bayes estimation, are also frequently used in meta-analyses.


                                                      10
means the common within-study correlation of treatment effect estimates is induced by random

sampling error.

       While the estimator proposed in Hedges et al. (2010) does not require an exact model

of the within-study dependencies in true effects, Tanner-Smith and Tipton (2014) and Tanner-

Smith et al. (2016) suggest that the following inverse variance weights ( ) are approximately

efficient in case of a correlated effects model:
                                                   -1
                  1
 =  2 +                   2                  2
                       =1   1 +  - 1 , where  is the estimated between-study
                       
                  

                            1
                            
variance in true effects, (      2 ) is the arithmetic mean of the within-study sampling
                              =1 
                             


variances (2
            ) with  being the number of  effect size estimates within each study , and  is


the assumed common within-study correlation of treatment effect estimates.

       We estimate the model with these weights and choose  = 0.8 as the default within-

study correlation of estimates (see Tanner-Smith and Tipton 2014). However, sensitivity

analyses of such an assumption are easily implemented, and we show results for  = [0, 0.9] in

increments of 0.1 in Appendix B.

       Our method addresses several shortcomings of the analysis presented in Fernandes et

al. (2014). First, we are able to formally investigate the importance of modeling between-study

heterogeneity in treatment effects and to compare the results to a model with the common-effect

assumption used in Fernandes et al. (2014). This is important because, as mentioned before,

financial education programs can be very different from each other. Second, we make use of

the all of the statistical information reported in primary studies, since the method used in this

paper is able to accommodate multiple estimates within studies, and thus is not dependent on

creating highly aggregated measures, such as the within-study average effect sizes reported in

Fernandes et al. (2014). To probe the robustness of our results, we estimate five alternative

models (see Appendix B), including a correction for potential publication selection bias and a



                                                   11
consideration of the power of the underlying primary studies. We are also careful to replicate

the methods of Fernandes et al. (2014), as reported in Appendix D.



4        Data

        To arrive at an unbiased estimate of the mean of the distribution of true effects of

financial education programs, we collect a complete list of randomized experiments in the

financial education literature. We build on an existing database and update it using the search

strategy described earlier, which is also used in Kaiser and Menkhoff (2017). We augment the

earlier dataset used in previous work with published randomized experiments on financial

education through January 2019 (end of collection period for this paper). 4 Appendix A contains

a detailed description of the papers included in our meta-analysis and the types of outcomes

coded. Applying our inclusion criteria, we arrive at a dataset of as many as 68 papers reporting

the effects of 76 independent-sample experiments. This is a much bigger sample of RCTs than

any previous meta-analyses.

         An important part of our meta-analysis is the inclusion of many recent papers in our

dataset, which enables us to provide a comprehensive and updated review of the large and

rapidly growing amount of research done on this topic. The review by Fernandes et al. (2014)

is the first paper in the literature, and it covers only 13 RCTs from which they code 15

observations. The meta-analysis in Miller et al. (2015) covers a total of seven RCTs. Of our 76

independent-sample experiments, one-third have not been included in the most recent meta-

analysis, by Kaiser and Menkhoff, (2017). 5 Thus, we expand greatly on those previous studies.

Table C1 in Appendix C contains a comparison of our dataset of RCTs to these earlier accounts

of the literature.


4
  This paper has gone through revisions and the end of the collection period refers to when we started extracting
and analyzing the data.
5
  We are also careful to update all of the papers to the latest version and include, for example, the estimates in
the published version of the papers.


                                                       12
         From our sample of 76 independent randomized experiments, we extract a total of 673

estimates of the effects of the program (the treatment effects). Out of these, 64 studies report a

total of 458 treatment effects on financial behaviors (see Table A4 in Appendix A). Thus, we

are able to work on a large number of estimates. The studies vary in their choice of dependent

variables, ranging from a number of financial behaviors to financial knowledge. To illustrate

some simple differences in studies, we note that 23 studies report 115 treatment effect estimates

on credit behaviors, and 23 studies report 55 treatment effect estimates on budgeting behavior.

The largest number of estimates is on saving behavior, with 54 studies reporting a total of 253

treatment effect estimates. Six studies report 18 treatment effect estimates on insurance

behavior, and six studies report 17 estimates on remittance behavior. Fifty studies report 215

treatment effect estimates on financial knowledge and 38 studies report treatment effects on

both knowledge and behaviors. We have a sizeable number of estimates for each outcome.

         We start our analysis by showing that the descriptive statistics alone suggest that

financial education is, on average, effective in improving both knowledge and behavior.

                                                 < Table 1 about here >

         The average effect size across all types of outcomes, reported in Table 1, is 0.123

standard deviation (SD) units (SD=0.183), and the median effect size is 0.098 SD units. 6 The

minimum effect size is -0.413, and the maximum effect size is 1.374. The average standard

error of the treatment effect is 0.085 (SD=0.049) and the median standard error is at 0.072. 7

         We first note that there is substantial variation in instruction time in the programs, where

the average estimate is associated with a mean of 11.71 hours of instruction (SD=16.27), and

the median is associated with 7 hours of instruction (Table 1). Treatment effects are estimated

30.4 weeks (7 months) after treatment, on average, with a standard deviation of 31.65 weeks



6
  Note that all effect sizes are scaled such that desirable outcomes have a positive sign (i.e., we are coding a
negative coefficient on "loan default" as a positive treatment effect (i.e., reduction in loan default) and vice versa.
7
  The average sample size across the 76 randomized experiments is 2,136 and the median sample size is 840.


                                                          13
(7.3 months). The median study does not focus on immediate effects: the median time passed

between financial education treatment and measurement of outcomes is 25.8 weeks (5.9

months). This is useful information for assessing the impact of programs, in particular if one

hypothesizes a decay of effectiveness with time, as emphasized by Fernandes et al. (2014).

Further, we note that nearly three quarters (72.4 percent) of the treatment effect estimates target

low-income individuals (income below the median), and 60.8 percent of the estimates are from

programs studied in developing economies; 30.8 percent of all estimates reported in randomized

experiments appear in top economics journals, which reflects the high quality of this sample of

studies. The average age across all reported estimates is 33.5 years, where 7.5 percent of

estimates are focused on children (<14 years old), 20 percent are focused on youth (14-25 years

old), and 72.4 percent are focused on adults (>25 years old).

       When assessing the effectiveness of financial education, interventions may not

necessarily lead to changes in behavior if people have resource constraints or are in the early

part of the life cycle, as highlighted in Lusardi et al. (2017). In some cases, people may already

be acting optimally and in other cases, even after exposure to financial education, it may be

optimal to not change behavior. Determining which behaviors should optimally change requires

a theoretical framework sometimes lacking in this literature.


5      Results

       We present the results in three steps. Section 5.1 shows the main results of our meta-

analysis of the universe of randomized experiments (up to 2019) and compares the results to

the first meta-analysis of the literature by Fernandes et al. (2014). Section 5.2 summarizes the

results of comprehensive robustness exercises that are reported in full in Appendix B. Section

5.3 examines our main effects further by discussing the results by outcomes, such as financial

knowledge and a variety of financial behaviors. Section 5.4 presents our main results once we

disaggregate the data into various sub-samples of interest.


                                                14
          5.1     A meta-analysis of randomized experiments

          We describe our findings by first plotting the universe of 673 raw effects extracted from

the 76 studies against their inverse standard error (precision) in Figure 2. We disaggregate the

data and distinguish between estimated treatment effects on financial behaviors (n=458) and

financial knowledge (n=215). 8 The unweighted average effect on financial behaviors is 0.0898

SD units, and the unweighted average effect on financial knowledge is 0.187 SD units. With

this simple analysis of the raw data, we find that financial education improves both financial

knowledge and behaviors.

          A visual inspection of the plot in Figure 2 shows that both samples of effect sizes

resemble a roughly symmetric funnel until effect sizes of 0.5 SD units and above. We

investigate the possibility of publication selection bias 9 in the financial education literature in

Appendix B (see Figure B1 and Table B1) and find that accounting for this potential publication

bias does not qualitatively change the result of positive average effects of financial education.

                                           < Figure 2 about here >

          Next, we provide a comparison of the data in our study with the results in Fernandes et

al. (2014). Specifically, we estimate the weighted average effect on financial behaviors using

`Robust Variance Estimation in Meta-Regression with Dependent Effect Size Estimates' (RVE)

under the common true effect assumption 10 made in Fernandes et al. (2014) and compare our




8
  We refer to n as the number of estimates and not the number of participants in the studies.
9
 Publication selection bias refers to the potential behavior of researchers to be more likely to report and journal
editors being more likely to publish statistically significant results.
                                                                                                     -1
                                                                      1   
10
     Thus, we assume  2 = 0, i.e., the weights are defined as  =      2  1 +  - 1 . Note, that
                                                                   =1 
Fernandes et al. (2014) use only one observation per study by creating within-study average effect sizes, i.e., the
                                           1
weights in their study are defined as  = 2. We show results with this approach in Table B3 of Appendix B.
                                           




                                                        15
result in the larger sample of 64 RCTs to their earlier result based on 15 observations from 13

RCTs. 11 These results are reported in Figure 3.

                                             < Figure 3 about here >

           A few important clarifications are in order: Fernandes et al. (2014)'s estimate and

standard error in Figure 3 is from the analysis of 15 observations of RCTs in their paper, not

from our analysis of their data. We were not able to exactly replicate this result, and in the

process, we uncovered four data errors in the direct coding and classification of RCT effect

sizes. In Appendix D, we describe our attempt to replicate the original result by Fernandes et

al. (2014) and thoroughly document each coding discrepancy.

           Taking their estimates at face value, Figure 3 shows that simply updating the dataset to

incorporate the burgeoning recent work increases the effect by more than three times.

Compared to the estimate reported in Fernandes et al. (2014) of 0.018 SD units (with a 95%

confidence interval (CI95) from -0.004 to 0.022), the weighted average effect in this larger

sample of recent RCTs is about 3.6 times higher. The new estimate of the effect size, even with

the identical assumption of a common true effect, clearly rules out a null effect of financial

education (0.065 SD units with CI95 from 0.043 to 0.089). Thus, one of the main findings of

Fernandes et al. (2014) is not confirmed in this larger sample of RCTs.

           Because the common true effect assumption is potentially problematic in the context of

heterogeneous financial education interventions, we estimate the mean of a distribution of true

effects using the model specified in equation 3. In addition to the mentioned theoretical reasons



11
     We convert the correlations used as an effect size metric by Fernandes et al. (2014), (r) to a standardized mean
                                2                                                       42
difference (Cohens' d) d =           and we convert the standard error using  =                   (cf. Lipsey and Wilson
                              1- 2                                                     (1- 2 )3
2001). This is true under the assumption that the outcome measures in each group are continuous and normally
distributed and that the treatment variable is a binary variable indicating treatment and control groups, i.e., a valid
assumption in the context of RCTs. To arrive at the "bias corrected standardized mean difference" (Hedges' g)
                                                                                  3
one may apply the following bias correction factor ex post  =  1 - (                 )
                                                                                         (cf. Borenstein et al. 2009)
                                                                           4 1 +2 -2 -1
but these metrics are near identical in the context of the financial education literature where the average sample
size is 2,136 and the median sample size is 840.


                                                          16
to assume a distribution of true effects rather than a single true effect, we note that formal tests

of heterogeneity show that at least 86.4 percent of the observed between-study variance can be

attributed to heterogeneity in true effects and only 13.6 percent of the observed variance would

have been expected to occur by within-study sampling error alone (see Table B3 in Appendix

B). 12

         Figure 3 shows the result of the random-effects RVE model. In our view, this estimated

mean of the distribution of financial education treatment effects is the most appropriate

aggregate effect size to consider; the estimate results in a mean of 0.1003 SD units [CI95 from

0.071 to 0.129], and thus, is significantly different from the estimate using the common true

effect assumption. The effect of financial education is now approximately 5.5 times larger than

the estimate reported in Fernandes et al. (2014). This effect is very similar in magnitude to

statistical effect sizes reported in meta-analyses of behavior-change interventions in other

domains such as health (e.g., Rooney and Murray 1996; Portnoy et al. 2008; Noar et al. 2007)

or energy conservation behavior (e.g., Karlin et al. 2015).

         To summarize, evidence that incorporates the updated set of papers shows that financial

education is effective, on average. Hence, we do not confirm the estimates from early studies,

which are based on a small number of interventions.



         5.2     Model sensitivity

         We probe the robustness of our findings about the average effect of financial education

programs with various sensitivity checks that are reported in full in Appendix B. These tests

include (i) estimating three alternative meta-analyses including models with a common-effect

assumption, (ii) investigating and correcting for potential publication selection bias, (iii)

restricting the sample to only those studies with adequate power to identify small treatment

12
  A Cochran's Q-test of homogeneity (with one synthetic effect size per study) results in a Q-statistic of 464.71
(p<0.000).


                                                       17
effects, (iv) choosing different assumed within-study correlations of treatment effect estimates

for the random-effects RVE approach, and (v) creating one synthetic effect size per study

(inverse-variance weighted within-study average) and estimating both fixed-effect and random-

effects models with one observation per study. All of these robustness checks confirm the main

conclusions of our paper. 13



         5.3      Outcome domains

         In addition to the effects on financial behaviors aggregated above (Figure 3), i.e., all

behaviors, we also include estimates on financial knowledge (Figure 4). Treatment effects on

financial knowledge are larger than the effect sizes on financial behaviors.

                                          < Figure 4 about here >

Specifically, we find that the mean of the distribution of true effects in our sample is estimated

to be 0.204 [CI95 from 0.152 to 0.255]. Hence, here as well, we cannot confirm the finding by

Fernandes et al. (2014) based on 12 papers (average effect of about 0.133 SD units). 14 Instead,

our average effect on financial knowledge is very similar to the average effects of educational

interventions in math or reading (see Hill et al. 2008; Cheung and Slavin 2016; Fryer 2016;

Kraft 2019).

        Effect sizes on financial behaviors are mostly not statistically different from each other,

suggesting the adequacy of pooling across these outcomes. However, additional analyses

shown in Table B2 in Appendix B suggest that the results on saving behavior and budgeting

behavior are the most robust, while the effects on other categories of financial behaviors are

less certain due to either fewer studies including these outcomes (insurance and remittances)

or high heterogeneity in the estimated treatment effects (credit behaviors). This result is


13
   We also check the robustness of results when excluding any papers of the authors of this meta-analysis.
14
  See Fernandes et al. (2014), p. 1867: "In 12 papers reporting effects of interventions on both measured literacy
(knowledge) and some downstream financial behavior, the interventions explained only 0.44% of the variance in
financial knowledge," i.e.,  2 = 0.066 or d=0.133.


                                                       18
generally in line with earlier accounts of the literature, such as Fernandes et al. (2014), Miller

et al. (2015), and Kaiser and Menkhoff (2017), and extends to the larger set of RCTs.



        5.4      Subgroup analyses

        In order to better understand the sources of heterogeneity in this literature, we further

disaggregate our data into various subgroups and investigate the mean effect of financial

education interventions.


        5.4.1    Sample population

        We disaggregate the sample of RCTs by characteristics of the sample population. First,

we split the sample by country-level income, distinguishing between high income economies

and developing economies, to account for differences in resources. 15 We find that the treatment

effects of interventions in developing economies on financial behaviors are about 9.56 percent

smaller than those in richer countries; however this difference is not statistically significant (see

Panel A(a) of Table 2). Previous meta-analyses have found slightly smaller effect sizes for

interventions in developing economies when controlling for additional features of the programs,

such as intensity (cf. Kaiser and Menkhoff 2017). Treatment effects on financial knowledge are

about 46 percent smaller in developing economies than in high income economies (see Panel

B(a) of Table 2); this difference is statistically significant, and this is also in line with earlier

evidence based on a smaller sample of RCTs (cf. Kaiser and Menkhoff 2017).

                                        < Table 2 about here >

        We next look at differences between low-income individuals and people with average

or above average individual income (relative to the average within-country income). While


15
  Country groups are based on the World Bank Atlas method and refer to 2015 data on Gross National Income
(GNI) per capita. Low-income economies are defined as those with a GNI per capita of $1,025 or less in 2015,
lower-middle income economies are defined by a GNI per capita between $1,026 and $4,035, upper-middle
income economies are those with a GNI per capita between $4,036 and $12,475, and high-income economies are
defined by a GNI per capita greater than $12,475.


                                                    19
interventions with low-income individuals show smaller treatment effects, on average, which

is in line with earlier accounts of the literature (Fernandes et al. 2014; Kaiser and Menkhoff

2017), we--in contrast to these earlier studies--do not find any significant differences between

these two samples (see Panel A(b) and Panel B(b)); this indicates that recent RCTs added to the

sample show smaller differences in treatment effects between groups than those interventions

studied in the earlier literature.

          Additionally, we disaggregate our sample by the age of the participants (see Panel A(c)

and Panel B(c) of Table 2). Treatment effects on financial behaviors are smallest for children

(below age 14) (0.064 SD units) relative to youth (ages 14 to 25) (0.1203 SD units) and adults

(above age 25) (0.1068 SD units), while the latter difference is only marginally significant.

Treatment effects on financial knowledge, on the other hand, are estimated to be largest among

children (0.2763 SD units) relative to youth (0.1859 SD units) and adults (0.2001 SD units).

These differences, however, are not statistically significant due to large uncertainty around the

estimate for children, which is based on 15 observations in seven studies (CI95 from 0.0076 to

0.545).


          5.4.2   Journal quality

          To address possible concerns regarding the internal validity and general rigor of the

included experiments and to focus on what editors and reviewers have judged to be the highest

quality evidence, we restrict the sample to studies published in top general interest or top field

economics journals only. 16 We compare the estimated treatment effects on financial behaviors

of the 15 studies published in these journals to the estimated treatment effects of the other 49

studies published in other journals or as working papers. While treatment effects are estimated


16
   These journals are: (1) Quarterly Journal of Economics, (2) Journal of Political Economy, (3) American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, (4) American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, (5) Journal of the
European Economic Association, (6) Economic Journal, (7) Journal of Finance, (8) Review of Financial Studies,
(9) Management Science, (10) Journal of Development Economics. There were no publications in other top
journals, such as the American Economic Review, Econometrica, and the Review of Economic Studies.


                                                     20
to be slightly smaller in these types of publications, there are no statistically significant

differences between these types of publications (see Panel A(d) and Panel B(d) of Table 2). The

same is true for effect sizes on financial knowledge where eight experiments published in top

general interest or top field economics journals report smaller, albeit not statistically different,

effect sizes than 42 experiments published in other journals or as working papers.


        5.4.3   Time horizon

        Finally, we tackle the important topic of potential decay of effectiveness of financial

education over time. We disaggregate the sample of treatment effects within studies,

considering the time span between financial education treatment and measurement of outcomes

(see Panel A(e) and Panel B(e) of Table 2). We start by looking at treatment effect estimates

that measure outcomes in the very short run (i.e., a time span of less than six months). The

average effect of financial education on financial behaviors within this sample of 34 RCTs (180

effect sizes) is 0.0991. Looking at treatment effects on financial behaviors that are measured at

a time span of six months or more (28 experiments and 260 estimates), we find that the estimates

reduced to 0.071 SD units [CI95 from 0.0425 to 0.0995], which is a marginally significant

difference relative to the set of studies with the shorter time horizon.

        We next restrict the sample further to 18 studies that measure treatment effects on

financial behaviors after at least one year. The estimate is statistically not different to the studies

with shorter time horizon after treatment (0.0878 SD units). Restricting the sample to even

longer time spans, i.e., ten RCTs that measure effects on financial behaviors at least 1.5 years

after treatment or longer, results in an estimated average of 0.0653 SD units. These effects are

slightly reduced but are still not statistically different from the other estimates. Restricting the

set of RCTs further to those seven studies that measure treatment effects on financial behaviors

at least two years after treatment or longer, results in an estimate of 0.0574 SD units, which is

again not statistically different from the other estimates and does not include the possibility of


                                                  21
zero effects (within the limits of the 95% CI). Overall, there is some decay in effectiveness

when measurement is delayed by six months or more; however, beyond this threshold we do

not observe any further significant decline.

        Regarding the decay in financial knowledge, we find significantly larger effects (0.2305

SD units) in 36 RCTs measuring effects on financial knowledge in the very short run (i.e., at a

time span shorter than six months) relative to those with time horizons above six months

(0.1408 SD units), but no statistically significant differences at longer time horizons (more than

6 months or more than 12 months). However, only five studies measure treatment effects on

financial knowledge considering time horizons between 12 and 18 months, and no longer-term

studies exist in our sample.

        Overall, these examinations of the possible decay in outcomes highlighted by Fernandes

et al. (2014) do not find conclusive evidence. This indicates one can neither rule out sustained

and relatively large effects nor close to zero effects of financial education at longer time spans

due to a very limited number of studies that measure very long-run outcomes. We attribute the

previous finding of a relatively rapid decay to the fact that Fernandes et al. (2014) chose to

model this relationship in a meta-regression model with four covariate variables based on a

sample of only 29 observations. 17 Thus, the evidence suggesting insignificant effects after time

spans of more than 18 months is based on a very limited number of observations and should be

viewed with caution in light of the large uncertainty around this estimated effect.




6       Discussion of the economic significance of financial education




17
  We also rerun their type of model (a regression of the estimated effect size on "linear effects of mean-centered
number of hours of instructions, linear and quadratic effects of number of months between intervention and
measurement of behavior, and the inter action of their linear effects" (Fernandes et al. 2014, p. 1867) with our
updated data (419 observations within 52 studies) and find coefficient estimates with large standard errors (i.e.,
insignificant coefficients) throughout (see Table B6 in Appendix B).


                                                       22
        As is true with any analysis of interventions, it is important to understand not just the

statistical effect size but also the economic significance of the effects of financial education. A

growing literature in education is concerned with interpreting effect sizes across studies,

samples, interventions, and outcomes. This section discusses the choice in Fernandes et al.

(2014) to focus on the "variance explained" as a measure of the effect size (Section 6.1). We

couch our effect sizes into the recent literature on explaining and comparing the effects of

education interventions (Section 6.2), provide a back of the envelope analysis of the cost-

effectiveness of financial education interventions based on our findings (Section 6.3), and

discuss the external validity of the RCT estimates by taking into account recent quasi-

experimental studies (Section 6.4).



        6.1     Statistical effect sizes

        A main argument in Fernandes et al. (2014) is that even though the statistical effects of

financial education on financial outcomes are positive in the overall sample, the magnitudes are

small. However, Fernandes et al. (2014) create the illusion of miniscule effects (when, in fact,

they can be economically significant) by using "variance explained," i.e., a squared correlation

coefficient, as their effect size metric.

        The fact that this metric creates the illusion of miniscule effects can be illustrated with

a simple example. Consider the median effect of education (and specifically, structured

pedagogy) interventions in developing countries, which is roughly 0.13 SD units (see Evans

and Yuan 2019). Translating this to the (partial) correlation in Fernandes et al. (2014) results

in a correlation coefficient of 0.06, which explains only 0.36 percent of the variance in learning

outcomes. Thus, according to this criterion, this education intervention would be interpreted to

be ineffective, as it "explains little of the variance." However, Evans and Yuan (2019) report

that this is actually equivalent to a sizeable effect, approximately 0.6-0.9 years of "business as




                                                23
usual schooling," depending on their choice of specification. In further analysis, they estimate

the returns to education (and specifically literacy) in Kenya, and estimate the net present value

of this intervention to be 1,338 USD at an average annual income of 1,079 USD in 2015 PPP.

Reported in this way, rather than the metric chosen by Fernandes et al (2014), these effects are

unlikely to be considered economically miniscule. Thus, it can be problematic to rely upon the

"variance explained" in determining the economic interpretation of statistical effect sizes.



       6.2     Interpreting treatment effects in the education literature

       Recent work in education interventions aims to compare effect sizes across

heterogeneous treatments, populations, and outcomes--as we are doing in our analysis--and

we turn to that work to get some guidance on interpreting effects. Kraft (2019) suggests five

key considerations in determining whether or not programs are effective. First, one should make

sure only studies with a causal interpretation (e.g., RCTs) are included in "effect sizes." Second,

one should expect effects to be larger when the outcome is easier to change; this is particularly

relevant if the intervention is designed to change the specific outcome. Third, one should take

into account heterogeneous effects on different populations. Fourth, one should always consider

costs per participant. A small effect size can have a large return on investment if the per

participant cost is low. Fifth, one should consider whether the program is easily scalable. We

have followed these recommendations.

       With these five points in mind, Kraft (2019) further points to a scheme for assessing the

effect of education interventions with academic outcomes (i.e., test scores) as the main outcome

of interest. He suggests that effects larger than 0.20 standard deviations are "large," effects

between 0.05 and 0.20 standard deviations are "medium," and effects under 0.05 standard

deviations are "small." This classification is roughly consistent with the What Works

Clearinghouse (2014), Hedges and Hedberg (2007) and Bloom et al. (2008). Our effects on



                                                24
financial knowledge in Figure 4 show an effect size of roughly 0.203, consistent with a "large"

effect of an education intervention on test scores.

       Kraft (2019) also notes that it is more difficult to affect long-run outcomes that are not

directly addressed in the intervention. It is, thus, not surprising that effects on financial behavior

are more modest than effects on financial knowledge. Even so, these effects are classified as

"medium" in magnitude in his interpretation of effect sizes realized in RCTs.



       6.3      Cost-effectiveness

       While understanding effect sizes in standard deviation units is more consistent across

educational interventions and more intuitive than "variance explained," a discussion of effect

sizes is incomplete without quantifying costs, as also noted in Kraft (2019). Unfortunately, only

20 papers within the 76 studied include a discussion of cost. If we conduct a meta-analysis with

only these papers, we find that the estimated treatment effects are smaller in the set of studies

reporting costs than in the fully aggregated sample. In Appendix B Figure B6, we regress a

binary indictor of reporting costs on sample and experiment characteristics to examine which

are the studies that do report costs. The only notable difference is that studies reporting costs

are more likely to involve low-income samples. Since we see no difference in effect sizes based

on whether or not the intervention was targeted to low-income populations, we cannot precisely

say what is driving the difference in effect sizes with respect to studies reporting costs.

       To give readers a visual assessment of costs and effect sizes, we report the average costs

by study in Appendix A Table A1 in 2019 U.S. dollars. Averaging across all studies reporting

costs, the mean and median per participant costs are $60.40 and $22.90, respectively. Using the

Kraft (2019) scheme with respect to effect sizes, an average cost of $60 per participant would

be classified as a "low cost" educational intervention. It could be that studies reporting costs

have, on average, lower costs than those that do not report costs. If that is the case, costs are




                                                 25
understated, as are benefits since effect sizes are smaller in the reporting sample. Several studies

mention their interventions had "minimal costs" but do not report a number; we do not include

these studies in the cost estimates. Some programs may have costs that are difficult to quantify.

Other programs may be difficult to scale. For example, Calderone et al. (2018) report a $25 per

person cost and $39 per person benefit for a financial education program in India. However,

they state the program is still too costly for a large company to implement at scale. While some

studies pass a cost-benefit analysis on the surface, there may be other barriers prohibiting

implementation.

       Overall, our cost-effectiveness ratio is $60.40 per person for one-fifth of a standard

deviation improvement in outcomes. Figure 5 displays the cost and effect size by outcome

domain for each study. There are two direct takeaways from the figure. First, most effect sizes

lie above the zero line but below 0.5 standard deviations. The effects below the zero line largely

reflect papers that study the impact of financial education on remittances (e.g., switching to a

cheaper financial product when transferring money across countries). Second, there does not

appear to be a linear relationship between costs and effect sizes. Figure B7 in Appendix B

displays the effect sizes and costs for each outcome domain separately, where we also include

95% confidence intervals for each estimate.

                                         < Figure 5 about here >

       To make the discussion more salient, we use one paper that clearly spells out the costs,

from a large-scale randomized control trial in Peruvian schools (Frisancho 2018). That paper

reports a cost per pupil of $4.80 USD and that a $1 increase in spending on the program yields

a 3.3 point improvement in the PISA financial literacy assessment. Since this study represents

financial education within a year-long class and average and median interventions in the sample

are only 12 and 7 hours, respectively, it is likely that the average effect across studies




                                                26
corresponds to lower costs. Frisancho (2018) also shows that the course does not detract from

performance in other courses, limiting opportunity costs.

        Our back of the envelope estimate is conservative in that it does not consider positive

externalities of the program. For example, Frisancho (2018) documents that in addition to

improving student outcomes, teachers' financial literacy and credit scores also increase.

Further, Bruhn et al. (2016) document positive "trickle up" effects for parents. Thus, financial

education programs may have externalities beyond the target group, such as affecting behaviors

of teachers, parents, and possibly peers (Haliassos et al. 2019).



        6.4      External validity

        While a benefit of only including RCTs is that there is little debate regarding their

internal validity, it is more common to study long-term effects in quasi-experimental settings.

There exists mounting quasi-experimental evidence that requiring U.S. high school students to

complete financial education prior to graduating improves long-term financial behaviors. This

body of literature uses a difference-in-difference strategy comparing students who would have

graduated just before and just after the requirement was in place within a state with a

requirement, as well as across states with and without requirements over the same time period.18

        High school personal finance graduation requirements, which include standalone

courses and personal finance standards incorporated into another required class or curriculum,

show that financial education reduces non-student debt (Brown et al. 2016), increases credit

scores (Brown et al. 2016; Urban et al. 2018), reduces default rates (Brown et al. 2016; Urban

et al. 2018), shifts student loan borrowing from high-interest to low-interest methods (Stoddard



18
  Cole, Paulson, and Shastry (2016) used this method but studied "personal finance mandates" between 1957-
1982, which often did not comprise course requirements but instead brought a representative from a bank to give
a one-off lecture. The authors documented no effects of the education on investment or credit management
behaviors. This was in contrast to Bernheim, Garret, and Maki (2001), who found that these same mandates
improved investment behaviors, though they did not include state-level fixed effects in their analysis.


                                                      27
and Urban 2019), increases student loan repayment rates (Mangrum 2019), reduces payday loan

borrowing for young adults (Harvey, 2019), and increases bank account ownership for those

with only high school education (Harvey 2020). This recent literature as well confirms the

findings in the meta-analysis.



7      Conclusions

       Our analysis of the existing research on financial education using the most rigorous

evaluation methods has three main findings.

       First, financial education treatment effects from RCTs have, on average, positive effects

on financial knowledge and behaviors. This result is very robust: it holds up to accounting for

publication bias, including only adequately powered studies, looking only at studies published

in top economics journals, and accounting for heterogeneity across studies. Financial education

interventions have sizable effects on both financial knowledge (+0.2 SD units) and financial

behaviors (+0.1 SD units). Thus, the treatment effects on financial knowledge are quite similar

to or even larger in magnitude than the average effect sizes realized by educational interventions

in other domains such as math and reading (see Hill et al. 2008; Cheung and Slavin 2016; Fryer

2016; Kraft 2018) and the effect sizes on financial behaviors are comparable to those realized

in behavior-change interventions in the health domain (e.g., Rooney and Murray 1996; Portnoy

et al. 2008; Noar et al. 2007) or behavior-change interventions aimed at fostering energy

conserving behavior (e.g., Karlin et al. 2015). Our findings are in stark contrast to the findings

presented in the first meta-analysis of the financial education literature (Fernandes et al. 2014).

How can we interpret these differences in findings? While we are unable to replicate the original

result on RCTs presented in Fernandes et al. (2014) (see Appendix D), we observe that the

number of recent RCTs added to the database is driving the more positive result of financial

education treatment effects on financial knowledge and behaviors. Additionally, we show that




                                                28
explicitly accounting for heterogeneity in studies and programs is crucial in assessing the

average impact of financial education.

       Second, there is no evidence to support or refute decay of financial education treatment

effects six months or more after the intervention. Since only six studies in our sample look at

impacts 24 months beyond the intervention, we cannot rule out that this effect is statistically

different from short-run effects. Because the present literature is characterized by very few

longer-term impact assessments, the evidence on the sustainability of effects is inconclusive.

What we can say, however, is that we do not find evidence for dramatic decay up to six months

after the intervention.

       Third, we document that the estimates of statistical effect sizes are economically

significant. We further document that many of the financial education interventions studied in

randomized experiments are cost-effective. This finding is crucial, since the discussion of the

effectiveness of financial education has focused on statistical effect sizes without considering

their economic interpretation.

       The evidence in this meta-analysis summarizes financial education interventions from

33 countries and six continents, across the lifespan of individuals. The analysis carefully

accounts for heterogeneity across interventions. However, there are still some limitations. Since

few RCTs study long-run effects, it is hard to determine the long-run impacts of these

interventions. The same is true for the quality of the data used to study changes in financial

behaviors: Few studies are able to link their experiments to administrative data, so the usual

caveats of having to rely on self-reported survey data also apply to this literature. Future

research should aim to collect longer-run administrative data or follow up with original

participants from earlier field experiments. Finally, we encourage more studies to report on the

costs of their programs, in order to provide policymakers with an estimate of cost-effectiveness.




                                               29
References

Beuermann, D. W. and C. K. Jackson (2018). The short and long-run effects of attending the
schools that parents prefer. Working paper. https://works.bepress.com/c_kirabo_jackson/37/

Bloom, H. S., Hill, C. J., Black, A. R., and Lipsey, M. W. (2008). Performance trajectories and
performance gaps as achievement effect-size benchmarks for educational interventions.
Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 1(4): 289­328.

Borenstein, M., Hedges, L. V., Higgins, J. P. T., and Rothstein, H. R. (2009). Introduction to
meta-analysis. Chichester, UK: Wiley. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1002/9780470743386

Bruhn, M., de Souza Leao, L., Legovini, A., Marchetti, R., and Zia, B. (2016). The impact of
high school financial education: Evidence from a large-scale evaluation in Brazil. American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(4): 256­295.

Brown, M., Grigsby, J., van der Klaauw, W., Wen, J., and Zafar, B. (2016). Financial education
and the debt behavior of the young. Review of Financial Studies, 29(9): 2490­2522.

Cheung, A. and Slavin, R. (2016). How methodological features affect effect sizes in education.
Educational Researcher, 45(5): 283­292

Collins, J. M. and O'Rourke, C. M. (2010). Financial education and counseling - still holding
promise. Journal of Consumer Affairs, 44 (3): 483­98.

Evans, D. and Yuan, F. (2019). Equivalent years of schooling: A metric to communicate
learning gains in concrete terms. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 8752.

Fernandes, D., Lynch Jr., J.G., and Netemeyer, R.G. (2014). Financial literacy, financial
education, and downstream financial behaviors. Management Science, 60(8): 1861­1883.

Fox, J., S. Bartholomae, and Lee, J. (2005). Building the case for financial education. Journal
of Consumer Affairs, 39 (1): 195­214.

Fryer, R. G. (2016). The production of human capital in developed countries: evidence from
196 randomized field experiments. NBER Working Paper No. 22130.

Haliassos, M., Jansson, T., and Karabulut, Y. (2019). Financial literacy externalities. Review of
Financial Studies 33 (2): 950­989.

Harbord, R. M., Higgins, J. P., et al. (2008). Meta-regression in Stata. Stata Journal,
8(4):493519.

Harvey, M. (2019). Impact of financial education mandates on young consumers' use of
alternative financial services. Journal of Consumer Affairs, forthcoming.

Harvey, M. (2020). Does state-mandated high school financial education affect savings by low-
income households? Working paper.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5c4d314bb27e3999d515a9e4/t/5e0a1b2841180e296002
3175/1577720633380/Harvey_FinEd_Savings_Working+Paper_v20191230.pdf


                                               30
Hastings, J. S., Madrian, B. C., and Skimmyhorn, W. L. (2013). Financial literacy, financial
education, and economic outcomes. Annual Review of Economics, 5: 347­373.

Hedges, L. V., Tipton, E., and Johnson, M. C. (2010). Robust variance estimation in meta
regression with dependent effect size estimates. Research Synthesis Methods, 1(1): 39­65.

Hedges, L. V. and E. C. Hedberg (2007). Intraclass correlation values for planning group-
randomized trials in education. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 29(1): 60­87.

Hill, C. J., Bloom, H. S., Black, A. R., and Lipsey, M. W. (2008). Empirical benchmarks for
interpreting effect sizes in research. Child Development Perspectives, 2(3): 172­177.
Kaiser, T. and Menkhoff, L. (2017). Does financial education impact financial behavior, and if
so, when? World Bank Economic Review, 31(3): 611­630.

Kaiser, T. and Menkhoff, L. (2019). Financial education in schools: A meta-analysis of
experimental          studies.        Economics     of        Education       Review.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2019.101930

Karlin, B., Zinger, J. F., and Ford, R. (2015). The effects of feedback on energy
conservation: a meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin 141(6): 1205­1227.

Kraft, M. A. (2019). Interpreting effect sizes of education interventions. Educational
Researcher, forthcoming.

Lipsey, M. W. and Wilson, D. B. (2001). Practical meta-analysis. Thousand Oaks: Sage.

Lührmann, M., Serra-Garcia, M., and Winter, J. (2018). The impact of financial education on
adolescents' intertemporal choices. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(3):
309­332.

Lusardi, A. and Mitchell, O. S. (2014). The economic importance of financial literacy: Theory
and evidence. Journal of Economic Literature, 52(1): 5­44.

Lusardi, A., Michaud, P.-C., and Mitchell, O. S. (2017). Optimal financial knowledge
and wealth inequality. Journal of Political Economy, 125(2): 431­477.

Mangrum, D. (2019). Personal finance education mandates and student loan repayment.
Working paper. https://www.danielmangrum.com/research.html

Meager, R. (2019). Understanding the average impact of microcredit expansions: A Bayesian
hierarchical analysis of seven randomized experiments. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 11(1): 57­91.

Miller, M., Reichelstein, J., Salas, C., and Zia, B. (2015). Can you help someone become
financially capable? A meta-analysis of the literature. World Bank Research Observer, 30(2):
220­246.




                                              31
Noar, S. M., Benac, C. N., and Harris, M. S. (2007). Does tailoring matter? Meta-analytic
review of tailored print health behavior change interventions. Psychological Bulletin, 133(4):
673­693.

OECD (2015). National strategies for financial education. OECD/INFE policy handbook,
https://www.oecd.org/finance/National-Strategies-Financial-Education-Policy-Handbook.pdf.

Portnoy, D. B., Scott-Sheldon, L. A., Johnson, B. T., and Carey, M. P. (2008). Computer-
delivered interventions for health promotion and behavioral risk reduction: A meta-analysis of
75 randomized controlled trials. Preventive Medicine, 47(1): 3­16.

Rooney, B. L. and Murray, D. M. (1996). A meta-analysis of smoking prevention programs
after adjustment for errors in the unit of analysis. Health Education Quarterly, 23(1): 48­64.

Stanley, T. D. (2001). Wheat from chaff: Meta-analysis as quantitative literature review.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(3): 131­150.

Stoddard, C. and Urban, C. (2019) The effects of financial education graduation requirements
on postsecondary financing decisions. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, forthcoming.

Tanner-Smith, E. E., and Tipton, E. (2014). Robust variance estimation with dependent effect
sizes: Practical considerations including a software tutorial in STATA and SPSS. Research
Synthesis Methods, 5(1): 13­30.

Tanner-Smith, E. E., Tipton, E., and Polanin, J. R. (2016). Handling complex meta- analytic
data structures using robust variance estimates: A tutorial in R. Journal of Developmental and
Life-Course Criminology, 2(1): 85­112.

Urban, C., Schmeiser, M., Collins, J. M., and Brown, A. (2018). The effects of high school
personal financial education policies on financial behavior. Economics of Education Review,
forthcoming.

What Works Clearinghouse. (2014). WWC procedures and standards handbook (Version 3.0).
U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education
Evaluation and Regional Assistance, What Works Clearinghouse.

Xu, L., and Zia, B. (2012). Financial literacy around the world: An overview of the evidence
with practical suggestions for the way forward. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
No. 6107.




                                              32
Figure 1: Citations in the SSCI to the term "financial literacy" per year

                                          3,500



                                          3,000
   Number of citations (Web of Science)




                                          2,500



                                          2,000



                                          1,500



                                          1,000



                                           500



                                             0
                                                   94
                                                        95
                                                             96
                                                                  97
                                                                       98
                                                                            99
                                                                                 00
                                                                                      01
                                                                                           02
                                                                                                03
                                                                                                     04
                                                                                                          05
                                                                                                               06
                                                                                                                    07
                                                                                                                         08
                                                                                                                              09
                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                      11
                                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                      14
                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                   20
                                                  19
                                                       19
                                                            19
                                                                 19
                                                                      19
                                                                           19
                                                                                20
                                                                                     20
                                                                                          20
                                                                                               20
                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                   20
Notes: Number of citations within the social science citation index (Web of Science) to articles including the term "financial
literacy" in the title or the abstract. Data from October 11, 2019.




                                                                                                              33
Figure 2: Distribution of raw financial education treatment effects and their standard errors


            70




            60




            50




            40
   1/SE_g




            30




            20




            10
                                                                                                                         Effects on Fin. Behaviors
                                                                                                                         Effects on Fin. Knowledge

             0
                 -.4   -.3   -.2   -.1   0   .1   .2   .3   .4     .5    .6   .7   .8   .9   1   1.1   1.2   1.3   1.4
                                                            Effect size (g)


Notes: Effect size (g) is the bias corrected standardized mean difference (Hedges' g). 1/SE_g is its inverse standard error
(precision). The number of observations in the treatment effects on financial behaviors sample is 458 effect size estimates from
64 studies. The number of observations in the treatment effects on financial knowledge sample is 215 effect size estimates from
50 studies. Thirty-eight studies report treatment effects on both types of outcomes. The mean effect size on financial behaviors
is 0.0937 SD units, and the mean effect size on financial knowledge is 0.186 SD units.




                                                                                   34
Figure 3: Estimating the average effect of financial education treatment on financial behaviors in RCTs




Notes: Fernandes et al. (2014) report weighted least squares estimates with inverse variance weights (common effect
assumption). The results with updated data are from robust variance estimation in meta-regression with dependent effect size
estimates (RVE) (Hedges et al. 2010) with  ! = 0 in the common effect case, and  ! estimated via methods of moments in the
heterogeneous effects case. Fernandes et al. (2014) use within-study average effects and estimate the weighted average effect
across 15 observations using inverse variance weights. Our estimates with updated data are based on multiple effect sizes per
study and account for the statistical dependency (estimates within studies) by relying on robust variance estimation in meta-
regression with dependent effect size estimates (Hedges et al. 2010). Dots show the point estimate, and the solid lines indicate
the 95% confidence interval.




                                                              35
Figure 4: Financial education treatment effects by outcome domain




Notes: Results from robust variance estimation in meta-regression with dependent effect size estimates (RVE) (Hedges et al.
2010). The number of observations for the financial knowledge sample (1) is 215 effect size estimates within 50 studies. The
number of observations for the credit behavior sample (2) is 115 within 22 studies. The number of effect size estimates for the
budgeting behavior sample (3) is 55 within 23 studies. The number of observations in the saving behavior (4) sample is 253
effect size estimates within 54 studies. The number of observations in the insurance behavior sample (5) is 18 effect sizes
within six studies. The number of observations on remittance behavior (6) is 17 effect size estimates reported within six studies.
Dots show the point estimate, and the solid lines indicate the 95% confidence interval.




                                                               36
Figure 5: Cost of intervention and effect sizes




                                         1.5
          Effects Across Outcome Domains
             -1    -.5    0    .5
                            -1.5    1




                                               0   25   50   75   100   125 150 175 200      225   250   275   300
                                                                        Cost (2019 USD)

                                                                  Knowledge    Borrowing
                                                                  Budgeting    Saving
                                                                  Insurance    Remittances

Notes: The graph depicts the cost and effect sizes for each outcome domain among the 20 experiments that report
costs. Each data point is an effect size for an outcome studied. Figure B7 in Appendix B provides a graph for each
outcome domain that contains standard errors of the estimates.




                                                                          37
Table 1: Descriptive statistics

Variable                   Obs.                  Mean             Median           Std. Dev.               Min.        Max.
Hedges' g                   677                  0.123             0.098               0.183             -0.413        1.374
SE (g)                      677                  0.084             0.072               0.049              0.007        0.365
Time span (in weeks)        643                 30.239            25.800             31.537               0.000      143.550
Intensity (in hours)        604                 11.709             7.000             16.267               0.008      108.000
Mean age (in years)         650                 33.480            38.300             12.480               8.500       55.000
Children (< age 14)         677                  0.075                 -                   -              0.000        1.000
Youth (age 14 to 25)        677                  0.201                 -                   -              0.000        1.000
Adults (> age 25)           677                  0.724                 -                   -              0.000        1.000
Low income (yes=1)          677                  0.725                 -                   -              0.000        1.000
Developing economy (yes=1) 677                   0.604                 -                   -              0.000        1.000
Top econ journal (yes=1)    677                  0.267                 -                   -              0.000        1.000

Note: Descriptive statistics at the estimate-level, i.e. we consider the total of 677 effects reported in 76 RCTs.




                                                                38
Table 2: Financial education treatment effects by subgroups of studies and populations

 Subgroup                         Effect size            SE        95% CI        95% CI      n(Studies)      n(effects)
                                          (g)                       Lower         Upper
                                                                    bound         bound
 Panel A: Treatment effects on financial behaviors
 (a) By country income
 High income economies             0.1127       0.0316             0.0478         0.1777              32           129
 Developing economies              0.0928       0.0130             0.0660         0.1195              32           329
 (b) By respondent income
 Low income individuals               0.0993         0.0194        0.0600         0.1387              43           367
 General population                   0.1035         0.0219        0.0571         0.1500              21            91

 (c) By age of participants
 Children (< age 14)                  0.0640         0.0186        0.0188         0.1091               9            36
 Youth (age 14 to 25)                 0.1203         0.0415        0.0250         0.2155              11            92
 Adults (> age 25)                    0.1068         0.0205        0.0653         0.1483              44           330

 (d) By type of publication
 Top econ. journals                   0.0833         0.0235        0.0325         0.1342              15           161
 Other publications                   0.1075         0.0183        0.0704         0.1445              49           297

 (e) By delay between treatment and measurement of outcomes
 Delay of < 6 months              0.0991      0.0169        0.0645                0.1337              34           180
 Delay of  6 months               0.0710      0.0137        0.0425                0.0995              28           260
 Delay of  12 months              0.0878      0.0200        0.0450                0.1308              18           134
 Delay of  18 months              0.0653      0.0192        0.0209                0.1098              10            49
 Delay of  24 months              0.0574      0.0225        0.0013                0.1136               7            32

 Panel B: Treatment effects on financial knowledge
 (a) By country income
 High income economies             0.2591       0.0415             0.1738         0.3443              29           135
 Developing economies              0.1392       0.0218             0.0934         0.1851              21            80

 (b) By respondent income
 Low income individuals               0.2238         0.0395        0.1428         0.3049              30           120
 General population                   0.1835         0.0310        0.1183         0.2486              20            95

 (c) By age of participants
 Children (< age 14)                  0.2763         0.1098        0.0076         0.5450               7            15
 Youth (age 14 to 25)                 0.1859         0.0390        0.1015         0.2703              16            40
 Adults (> age 25)                    0.2001         0.0282        0.1418         0.2583              28           160

 (d) By type of publication
 Top econ. journals                   0.1572         0.0379        0.0648         0.2497               8            46
 Other publications                   0.2142         0.0299        0.1537         0.2746              42           169
 (e) By delay between treatment and measurement of outcomes
 Delay of < 6 months              0.2305      0.0319        0.1654                0.2956              36           142
 Delay of  6 months               0.1408      0.0289        0.0775                0.2041              15            57
 Delay of  12 months              0.1406      0.0367        0.0166                0.2646               5             5
 Delay of  18 months                   -            -            -                     -               0             0
 Delay of  24 months                   -            -            -                     -               0             0
Notes: This table reports average effects of financial education treatment on financial behaviors (Panel A) and financial
knowledge (Panel B) estimated via RVE. Ten studies with 34 effect size estimates are missing information about the delay
between treatment and measurement of outcomes.




                                                           39
