                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         IT TAKES A VILLAGE:
   THE ECONOMICS OF PARENTING WITH NEIGHBORHOOD AND PEER EFFECTS

                                      Francesco Agostinelli
                                        Matthias Doepke
                                        Giuseppe Sorrenti
                                        Fabrizio Zilibotti

                                       Working Paper 27050
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27050


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We thank Matt Wiswall, participants at the "Economics of Child Development" conference at the
University of Chicago, and seminar participants at Banco Central de Chile, Northwestern
University, Penn State University, Temple University, Universidad de Chile, University of British
Columbia (Woodward Lecture), and Yale University for helpful suggestions that greatly
improved the paper. Financial support from the SNSF (grant 100018-165616) and NSF (grant
SES-1949228) during the preparation and execution of the project are gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Francesco Agostinelli, Matthias Doepke, Giuseppe Sorrenti, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
It Takes a Village: The Economics of Parenting with Neighborhood and Peer Effects
Francesco Agostinelli, Matthias Doepke, Giuseppe Sorrenti, and Fabrizio Zilibotti
NBER Working Paper No. 27050
April 2020
JEL No. I24,J13,J24,R20

                                          ABSTRACT

As children reach adolescence, peer interactions become increasingly central to their
development, whereas the direct influence of parents wanes. Nevertheless, parents may continue
to exert leverage by shaping their children's peer groups. We study interactions of parenting style
and peer effects in a model where children's skill accumulation depends on both parental inputs
and peers, and where parents can affect the peer group by restricting who their children can
interact with. We estimate the model and show that it can capture empirical patterns regarding the
interaction of peer characteristics, parental behavior, and skill accumulation among US high
school students. We use the estimated model for policy simulations. We find that interventions
(e.g., busing) that move children to a more favorable neighborhood have large effects but lose
impact when they are scaled up because parents' equilibrium responses push against successful
integration with the new peer group.

Francesco Agostinelli                            Giuseppe Sorrenti
University of Pennsylvania                       University of Amsterdam
133 South 36th Street                            Amsterdam School of Economics
Philadelphia, PA 19104                           Roetersstraat 11
fagostin@upenn.edu                               1018 WB Amsterdam
                                                 The Netherlands
Matthias Doepke                                  g.sorrenti@uva.nl
Northwestern University
Department of Economics                          Fabrizio Zilibotti
2211 Campus Drive                                Yale University
Evanston, IL 60208                               Department of Economics
and NBER                                         28 Hillhouse Avenue
doepke@northwestern.edu                          New Haven, CT 06520
                                                 and NBER
                                                 fabrizio.zilibotti@yale.edu
1       Introduction
The two most important influences on children's development are their parents
and their peers. The importance of these two factors evolves as children grow
up: once children pass into adolescence, parents' ability to hold sway over them
wanes, whereas the influence of peers looms larger. Yet, parents can try to influ-
ence how their adolescent children select their peers. They can choose neighbor-
hoods and schools, and coax their children into activities and hobbies that expose
them to a favorable peer group. Or, more directly, they can push their children to
associate with or stay away from specific peers.

In this paper, we examine the determinants and consequences of parental deci-
sions that are aimed at shaping their children's peer groups. We build on evi-
dence from the Add Health study, which follows a large group of children in the
United States throughout the high school years. The data set includes informa-
tion on children's grades, test scores, and socio-economic characteristics of their
families. Crucially for our purposes, it also provides rich information on parents'
behavior and on children's friendship networks. We are specifically interested
in how parents intervene in peer-group formation. The data set includes a ques-
tion that addresses this issue directly: "Do your parents let you make your own
decisions about the people you hang around with?" We classify a parent whose
child answers "No" as adopting an authoritarian parenting style about friends--
or more simply, as authoritarian.1 Conversely, when the child answer "Yes," a
parent is classified as adopting a nonauthoritarian style.

The first question we address is whether parents' choice between the authori-
tarian versus nonauthoritarian style can be understood from the perspective of a
rational-choice theory of parenting, where parents are concerned about their chil-
dren's present and future welfare and are responsive to the characteristics of both
    1
      Of course, the notion of an authoritarian parenting style (stretching back to Baumrind 1967)
is usually more general and covers many aspects of behavior; we use the shorthand "authoritar-
ian" because we are specifically interested in parents' impact on peer selection. In the develop-
mental psychology literature, the notion of authoritarian parenting style often carries a negative
connotation and is associated with unfavorable outcomes (see, e.g., Brooks 2013). In contrast,
following Doepke and Zilibotti (2017), we do not attach a value judgement to the use of author-
itarian parenting, and simply use "authoritarian" to denote parents who restrict their children's
choices.


                                                1
their children and the surrounding community. We begin answering this ques-
tion by documenting correlations between the parenting style parents adopt and
the peer environment their children face. We find that parents are more likely to
be authoritarian (i.e., meddle in their children's peer choices) when the average
quality of the peer group (measured by grades) is low and when its variance is
high. Informally speaking, parents are more authoritarian when their children
are exposed to the influence of "bad apples." Authoritarian parenting also ap-
pears to be effective: intervening in a child's peer formation is associated with an
improvement over time in the quality of a child's set of friends.

These correlations are consistent with the view that parents' actions are a pur-
poseful response to the environment that their children face. To study the im-
plications of this hypothesis more formally, we develop a model that combines
dynamic skill acquisition by children (Cunha and Heckman 2007) with endoge-
nous formation of friendship networks (Agostinelli 2018) and a rational-choice
theory of parent-child interactions. In the model, building on Doepke, Sorrenti,
and Zilibotti (2019), parents' concern for their children has a paternalistic com-
ponent: parents place relatively more weight on the children's accumulation of
skills than do the children themselves. This motivates interventions aimed at
fostering skills. Parental interventions can take two forms. First, parallel to what
we observe in the Add Health data, parents can adopt an authoritarian parent-
ing style to influence their child's selection of friends. Second, parents can invest
time to directly support their children's skill formation, such as helping them
with homework or motivating them to work hard. We interpret such time in-
vestments as an element of an authoritative parenting style.2 The two strategies
are not exclusive: parents may decide to combine elements of authoritarian and
authoritative parenting.

Children form friendships based on the mutual agreement of two potential friends,
where the utility a child derives from a friendship depends on their own and the
friend's characteristics as well as on match-specific shocks. Authoritarian parent-

   2
     Authoritative parenting is generally characterized by high parental engagement and by ex-
plaining the reasoning behind parents' views rather than just demanding obedience as in the
authoritarian style. See Doepke and Zilibotti (2019) for a detailed discussion of parenting styles
from an economic perspective.


                                                2
ing lowers the utility a child earns from befriending lower-skill peers, which cap-
tures the effect of parental disapproval. If successful, this intervention improves
the quality of a child's peer group, which in turn feeds back into the child's own
accumulation of skills. However, in line with the child development literature,
authoritarian parenting has some negative repercussions. Meddling in the choice
of friends puts a strain on the parent-child relationship, making the child less re-
ceptive to other parental interventions.

These opposing effects yield a tradeoff for parents between improving the se-
lection of peers and the collateral damage caused by parental interference. The
resolution of this tradeoff hinges on the peer environment a child is exposed to.
Influencing the choice of friends is more urgent in riskier neighborhoods where
certain social interactions could lure children into hazardous behavior. In con-
trast, in homogeneous neighborhoods where most potential peers have a solid
family background, parents can grant their children leeway and spare them the
downsides of an authoritarian upbringing.

We estimate the model to match a set of data moments and find that it provides
a good fit for the empirical relationships between child skills, peers skills, and
parenting style observed in the Add Health study. The primary source of iden-
tification in the estimation is the within-school and within-grade variation in the
makeup of the potential peer group. Even so, the model provides a good fit for
the observed variation in parenting styles across schools from richer and poorer
neighborhoods, which is not directly targeted.

The estimated model implies a flexible interaction between different dimensions
of parenting style. For nonauthoritarian parents, authoritative investments in a
child's skills are a substitute input for the quality of the child's peers (in line with
Agostinelli 2018). As a result, parents increase their time investment when their
children face a worse peer group. In contrast, the time investment of authori-
tarian parents does not respond to the quality of peers. These findings suggest
that parents regard authoritative time investments and authoritarian restrictions
on the choice of friends as alternative strategies for responding to a problematic
peer environment.

Having confirmed that parenting choices can indeed be understood as a rational

                                           3
response to incentives arising from a child's environment, we move on to a sec-
ond question: What are the implications of endogenous parenting for the effects
of policy interventions that are also aimed at shaping peer effects?

We focus specifically on a busing policy that moves children from a low-quality
school (measured by average test scores) to a better one. Our model implies that
bused children face two barriers to integration. The first is homophily bias in
children's preferences, i.e., the tendency for children to associate with peers who
are similar to themselves. The second is the endogenous response of parents in
the host neighborhood. We find that the strength of these barriers hinges on the
scale of the intervention. A small-scale policy that moves only a few children
has large beneficial effects on the moved children and hardly any negative im-
pact on the children already at the receiving school. However, for two reasons,
the effectiveness of the policy declines sharply as it is scaled up to cover more
children. First, if only few children are bused, they have no choice other than to
mingle with the children in the new school. In contrast, when the policy is scaled
up, homophily bias induces the bused children to increasingly stick together and
mix less with others. Second, as more children are bused, parents at the receiv-
ing school increasingly turn authoritarian to prevent their own children from be-
friending the new arrivals. In other words, parents' equilibrium responses push
against successful integration.

Beyond busing, other examples of policies where similar effects may arise in-
clude school choice policies and tracking policies within schools. We also study
counterfactual policies that alter the peer environment for all children by reduc-
ing initial inequality in skills either within or across neighborhoods. Reducing
initial inequality across the board or within neighborhoods (e.g., through poli-
cies targeting early child development) generally has beneficial effects on the
accumulation of skills, in significant part because lower inequality reduces the
use of authoritarian parenting. Results are less favorable for a policy that re-
duces inequality across neighborhoods, for instance by removing all residential
segregation so that the composition of all neighborhoods turns identical, while
holding constant overall inequality. In our model, this policy has a negative
average effect on skill accumulation because inequality increases within most


                                        4
neighborhoods, which due to homophily bias and the defensive response of par-
ents, increases barriers against the successful integration of children from differ-
ent backgrounds. All these findings underline the importance of taking parental
responses into account when considering the effects of policies that are aimed at
shaping peer effects.

Relationship to Literature

This paper links three strands of the recent literature on the determinants of child
development. The first is the literature on children's skill formation, including
James Heckman's recent work with different coauthors (e.g., Cunha and Heck-
man 2007; Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach 2010), which has led to new in-
sights on how children's skills and attitudes evolve as a function of endowments
and parental and other inputs.3 We build on this literature in our modeling of
children's skill acquisition, and also introduce new elements, such as alternative
investment strategies (parenting styles), through which parents can foster their
children's skills.

The second strand of literature is the growing body of multidisciplinary research
studying the importance of neighborhood effects for human capital formation
and inequality of opportunity.4 This literature shows that children who grow up
in distressed areas tend to reach lower outcomes and display less upward mo-
bility when compared to children from wealthier areas (e.g., Cutler and Glaeser
1997; Chetty et al. 2014). In a recent study, Chetty, Hendren, and Katz (2016) ar-
gue that moving to a less poor area improves long-term outcomes for children
who move at a young age. The importance of childhood exposure to neighbor-
hoods is also supported by recent papers studying tax records of millions of US
families moving across different areas (Chetty and Hendren 2018a, 2018b) and

   3
      Other important studies in this literature include Todd and Wolpin (2003), Heckman,
Stixrud, and Urzua (2006), Todd and Wolpin (2007), Cunha and Heckman (2008), Almlund et al.
(2011), Dahl and Lochner (2012), Løken, Mogstad, and Wiswall (2012), Heckman, Pinto, and
Savelyev (2013), Del Boca, Flinn, and Wiswall (2014), Agostinelli and Wiswall (2016), Agostinelli
and Sorrenti (2018), Attanasio, Meghir, and Nix (2019), and Attanasio et al. (2020). For literature
reviews, see Heckman and Mosso (2014) and Attanasio (2015).
    4
      See Jencks and Mayer (1990), Sampson, Morenoff, and Gannon-Rowley (2002) and Durlauf
(2004) for early reviews.


                                                5
the findings of Chyn (2018) on the effects of a program of public housing de-
molitions in Chicago that forced poor families to relocate to less disadvantaged
areas.

These empirical studies leave open the question through which mechanism the
benefits of exposure to better neighborhood arise. In addressing this question,
our study complements the theoretical literature on social interactions within
neighborhoods (e.g., Brock and Durlauf 2001a; Brock and Durlauf 2001b ; Brock
and Durlauf 2002; Durlauf and Ioannides 2010) and the empirical literature on
peer effects in education.5 Calvó-Armengol, Patacchini, and Zenou (2009) esti-
mate a friendship network model using, as we do, the Add Health data. Their
main finding is that a child's position in the network, as measured by its Bonacich
centrality, has an impact on school performance.6 A recent study by List, Mo-
meni, and Zenou (2019) documents large spillover effects of programs targeting
disadvantaged children on the cognitive and noncognitive skills of other local
children. In line with our modeling approach, the evidence suggests that these
spillovers operate through children's social networks. Angrist and Lang (2004)
study the effect of a desegregation busing policy in the Boston area. They find
that negative spillovers on the receiving community are small, although there
are some negative effects on local black children who are more likely to interact
with the bused children. These results are consistent with the findings of our
counterfactual policy analysis. Two recent macroeconomic papers by Eckert and
Kleineberg (2019) and Fogli and Guerrieri (2018) study the effect of neighborhood
choice on human capital accumulation and social mobility. We do not explicitly
model the choice of neighborhood, but unlike these studies, we provide a micro-
foundation for peer effects and the process of friendship formation, and we allow
for direct parental interventions in children's peer group formation.

   5
      Case and Katz (1991) is an early contribution on the effect of neighborhood peers on the be-
haviors of youths. Papers estimating peer effects in education under a variety of identification
strategies include Hoxby (2000), Sacerdote (2001), Zimmerman (2003), Sacerdote (2011), Arcidi-
acono et al. (2012), Carrell, Sacerdote, and West (2013), Tamayo Castano (2016), and Feld and
Zölitz (2017). Altonji and Mansfield (2018) address econometric issues in the estimation of group
treatment effects in the presence of selection effects. Blume et al. (2011) and Blume et al. (2015)
provide an overview of the identification of various social interactions models.
    6
      Other studies on peer effects using the Add Health data set include Bifulco, Fletcher, and
Ross (2011), Badev (2016), Mele (2019), and Olivetti, Patacchini, and Zenou (2020).


                                                6
The third related strand of literature consists of recent work on the economics
of parenting that merges insights from the developmental psychology literature
with the Beckerian tradition of family economics, including Doepke and Zilibotti
(2017), Doepke and Zilibotti (2019), and Doepke, Sorrenti, and Zilibotti (2019).
While the psychology literature (following Baumrind 1967) regards parenting
styles as given traits of parents, the economics literature treats them as the en-
dogenous choice of rational parents who seek to influence the behavior of their
children, with whom they disagree on occasion.7 Strategic interaction between
parents and children is also central to Del Boca et al. (2019), who focus on mone-
tary incentives that parents provide for their children (related to Weinberg 2001)
rather than on interference with friend selection. Relative to this literature, the
key innovation of this paper is to consider how parenting choices interact with
peer effects.8 In terms of modeling peer interactions, we build on Agostinelli
(2018), who estimates a dynamic model of skill formation where children choose
their own peer groups.9 However, in his setting, parents do not choose a parent-
ing style or interfere in their children's peer selection, which is the main focus of
our study.
In the following section, we describe the data and provide descriptive evidence.
In Section 3, we develop a structural model of parent-child interactions with peer
effects. Section 4 describes the model estimation. Section 5 uses the model for
policy analysis, and Section 6 concludes. The appendix contains additional em-
pirical results, details on the measurement of skills and parenting styles, and
    7
       Earlier work on the economics of parenting includes Akabayashi (2006) and Lizzeri and
Siniscalchi (2008), who emphasize informational frictions and learning. More recently, Kim (2019)
models the role of parental punishment as a parent-child communication channel. Other empir-
ical studies on different dimensions of parenting include, among others, Patacchini and Zenou
(2011), Zumbuehl, Dohmen, and Pfann (2018), Brenøe and Epper (2019), and Cobb-Clark, Sala-
manca, and Zhu (2019).
     8
       The link between parenting and peer effects has been stressed previously in the develop-
mental psychology literature. For instance, Brooks (2013) describes parenting as a "process of
action and interaction between parent and child . . . . Society is a third dynamic force in the pro-
cess. . . . The child, the parent, and society all influence the process of parenting, and, in turn,
are changed by it" (pp. 6­7). The impact of parents through shaping their children's peer en-
vironment is acknowledged even by authors who are skeptical of the influence of parents on
adolescent children, such as Harris (1998) .
     9
       A contemporaneous nonstructural paper by Özdemir (2019) also uses the Add Health data
to study the response of parents to the environment, with a special focus on the differential effects
of time investments of mothers and fathers.


                                                 7
robustness exercises.


2     Parenting, Peers, and Skills in the Add Health Data
In this section, we describe the data and document empirical correlations be-
tween skill accumulation, peers, and parental interventions that motivate our
structural theory.

2.1   Data

The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health)
is a nationally representative longitudinal survey of adolescents in the United
States. The original data set includes about 90,000 students from 132 schools in
the school year 1994­95. Students are in grades 7­12. Our analysis focuses on the
baseline survey (Wave I) and the 1996 follow up (Wave II).

A subsample of students is selected for a home interview that includes question-
naires for both the students and their parents. The data set includes detailed
information on family background, grades, and test scores. The survey asks
questions that can be used for measuring parenting styles. Importantly for our
research, the survey also asks detailed questions on students' peers. Each student
is asked to nominate their best five male and best five female friends. Since stu-
dents are observed repeatedly, we have information on how peer groups evolve
over time. In addition, we can study how students' characteristics (including
grades and tests scores) affect peer group formation.

We are interested in children's answers to the question: "Do your parents let you
make your own decisions about the people you hang around with?" We consider
a parent whose child answers "No" as behaving in an authoritarian fashion about
friends. We classify such parents as authoritarian; all others are nonauthoritar-
ian. The authoritarian group comprises 13 percent of parents in the sample we
use in our analysis. We also construct a measure of parental investment based on
activities parents do together with their children, such as working on a project
for school, talking about a party the child attended, or talking about a personal



                                        8
problem.10 We consider parental investments of this kind as an element of an
authoritative parenting style. The data set does not provide information on mon-
etary investments in child-rearing activities.

Appendix Table A-1 provides the summary statistics of our main variables. Ap-
pendix B provides additional information on how we measure skills and parental
investments.

2.2           Authoritarian Parenting Across Schools

In this section, we provide some descriptive evidence. Our main hypothesis is
that parenting behavior is driven by parents' concern about children's skill for-
mation. Therefore, we expect parents to be more authoritarian when their chil-
dren are exposed to peers who may disrupt human capital accumulation. The
data supports this conjecture.

                     Figure 1: Authoritarian Parenting and Neighborhood Characteristics
                                                                                                           .3
                      .3
        Fraction Authoritarian Parents




                                                                                                                        .25
                                                                                             Fraction Authoritarian Parents
                             .2




                                                                                                            .2
            .1




                                                                                               .15         .1
                      0




                                         2          4                   6            8                                        4     6               8             10    12
                                             Median Family Income at School ($10k)                                                Family Income 90-10 Ratio at School



   The figure shows how the incidence of the authoritarian parenting style varies with within-
   school average family income (left panel) and inequality (right panel). Inequality is mea-
   sured by the 90th­10th percentile ratio of within-school family income.


Figure 1 shows how authoritarian parenting varies across schools with different
characteristics. The left panel displays a binned scatter plot of the relationship
between median family income and the fraction of authoritarian parents at the
school level, whereas the right panel shows the relationship between income in-
equality and authoritarian parenting. The figure shows that across schools, the
   10
     See Appendix Table A-1. We restrict attention to activities done by the child with its mother
to avoid selection problems, since the father is often not present.


                                                                                         9
    Table 1: Authoritarian Parenting and Peer Environment Across Schools


                                                       Authoritarian
                                                       (1)          (2)


                    Median Family Income -0.033*** -0.021***
                    at School                        (0.005)      (0.004)

                    90-10 Family Income              0.006*       0.005*
                    at School                        (0.003)      (0.003)
                    Mean Dep                         0.154         0.154
                    Obs                              15064        15064
                    Clusters                          114           114
                    Controls                           No           Yes
                    The table shows the estimated coefficients of regressions
                   whose dependent variable is an indicator variable for au-
                   thoritarian parenting at the individual level. The regres-
                   sions include mother's education, family income, child's
                   race, age, and gender as control variables. Standard er-
                   rors are clustered at the school level.


proportion of parents adopting the authoritarian parenting style is decreasing
with the median income and increasing with income inequality. Broadly speak-
ing, parents are more likely to meddle in the choice of friends when there are
more children from disadvantaged families present. The differences are quanti-
tatively large. Moving from a neighborhood (school) with a median income of
$20,000 to one with a median income of $60,000 or more decreases the percent-
age of parents behaving in an authoritarian fashion from 26 percent to 8 percent.
Likewise, moving from the three most equal to the three most unequal bins is
associated with more than doubling the share of authoritarian parents. The same
pattern emerges in multiple regressions where we simultaneously include me-
dian income and income inequality and control for parental characteristics, as
shown in Table 1.

While our definition of authoritarian parenting focuses on parental intervention
in peer formation, the patterns documented above are robust to other ways of

                                              10
        Table 2: Authoritarian Parenting and Peer Environment within Schools


                                                              Authoritarian
                                       (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)


    Mean GPA within Grade           -0.114**                  -0.064      -0.059                -0.036
                                     (0.046)                  (0.047)    (0.042)                (0.043)

    SD GPA within Grade                          0.329*** 0.269***                  0.206** 0.181**
                                                 (0.087)      (0.087)               (0.087)     (0.089)
    Mean Dep                          0.130       0.130        0.130      0.130      0.130       0.130
    Obs                               10057       10057       10057       10057      10057      10057
    Clusters                            63          63          63          63         63         63
    Controls                           No          No           No         Yes         Yes        Yes
    School F.E.                        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
   The table shows the estimated coefficients of regressions whose dependent variable is an indicator
  variable for authoritarian parenting at the individual level. The SD GPA grade is the standard devia-
  tion in GPA across pupils within school and grade. All regressions include school fixed effects, as well
  as mother's education, family income, and child's race, age, and gender as control variables. Standard
  errors are clustered at the school level.


measuring parenting style. In Appendix Figure A-1, we construct measures of
parenting styles based on the values parents emphasize in child rearing, simi-
lar to Doepke and Zilibotti (2017).11 The figure shows that parents tend to be
more permissive in wealthier and more equal neighborhoods, while they tend
to be more authoritative and authoritarian in poorer and more unequal neigh-
borhoods. This is consistent with the cross-country evidence documented by
Doepke and Zilibotti (2017).



   11
     We use the answer parents give to the following question: "Of the following, which do you
think is the most important thing for a boy/girl to learn? Be well-behaved, work hard, think
for himself, help others, be popular." We classify parents as authoritarian when they choose "be
well-behaved," as authoritative when they choose "work hard," and as permissive when they
choose "think for themselves." In the figure, we exclude parents who choose either "think for
himself" or "be popular." The result does not change significantly if we classify the excluded
parents as permissive.


                                                    11
2.3     Authoritarian Parenting Within Schools

A natural concern is that the correlation might be driven by omitted variables at
the neighborhood level. To address this concern, we consider within-school re-
gressions exploiting variations across cohorts. We focus on the same measure of
peer quality that we will use in our structural model below, namely, a student's
grade point average (GPA). Table 2 shows the results of regressing parenting style
(authoritarian) on the mean and standard deviation of GPA among the children
in a given school cohort. Parents are significantly more inclined to be authoritar-
ian when their children are exposed to peers with low and unequal skills (where
inequality is measured by the standard deviation of GPA) even when controlling
for school fixed effects and family characteristics.12 Remarkably, the correlation
of parenting style with inequality in GPA is stronger and more robust than that
of parenting style with the mean GPA. The range of variation for the standard
deviation of GPA within grade is [0.47, 0.97]. Moving from the least to the most
unequal cohort in the sample is associated with an increase of the incidence of the
authoritarian parenting style between 9 (sixth column) and 16.5 (second column)
percentage points. This is a large change, given that about 13 percent of parents
in the sample are authoritarian in our sample.

The next question is whether authoritarian parenting makes a difference. To ad-
dress this issue, we study the correlation between parenting style and the change
in the quality of peers. In these regressions, we use information on each child's
network of friends and test whether, conditional on the child's skill and on the
average GPA of her friends, an authoritative parenting style is associated with a
higher GPA of its peers in the following year.13 We control for school and grade
fixed effects and exploit the variation across the realized set of friends for each
child. Table 3 shows that in most cases the dummy for an authoritarian style
has a positive coefficient. While the estimated coefficient is small and statistically
insignificant in the entire sample, there is significant heterogeneity. In particu-
lar, the coefficient turns larger and highly significant when we zoom in on intact
   12
      Appendix Table A-2 shows that the results are robust to using the Gini coefficient instead of
the standard deviation as a measure of inequality.
   13
      Note that we lose many observations because this regression requires that we observe both
the GPA of the child and that of all her friends.


                                                12
                    Table 3: Authoritarian Parenting and Dynamics of Peer Quality



                                                       Next Period Peer GPA
                        (1)              (2)                  (3)                  (4)                   (5)
                        All      Intact Families                        Intact Families Only:

                                                       Low-Income Medium-Income High-Income
                                                      Neighborhood Neighborhood Neighborhood
  Child's GPA        0.177***         0.251***            0.345***              0.226***               0.282*
                      (0.022)         (0.030)              (0.089)               (0.023)              (0.145)

  Peer GPA           0.317***         0.297***              0.147               0.358***               0.179
                      (0.035)         (0.065)              (0.171)               (0.052)              (0.153)

  Authoritarian        0.013          0.198**              0.286*                0.107                 0.212
                      (0.042)         (0.081)              (0.144)               (0.077)              (0.170)
  Obs                  1895             974                   175                 615                   184
  Clusters               56              55                   16                   23                    16
  The table shows the estimated coefficients of regressions whose dependent variable is the average GPA of peers in
 the second wave of interviews. The Peer GPA grade is the average GPA of peers in the first wave of interviews. All
 regressions include school-grade fixed effects, as well as mother's education, family income, and child's race, age,
 and gender as control variables. Standard errors are clustered at the school level.



families, i.e., families in which both parents are present. For these families, an au-
thoritative parenting style is associated with a 0.20 average increase in the skills
of future friends. The point estimate is even larger (0.29) in low-income neighbor-
hoods where more parents are authoritarian. An intuitive interpretation for this
heterogenous effect is that the parental intervention is magnified by the presence
of two parents. While these regressions are suggestive, they are subject to impor-
tant caveats related to selection issues. The costs and benefits of being author-
itarian, both in terms of skill formation and potential psychological costs, may
vary with the characteristics of children and the environment in a systematic and
nonlinear way. We will show below with the aid of a structural model that a large
causal effect of authoritative parenting is consistent with a small reduced-form
regression coefficient.

Overall, the correlations described in this section suggest a rational motive for
parents to interfere in the process of peer selection. To test this hypothesis more


                                                         13
formally and to perform counterfactual policy analysis, we construct and esti-
mate a structural model.


3    A Model of Parents, Peers, and Skill Accumulation
Consider an economy comprising a set of neighborhoods indexed by n, each pop-
ulated by families composed of a child and a parent. The focal point of our anal-
ysis is the accumulation of children's skills i,t , where i is the index of a child and
t denotes the time period. We model the interaction of parent and child from pe-
riod t = 1 to period t = T . In our empirical application this interval corresponds
to the four years of high school (grades 9 to 12), so that T = 4.

                                    Figure 2: Model Timing


    Skills of child (i,t ) and                    Child's skill (i,t+1 )   Peer group ( ¯i,t+1 )
      peers ( ¯i,t ) realized                          realized                 realized



             t                                       t+1
                                  Parenting:
                                    Style                         Friendship
                                      +                           Decisions
                                 Investments



 The figure shows the timeline of the model. The child's skills at t = 0 are drawn from
 the initial distribution. The peers' skills at t = 0 are determined by the peer environment
 (the distribution of children's skills at the school and grade level) and by the random util-
 ity preferences without parental interventions. From period t = 1 onward, t and        ¯t are
 endogenous state variables.


Each neighborhood n is characterized by a set X n of children living in the neigh-
borhood and by the initial (t = 1) skill distribution of these children. All children
living in a given neighborhood attend the same school. Figure 2 outlines the
timing of events within each period. At the beginning of the period, the child's
current skill level i,t is realized. Next, the child forms friendships with some of
the other children of the same age in the same school. The characteristics of these

                                               14
friends (which affect skill formation) are summarized by the variable          ¯i,t . The
parent can now make two choices that affect the evolution of the child's skills
and peers. First, the parent can undertake (authoritative) parenting investments
Ii,t that affect the child's skill formation. Second, the parent chooses her parenting
style, Pi,t  {0, 1}, where Pi,t = 1 means that the parent behaves in an authori-
tarian fashion by interfering in the child's next round of friendship decisions. At
the beginning of the next period, the child's updated skill i,t+1 is realized and
the new group of friends with the average skill      ¯i,t+1 is formed. These events are
repeated until the final year of high school. Then, the child enters adult life with
skills i,T +1 .

3.1   Preferences of Parents and Children

The structure of preferences builds on Doepke and Zilibotti (2017) and Doepke,
Sorrenti, and Zilibotti (2019). In particular, the utility of the parent combines ele-
ments of altruism and paternalism. Altruism means that the child's utility enters
the parent's utility so that the parent wants the child to be "happy." In contrast,
paternalism implies that the parent evaluates the child's choices and educational
outcomes from her own standpoint. Specifically, the parent's paternalistic self
attaches a higher weight on the child's skill accumulation than does the child
herself. The conflicting motives of altruism and paternalism imply that the par-
ent's behavior responds to the environment in a way that can be fitted to data.
The paternalistic motive explains why the parent may want to interfere in the
child's friendship decisions (against the child's wishes), and the altruistic motive
explains why the parent will interfere only when the benefits of doing so are high
relative to the child's loss of utility.
To keep the model parsimonious, we limit attention to the choices and state vari-
ables that are part of our empirical analysis and omit other factors such as goods
consumption. In our notation, we employ the convention that lowercase vari-
ables correspond to the child and uppercase variables correspond to the parent.
The individual state variables for a family are the child's skills i,t and the char-
acteristics of the child's peers ¯i,t . An additional aggregate state variable is the
distribution of the children X n in the neighborhood over skills at age t, which
matters for friendship formation and peer effects. However, since in our analysis

                                           15
families do not switch neighborhoods, the aggregate state is taken as given by
each family.14 Thus, our notation omits the aggregate state as an explicit state
variable. Instead, we denote the dependence of utility and choices on neighbor-
hood characteristics by indexing value functions by neighborhood n.

The parent decides on parenting style (Pi,t and Ii,t ), and the child chooses peers,
i.e., who to be friends with. We express the preferences of parent and child with
value functions that summarize utility in a period after the child's current skills
and peer group have already been realized so that the decisions concern the evo-
lution of these variables into the next period.

The value function for child i in neighborhood n in period t is given by:

                         n
                        vt (i,t , ¯i,t ) = max E u(Fi,t+1 )|i,t , ¯i,t     .                     (1)

Here u(Fi,t+1 ) captures the utility derived from peer interactions with the set of
friends Fi,t+1 chosen in period t, where Fi,t+1  X n . The friend set Fi,t+1 de-
termines the next period's peer quality     ¯i,t+1 . The friendship decisions, in turn,
hinge on both the child's and the parent's decisions in a way that will be made
precise below.15 The (conditional) expectation in the value function reflects the
presence of taste shocks affecting the process of friendship formation. Current
peer quality   ¯i,t enters the value function because it affects the evolution of the
child's skills and the decisions of parents.

The representation of preferences in Equation (1) implies that children only care
about the flow utility accruing from spending time with their friends with no
regard for the effects of peers on their skill formation. A more general repre-
sentation could include the discounted continuation utility from the next period



   14
       In principle, because there is a finite number of families in each neighborhood, peer interac-
tions imply there is a feedback from a family's decisions to the aggregate state, i.e., each family
affects skill accumulation in other families. In practice, given the size of neighborhoods in the
estimated model, this feedback effect is very small, so we assume that parents take the skill dis-
tribution in the neighborhood as given.
    15
       Note that given that utility is summarized after friendship formation at time t has already
been completed, the utility derived from forming friendships with time-t friends u(Fi,t ) does not
appear in the time-t value function (instead, it appears at time t - 1).


                                                 16
onward.16 In other words, we ignore the possibility that children strategically
prefer peers with high grades because of the help these peers may offer them
in improving their school proficiency. This assumption simplifies our empirical
analysis by allowing us to obtain analytical expressions that can be estimated
directly. The loss of generality relative to the formulation in Footnote 16 is very
limited. In our estimation, children take into account the value of other children's
skills because these affect (as we will see) the value of being friends with them.
Therefore, the ultimate determinants of their choice would be the same as in our
formulation, although the functional forms would be different.

The parent's total utility in period t is given by the value function:

  Vtn (i,t , ¯i,t ) = max E U (Ii,t , Pi,t ,    i,t )+

                    ~(i,t , Pi,t ) + (1 - )u(Fi,t+1 )] + BVtn           ¯             ¯
                 Z [u                                       +1 (i,t+1 , i,t+1 )|i,t , i,t      . (2)

Here U (Ii,t , Pi,t , i,t ) is the parent's period utility, which depends on parenting
style (Pi,t and Ii,t ), chosen optimally by the parent. Utility also depends on taste
shocks i,t , which ensure a smooth mapping from state variables into decisions.
The parent also cares about the child, where Z is the overall weight attached to
the child's welfare.

Parental concern about children has an altruistic and a paternalistic component.
The altruistic component with weight 1 -  consists of the child's actual period
utility u(Fi,t+1 ). The paternalistic component with weight  is the parent's own
evaluation of the current actions and outcomes of the child. The paternalistic con-
cern is focused on the child's accumulation of skills i,t , where we allow for the
possibility that the parent's evaluation of the child's skill interacts with parenting
style Pi,t . Hence, paternalistic utility enters as u
                                                    ~(i,t , Pi,t ). Note that, at time t, the
parent takes the quality of the child's current peers        ¯i,t as given, but the parent
can influence future peer formation (and hence future peer quality           ¯i,t+1 ) through


  16
       Formally, the more general representation would be
                  n
                 vt (i,t , ¯i,t ) = max E u(Fi,t+1 ) + bv n (i,t+1 , ¯i,t+1 )|i,t , ¯i,t   .
                                                         t+1

Our myopic formulation corresponds to setting b = 0.


                                                    17
the choice of parenting style Pi,t .17

The continuation utility at the end of high school is identical to the child's con-
tinuation utility, and thus depends on T +1 :

                                     VTn+1 = vT
                                              n
                                                +1 (i,T +1 ),


                    n
where the function vT +1 (T +1 ) (corresponding to the child's utility as an adult) is
taken as given and assumed to be identical across neighborhoods.

Taking stock, the focal point of the theory is a disagreement between the par-
ent and the child about the tradeoff between the enjoyment of the present (i.e.,
interactions with friends) and investment in future skills. For instance, a child
may want to hang out with "cool" kids who do not necessarily do well in school,
whereas associating with "nerdy" high-GPA peers may be good for school per-
formance but also more boring for the child.

3.2     The Technology of Skill Formation

Having described preferences, we now turn to the technology of skill formation
for adolescent children. The initial distribution of children's skills is drawn from
the distribution F n (i,1 ). In reality, this initial distribution depends on families'
socio-economic conditions, neighborhood effects, and earlier actions by parents
and children. Since we do not have information on those variables before chil-
dren enter high school, we treat initial conditions as exogenous.18

Subsequently, skills evolve as a function of family inputs and peer influences. For
each child i, next period's skill i,t+1 depends on the current stock of skills i,t , a
summary statistic of the quality of peers     ¯i,t (e.g., the average level of skills),
parental investments Ii,t , and the parent's choice of whether to interfere in the
   17
      The disagreement between parents and children does not hinge on the simplifying assump-
tion that children are myopic. We could obtain the same results if we replaced Equation (1) with
the more general formulation given in Footnote 16. Disagreement could arise both through the
parametrization of the functions u and u   ~ in Equation (2), which reflect the within-period dis-
agreement between parent and child, and through allowing for the possibility that the parent's
discount factor B is larger than the child's discount factor b.
   18
      As we discuss below, we estimate the model using only within-school-grade variation in the
data.


                                               18
child's choice of peers Pi,t  {0, 1}. We formalize the technology of skill formation
as follows:
                             i,t+1 = s(i,t , ¯i,t , Ii,t , Pi,t ).                (3)

The direct effect of parenting style Pi,t in Equation (3) captures the impact of
the quality of the parent-child relationship on skill accumulation. While we do
not impose any a priori restriction in the estimation, we expect an authoritarian
parenting style to have a negative effect on skill accumulation. This could arise
either from discord between parent and child or from time use: time that the
parent spends trying to talk kids out of meeting certain people is not available
for more productive investments. The total effect of an authoritarian parenting
style can still be positive because Pt affects the composition of the peer group and
hence peer quality    ¯i,t .


3.3     Endogenous Peer Selection

We model the formation of friendships as a random utility model. Every pe-
riod, each child meets all potential peers X n in the neighborhood and can try
to be friends with some of them. There is no capacity constraint in the number
of friends nor any decreasing marginal utility to the number friendships. The
potential utility fi,j,t+1 that child i would derive from forming a new friendship
with j  X n is given by:

                           fi,j,t+1 = g (i,t+1 , j,t+1 , Pi,t , i,j,t+1 ).                   (4)

Here i,j,t+1 is an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) taste shock that
guarantees that the probability that a friendship is established is a smooth func-
tion of fundamentals. Note that, in general, i,j,t+1 = j,i,t+1 , which captures the
common situation where, say, child i wants to be friends with j but not vice versa.
The utility from forming a friendship depends on both the own skill of child i and
the skill of the potential friend j . This specification allows for homophily bias in
terms of skills.19
   19
    The homophily bias is a common tendency of people in social networks to be drawn toward
others who are similar to them in some significant dimension (see e.g., McPherson, Smith-Lovin,
and Cook 2001; Currarini, Jackson, and Pin 2009; Jackson 2010, and, in a context similar to ours,
Agostinelli 2018).


                                                19
The parenting style Pi,t affects how much utility accrues to the child when it
forms friendships with children of different skill levels. Since parents want to
encourage skill formation, we assume that an authoritarian parenting style (Pi,t =
1) lowers the utility of befriending a low-skill peer relative to a high-skill one.
This could be done by rewarding the child in some way for making "desirable"
friends or by meting out punishments for befriending less desirable ones.

Friendships are subject to mutual agreement: a friendship between child i and
child j is formed if and only if

                              fi,j,t+1 > 0 & fj,i,t+1 > 0,                           (5)

where we normalize the value of not forming a friendship to zero. As already
mentioned, Fi,t+1  X n denotes the set of friendships involving child i in period
t + 1, i.e., the set of j  X n for which Equation (5) is satisfied. The friendship
utility u(Fi,t+1 ) that determines the child's utility (1) is then:

                              u(Fi,t+1 ) =              fi,j,t+1 .
                                             j Fi,t+1


The process of friendship formation entails externalities across families. Friend-
ships are formed by mutual consent. When a parent meddles in the process of
friendship formation, her intervention affects not only her child, but also other
children. Given that parents do not care about other children, their decisions
generally fail to be socially optimal.

3.4   Friendship Formation in the First and Last Periods

The value functions (1) and (2) in the first period (corresponding to ninth grade)
depend on the initial quality of peers  ¯i,1 . Rather than taking this state variable as
parametric, we assume that only the initial distribution of skills is given and that
friendships are formed through the endogenous process discussed above. This
approach allows us to run policy analyses where we counterfactually vary the
initial skill distribution and adjust the network of friends accordingly. A limita-
tion is that we do not observe parenting style in the preceding period. For this


                                             20
reason, we assume that parents cannot affect the initial choice of friends.20 Since
this happens in the period when children enter high school and are exposed to
new peers, this entails only a limited loss of generality.

In the last period T = 4 (corresponding to 12th grade), the parental decision
problem is different because the continuation utility VTn+1 does not depend on
the quality of peers. This reflects that the children have to form new peer groups
after leaving high school, and at any rate these future peers are not observed in
the Add Health data. Setting Pi,T = 1 does not affect future peers' skills, and
parenting style will be optimally chosen solely based only on the parents' taste
shocks.

3.5     Functional Forms for Estimation

To estimate the model, we impose functional forms and restrictions that allow us
to summarize the model by a list of parameters.

Initial Conditions. The initial distribution of children skills within each neigh-
borhood n is drawn from a log-normal distribution. This specification captures
the initial (and to us unobserved) sorting of families into different neighborhoods
characterized by different initial distributions of children's skills. We define the
initial conditions for each neighborhood n as follows:

                                     ln i,1  N (µn , ( n )2 ),                                  (6)

where µn and  n represent the neighborhood-specific mean and the standard de-
viation of the log-skills.

Once the initial heterogeneity of children's skills within the neighborhood is re-
alized, children select their initial peer group according to their preferences for
friends (Equation (4)).21 At this stage, the initial vector of state variables {i,1 , ¯i,1 }


   20
     Formally, we set Pi,t-1 = 0 when evaluating Equation (4) and Equation (5) at time t = 1.
   21
     As noted, we do not have information about parenting style at time t = 0. Note that in our
sample, children start high school at time t = 1, where they meet many new potential friends.
For this reason, we find it plausible to assume that parents have a limited effect on the process of
selection in the first period.


                                                21
is determined, and the dynamic parent-child interaction starts according to the
model described above.22

Technology of Skill Formation. We parameterize the technology of skill forma-
tion with the following nested CES production function:

                        s(i,t , ¯i,t , Ii,t , Pi,t = p) = Ap (t) × Hp (i,t , ¯i,t , Ii,t ),                      (7)

where p  {0, 1}, Ap (t) = exp(0 + 1 · t + 2 · p), and
                                                                                                           5,p
                                                                                                     4,p   4,p
             ¯i,t , Ii,t ) =       4,p                               ¯3,p                   
   Hp (i,t ,                   1,p i,t            + (1 - 1,p )   2,p  i,t   + (1 -   2,p ) Ii,t3,p   3,p
                                                                                                                 .

Note that all parameters of the skill formation technology depend on P , namely,
whether the parent chooses an authoritarian parenting style. First, this affects
the total factor productivity Ap (t), capturing the potential disruptive effect of au-
thoritarian parenting on the parent-child relationship documented by the devel-
opmental psychology literature. Our estimation below indeed finds that 2 < 0,
i.e., an authoritarian parenting style depresses skill accumulation. Second, par-
enting style affects the parameters 1,p and 2,p , capturing the weights of the dif-
ferent inputs. Our estimation finds that the authoritarian style attenuates the in-
fluence of peers. Third, an authoritarian parenting style also affects the elasticity-
of-substitution parameters 3,p and 4,p and the returns-to-scale parameter (5,p ).
Here the data suggest the parenting style determines whether peer effects are a
substitute or a complement to other inputs in the production of skills.

Parent's Preferences. We specify the parent's period utility in (2) as follows:

                       U (Ii,t , Pi,t ,   i,t )   = 1 ln(1 - Ii,t ) + 2 Pi,t +   i,t (Pi,t ),                    (8)

where 1 and 2 define the disutility of authoritative investment and of engag-
ing in an authoritarian parenting style, respectively, and i,t (Pi,t ) is a taste shock
   22
     An alternative specification for the initial conditions would be to specify an exogenous bi-
variate joint distribution of children's skills and peer quality. However, in this case the initial peer
quality would be exogenously determined and hence policy-invariant. Our model specification
allows for immediate endogenous peer selection, which is important when evaluating policies
that change the initial neighborhood composition, as we do below.


                                                           22
that is conditional on the parenting style. We assume that this shock follows a
type-I extreme value distribution. The paternalistic utility of the parent takes the
following form:
                      ~(i,t , Ii,t , Pi,t ) = 3 ln(i,t ) · (1 + 4 Pi,t ),
                      u                                                           (9)

where 3 captures the level of the parent's paternalistic enjoyment of the child's
skills, which may depend on the parenting style through parameter 4 . The utility
derived from the child's adult skills i,T +1 takes the same form as the period-by-
period paternalistic utility from skills:

                                  VTn+1 = 3 ln (i,T +1 ) .

In the empirical model, we set Z = B = 1. This is without loss of generality.
An increase in either B or Z is equivalent to a proportional decrease in cost pa-
rameters 1 and 2 . Changing B and/or Z would affect the numerical estimates
of those parameters without altering the model fit or the counterfactual experi-
ments.

Child's Preferences. The (marginal) utility child i earns from being friends with
child j relative to not being friends with j is:

  fi,j,t+1 = 0 + 1 ln i,t+1 + 2 ln j,t+1 + 3 (ln i,t+1 - ln j,t+1 )2
                         + 4 1(j,t+1 < i,t+1 ) (ln i,t+1 - ln j,t+1 )2 Pi,t + i,j,t+1 . (10)

Here, i,j,t+1 is a random taste shock for being friends with child j , which we as-
sume to be i.i.d. standard logistic distributed. The terms 1 ln i,t+1 and 2 ln j,t+1
capture, respectively, the effect of child i's and child j 's skills on the utility child i
earns from being friends with child j , where 1 and 2 are parameters that will be
estimated. The quadratic term (ln i,t+1 - ln j,t+1 )2 captures potential homophily
bias in the formation of friends. A negative coefficient 3 < 0 would imply that
the higher the difference in skills between the two children, the lower the utility
for child i to be friends with child j .

The coefficient 4 captures the effect of an authoritarian parenting style on the
preferences for child j 's skills. In particular, if 4 < 0, authoritarian parenting


                                            23
imposes a penalty whenever the child is friends with a lower-skill peer, where the
penalty increases with the GPA gap between the two children. This formulation
captures the idea that parental intervention (through, e.g., moral suasion, threat
of punishment, or incentives) is designed to improve the quality of the child's
peer selection.

We can now characterize the conditional probability that a friendship link be-
tween child i and child j is formed as:23

                                                              exp(i,j )     exp(j,i )
           P r(j  Xi,t+1 |i,t+1 , Pi,t , j,t+1 , Pj,t ) =                               ,        (11)
                                                            1 + exp(i,j ) 1 + exp(j,i )
where:

  i,j = 0 + 1 ln i,t+1 + 2 ln j,t+1 + 3 (ln i,t+1 - ln j,t+1 )2
                                           + 4 1(j,t+1 < i,t+1 ) (ln i,t+1 - ln j,t+1 )2 Pi,t ,



  j,i = 0 + 1 ln j,t+1 + 2 ln i,t+1 + 3 (ln j,t+1 - ln i,t+1 )2
                                           + 4 1(i,t+1 < j,t+1 ) (ln i,t+1 - ln j,t+1 )2 Pj,t .


The presentation of the parent's and child's preferences completes the descrip-
tion of the effects of parenting style in our model. To summarize, authoritarian
parenting has a direct effect on the technology of skill formation given the current
child's skill and peers. In addition, authoritarian parenting affects the process of
peer formation by discouraging the child from choosing low-skill friends. Our
estimates below imply that, conditional on an existing set of friends, an author-
itarian parenting style entails productivity losses in the skill formation technol-
ogy. The reason some parents still choose to be authoritarian must then lie in the
benefits of an improved quality of future peers. It follows from this argument
   23
     The conditional probability in Equation (11) might suggest a potential strategic interaction
between parents when deciding about their own parenting style. However, under our assump-
tions, only the parent of the higher-skill child can actively affect the probability in Equation (11),
so there is in fact no strategic interaction among parents. Note that in our model parents have an
additional motive to invest in their children's skills, namely, to give them more opportunities to
condition their children's choice of peers in the future.


                                                 24
that in wealthy and homogeneous neighborhoods, where most potential friends
are highly skilled and there is little risk that one's child might associate with low-
skill peers, the cost of an authoritarian parenting style is high while the benefit is
small. Conversely, parents will tend to be authoritarian in neighborhoods where
children face a high risk of exposure to low-skill peers.


4        Model Estimation
We estimate the model using the Simulated Method of Moments (SMM) by match-
ing a set of moments generated from the Add Health data. More specifically,
we follow an indirect inference approach where some of the target moments are
estimated coefficients of reduced-form regressions including school-grade fixed
effects.

We take the initial distribution of skills as exogenous, assuming that these are
a sufficient statistic for fixed characteristics and past history, including innate
ability, socio-economic status, parental behavior before adolescence, and random
shocks, which we do not observe in our data.24 Since residential choice can lead
to ex ante sorting of families with different characteristics, we do not use the vari-
ation across schools in the estimation.25 Instead, we identify the parameters using
within-school-grade variation in the data. After the first period, heterogeneity in
skills and exposure to peers is partly endogenous (as determined by the laws of
motion of the model) and partly determined by preference shocks.

We target the following 28 moments:

    1. Probability of parents being authoritarian: Aggregate fraction and regres-
       sion of parenting style on current period own child's and peers' skills (three
       moments, see Table A-3).


    24
     Appendix B provides details on the way we measure children's skills.
    25
     The results are robust to controlling for parental education as discussed below (see Appendix
C.2 and Table C2-1). One might still be concerned about selection by unobserved heterogeneity
before high school starts. The mobility of the families with teenagers that enter our sample is, in
contrast, rather low. Therefore, selection is a less severe concern when we compare pupils within
school and grade.


                                                25
  2. Dynamics of a child's skills: Mean by school grades and regressions of a
     child's next-period skills on previous period own skills, peers' skills, and
     authoritarian parenting style (eleven moments, see Table A-4).

  3. Dynamics of peers' skills: Number of friends and regressions of next-period
     peers' skills on previous period own skills, peers' skills, and authoritarian
     parenting style (eight moments, see Table A-5).

  4. Parental investment: Mean and regressions of parental investments on cur-
     rent period own skills, peers' skills, and authoritarian parenting style (six
     moments, see Table A-6).

To estimate the model, we must define the neighborhoods in which children form
friendships and solve for a local equilibrium in each neighborhood. A natural
choice would be to have as many environments as there are schools in our sam-
ple. However, when implementing a simulation-based estimator, this approach
becomes computationally infeasible. To overcome this issue, we pursue a par-
simonious approach where a neighborhood is characterized by the mean and
standard deviation of a log-normal distribution of initial skills. We carry out the
estimation using synthetic neighborhoods based on the variation across schools
observed in the Add Health sample. Specifically, we sort schools by average
child skills and then form four synthetic neighborhoods from the quartiles of this
distribution.

Table 4 summarizes the characteristics of these neighborhoods (from the lowest
to the highest quartile). Using the data, we can map the quartiles of the skill
distribution to quartiles of the income distribution. As expected, average grades
are higher in high-income neighborhoods. The median real family incomes in
2016 US dollars for the four synthetic neighborhood are $5,000 (Neighborhood
1), $48,000 (Neighborhood 2), $81,000 (Neighborhood 3), and $102,000 (Neigh-
borhood 4).

We first report the parameter estimates, then turn to the fit of the model to the
target moments, and finally discuss the fit to untargeted moments.



                                        26
                     Table 4: Characteristics of Synthetic Neighborhoods

                                  Mean (µe )     Standard Deviation (e )          Population
           Neighborhood 1            -0.55                     0.87                  269
           Neighborhood 2            -0.28                     0.98                  307
           Neighborhood 3            0.23                      0.96                  300
           Neighborhood 4            0.59                      0.84                  210
           The table shows the mean and standard deviation of grades (from log-normal distri-
          butions) in four synthetic neighborhoods. The associated distributions are the initial
          conditions in the structural estimation of the dynamic model of skill formation.


4.1    Parameter Estimates

Skill Formation Technology. Table 5 displays the estimates of the parameters
of the skill formation technology in Equation (7). Recall that the parameters are
different for parents adopting an authoritarian (P = 1) and a nonauthoritarian
(P = 0) parenting style. For P = 1, we obtain estimates of the two elasticities
of substitution close to unity.26 Therefore, we report estimates of a parsimonious
model in which we impose a Cobb-Douglas production such as:

                             H (i,t , ¯i,t , Ii,t , 1) = ¯ 1,1 ¯¯ 2,1
                                                               i,t
                                                                        ¯
                                                                      Ii,t3,1 ,                    (12)
                                                         i,t


where ¯ 1,1 = 1,1 5,1 , ¯ 2,1 = (1 - 1,1 )2,1 5,1 , and ¯ 3,1 = (1 - 1,1 )(1 - 2,1 )5,1 .

In contrast, the estimated elasticities are significantly different from unity for
nonauthoritarian parents. Consider, first, 4,0 . When P = 0, we estimate 4,0 > 0,
which implies that parental investment and peer quality are substitutes, as in
Agostinelli (2018). This elasticity is primarily identified by the covariation be-
tween inputs in the technology of skill formation. For authoritarian parents,
parental investment barely responds to the skills of the child and the peers, con-
sistent with a unit elasticity. In contrast, nonauthoritarian parents spend more
time with their children when the peer group is weak, consistent with an elastic-
ity of substitution larger than unity.

The estimates of the other parameters also reveal interesting patterns. An author-
  26
    The point estimates for the unconstrained CES specification are 1,p = 0.772, 2,p = 0.382,
3,p = 0.009, 4,p = 0.009, and 5,p = 0.502. See Appendix Table C1-1.


                                                    27
                     Table 5: Estimated Parameters of the Skill Formation Technology

                                                                            Cobb-Douglas (Authoritarian = 1)
   Child's Skills (1,1 )                                                                      0.412
                                                                                          [0.321,0.460]
   Peer Skills (2,1 )                                                                         0.214
                                                                                          [0.168,0.370]
   Investments (3,1 )                                                                         0.073
                                                                                          [0.045,0.095]
                                                                                   CES (Authoritarian = 0)
   Complementarity Parents vs. Peers (4,0 )                                                   0.784
                                                                                          [0.755,0.801]
   Share Self-Production (1,0 )                                                               0.564
                                                                                          [0.558,0.569]
   Share Peer Skills (2,0 )                                                                   0.395
                                                                                          [0.385,0.404]
   Complementarity Self-Production vs. Parents-Peers (3,0 )                                   -1.680
                                                                                         [-1.767,-1.587]
   CES Returns to Scale (5,0 )                                                                1.087
                                                                                          [1.046,1.175]
                                                                                  Total Factor Productivity
   TFP Constant (0 )                                                                          0.418
                                                                                          [0.389,0.446]
   TFP Age Trend (1 )                                                                         0.025
                                                                                          [0.023,0.030]
   TFP Parenting Style (2 )                                                                   -0.299
                                                                                         [-0.326,-0.280]
   The table shows the estimated parameters of the skill formation technology. See Equation (7) for P = 0 and Equa-
  tion (12) for P = 1. The 95 percent confidence intervals in brackets are calculated via 100 school-clustered bootstrap
  repetitions. The point estimates are the averages among the bootstrap repetitions.



itarian parenting style reduces both the total factor productivity and the relative
importance of peer effects.27 Both results are intuitive and in line with the find-
ings of the child development literature. For nonauthoritarian parents, we find
a strong complementarity between the child's skills and the composite input of
peer effects and parental investments (3,0 < 0). In plain words, nonauthori-
tarian parents invest more time when the child has high skill. This complemen-
tarity has an important implication: a combination of nonauthoritarian parenting
   27
     In Appendix C.1, Tables C1-2 and C1-3, we estimate two specifications imposing that au-
thoritarian and nonauthoritarian parents operate the same technology of skill formation. The fit
of the model deteriorates significantly suggesting that a tradeoff between the influence on peer
selection and the direct effect on human capital accumulation is an essential feature of the choice
of parenting style in our theory.


                                                           28
and authoritative investments is highly productive for gifted children. Therefore,
high-skill children are less likely to be subject to an authoritarian parenting style
and more likely to attract other types of time-intensive (authoritative) parental
investments. This insight casts a new light on the conventional wisdom in the
child development literature that an authoritarian parenting style leads to poor
child outcomes. This wisdom is rooted in the positive correlation found in obser-
vational data. Our structural theory implies that children with low cognitive or
noncognitive abilities are more likely to attract an authoritarian parenting style.
Thus, part of the correlation observed in the data might reflect (and according to
our estimates, indeed does reflect) a reverse causation.

                    Table 6: Estimated Parent's Preference Parameters


                                                                       1
                    Disutility of Investment (1 )                (Normalized)
                                                                     [-,-]
                    Disutility of Authoritarian (2 )                  -2.208
                                                                 [-2.516,-2.084]
                    Child's Skills (3 )                               2.184
                                                                  [2.049,2.336]
                    Authoritarian × Child's Skills (4 )               -0.208
                                                                 [-0.225,-0.173]
                    The table shows the estimated parents' preference parameters;
                   see Equations (8) and (9). The 95 percent confidence intervals in
                   brackets are calculated via 100 school-clustered bootstrap rep-
                   etitions. The point estimates are the averages among the boot-
                   strap repetitions.


Preferences. Table 6 displays the estimates of parents' preferences. In the esti-
mation, we exogenously set  = 0.95, i.e., parents are highly paternalistic. It is
difficult to find sources of variation in the data to credibly identify this parame-
ter. The results are rather insensitive to changes in , as long as we stay in a high
range. For lower values of , we cannot match the observed share of authori-
tarian parents.28 According to our estimates, parents dislike being authoritarian
(2 <0), and more so when children have high skills (4 <0).

  28
   The results are very similar for any   0.9. One could construct an alternative model where
 varies across parents and only some of them choose an authoritarian parenting style. This
model would yield similar results.


                                                 29
                        Table 7: Estimated Child's Preference
                        Parameters


                         Child i 's Skills (1 )         -0.184
                                                   [-0.199,-0.173]
                         Child j 's Skills (2 )         -0.191
                                                   [-0.201,-0.177]
                         Homophily (3 )                 -0.286
                                                   [-0.320,-0.266]
                         Authoritarian (4 )             -0.468
                                                   [-0.502,-0.384]
                         Constant (0 )                  -1.484
                                                   [-1.517,-1.438]
                         The table shows the estimated child's pref-
                        erence arameters, see Equation (10). The 95
                        percent confidence intervals in brackets are
                        calculated via 100 school-clustered bootstrap
                        repetitions. The point estimates are the aver-
                        ages among the bootstrap repetitions.


Table 7 shows the estimates for the child's preferences in the random utility
model. The coefficients of own and peer skills are both negative, indicating
that high-skill children are both less keen on forming friendship ties and less
popular with other children. Intuitively, from a child's perspective, low-skill
peers are more attractive friends than "nerdy" high achievers. The estimate of
the homophily parameter has a negative sign. As this parameter multiplies the
squared difference between own and peer skills, the negative point estimate im-
plies a positive homophily bias, i.e., the larger the difference in skills between
the two children, the less valuable the friendship. The parameter 4 captures
the penalty from socializing with low-skill peers when parents are authoritar-
ian. This penalty is quantitatively large: the estimate is almost twice the size of
the homophily coefficient 3 . Thus, an authoritarian parenting style has a strong
causal effect on the child's future peer selection.

These estimation results paint a clear picture of the tradeoff involved in the choice
of parenting style. An authoritarian parenting style entails a productivity loss in
the skill formation technology but improves peer selection over time. Being au-
thoritarian is therefore more attractive in poor neighborhoods, where the benefit

                                             30
of improving the selection of friends is large. Also, all else being equal, it is the
parents of children with many low-skill friends who have the strongest incentive
to behave in an authoritarian fashion because their children's skill formation ben-
efits little from their current peers. Finally, the (authoritative) time investment re-
sponds more to the quality of peers if the parent is nonauthoritarian. Specifically,
parents who give children leeway spend more time with them when the quality
of the peer environment is low. For all these reasons, parents are less prone to be
authoritarian in wealthier neighborhoods.

4.2   Robustness: Heterogenous Effects by Education

In our main estimation, we kept the structural model parsimonious by limiting
initial heterogeneity (before the first friendships are formed) to the single dimen-
sion of skill. A potential concern is that parenting style may correlate with and
be partly determined by other characteristics that the model abstracts from. If
so, the effect of parenting style could spuriously proxy for the effect of another
variable.

A characteristic that is especially likely to be relevant is parental education, which
is correlated with parenting style and could have independent effects on child
development. To address this concern, we re-estimate the model while allowing
for some of the key parameters to vary with parental education. We focus on
mother's education to avoid selection problems related to the fact that in many
families, fathers are not present. We distinguish between mothers with high ed-
ucation (some college or more) and with low education (high school or less).
We allow this binary measure of mother's education to affect the preferences for
parenting style and the total factor productivity in the skill formation technol-
ogy. Arguably, these are the two most natural differences related to education.
More educated mothers may dislike being authoritarian, and they may enhance
the productivity of the technology of skill formation irrespective of the parenting
style.

We find that parameters we assume to be independent of mother's education are
estimated to be very similar to those estimated in the benchmark model. In the
more flexible model, highly educated mothers have a higher cost of being au-

                                          31
thoritarian and induce higher total factor productivity in the technology of skill
formation. However, in neither case is the difference quantitatively large.29 The
estimation results suggest that allowing for heterogeneity in parents' education is
not essential, at least during the high school years that we focus on. We therefore
use the more parsimonious model without a direct role for parental education.

4.3     Sample Fit

Tables A-3 through A-6 report information about the sample fit of the model.
Recall that the model is estimated by indirect inference, i.e., the SMM estima-
tion targets the regression coefficients from the data. All regressions, both in the
data and in the model, include school-grade fixed effects. The tables show how
successful the simulated model is in matching the targeted moments.

Table A-3 focuses on the results of linear probability models where P = 1 (i.e., be-
ing authoritarian) is regressed on the child's and the peers' skills. For the reasons
discussed above, parents are less likely to interfere with peer formation when
their own children are proficient and when the peer group is of high quality. The
model closely matches the sign and magnitude of the coefficients and also accu-
rately predicts the total fraction of authoritarian parents.

Table A-4 displays results for the dynamics of skills. In the upper panel, the
child's next-period skills are regressed on her own current skills, the average
skills in her peer group, and the parenting style to which she is subjected. Both
in the model and in the data, the coefficient of the child's skills is the largest; the
coefficient of the peers' skills is smaller and yet sizeable. Both in the model and
in the data, the reduced-form effect of parenting style on the next period's skills
is small.30 In particular, the point estimate is negative in the model and positive
   29
      The results can be found in Appendix C.2.
   30
      In the data, the effect is positive but statistically insignificant. Interestingly, the regression
coefficient turns positive and highly significant if we restrict the sample to intact (i.e., two-parent)
families. In the data the small size of the effect is largely explained by families with single
mothers--a similar argument applies to Table A-5 below. Since our model abstracts from this di-
mension, we conservatively target the small positive coefficient that we find for all families. Our
structural estimate implies a large causal effect of an authoritarian parenting style even though
the targeted reduced-form effect (that is confounded by selection issues) is small. The causal
effect would be even larger if we targeted the regression coefficient for intact families.


                                                  32
but statistically insignificant in the data. The lower panel shows the evolution
of mean skills throughout the high school years in the model and in the data.
Again, the fit is very good.

Table A-5 compares the regression coefficients for the evolution of peer skills in
the model and in the data. In the data, the correlation of authoritarian parenting
with the quality of peers in the next period is insignificant. Interestingly, the
correlation is also low in the linear regression generated by the model, in spite of
the large positive causal effect of authoritarian parenting on the selection of peers
discussed above.

Table A-6 displays results for authoritative parental investments broken down by
(authoritarian versus nonauthoritarian) parenting style. For authoritarian par-
ents, time investments are unresponsive to both the child's and the peers' skills.
The model accounts for this finding by estimating a unit elasticity (Cobb Dou-
glas) in the skill formation technology. In contrast, when P = 0 parental invest-
ments are positively associated with the child's skills and negatively associated
with the peers' skills. The model accounts for this pattern by estimating a higher
elasticity of substitution in the CES technology, as discussed above. Note that the
average level of investment also strongly depends on the parenting style, with a
good fit between the model and data.

4.4   Fit for Non-Targeted Moments: Parenting Across Neighborhoods

In this section, we assess the accuracy of the estimated model in matching non-
targeted moments. We compare the model predictions with data moments across
the four synthetic neighborhoods that determine the peer environment. Recall
that our estimation targets the coefficients of linear regressions exploiting within-
school-grade variation. Since we did not target any variation across neighbor-
hoods, this variation is an ideal testing ground to evaluate the success of the
model in fitting non-targeted moments.

Figure 3 shows the fraction of authoritarian parents in each neighborhood pre-
dicted by the model and its empirical counterpart, namely, the average across
all the schools that make up a synthetic neighborhood. In the data, the fraction
of authoritarian parents is strongly decreasing as one moves from the less to the

                                         33
        Figure 3: Out-of-Sample Fit: Parenting Style and Neighborhood




  The figure shows the out-of-sample predictions of the model. The figure displays the frac-
  tion of authoritarian parents by neighborhood type as predicted by the model and as ob-
  served in the data. We calculate the model's predicted fraction of authoritarian parents as
  the average fraction among 50 different model simulations.


more advantaged neighborhoods. The model matches the data closely. In the
poorest neighborhood, 18 percent of parents are authoritarian, while in the most
affluent synthetic neighborhood this share is only 7 percent. In the model, the
difference hinges on the estimated parameters of the skill formation technology.
In high-quality neighborhoods, parents face better initial conditions in terms of
both the peer environment and the skills of their own children. Because an au-
thoritarian parenting style reduces the productivity of these inputs (by lowering
total factor productivity and the effect of peers), the opportunity cost of author-
itarian parenting is higher compared to poor neighborhoods, where parents are
more focused on improving the child's peer group.

Figure 4 breaks down this result further by grade and neighborhood. Here, we
see that in the two low-SES (socio-economic status) neighborhoods, the frac-
tion of authoritarian parents declines as children advance through the grades,

                                              34
    Figure 4: Out-of-Sample Fit: Parenting Style Dynamics and Neighborhood




    The figure shows the out-of-sample predictions of the model. The figure displays the frac-
    tion of authoritarian parents over school grades by neighborhood type as predicted by the
    model and as observed in the data. We calculate the model's predicted fraction of authori-
    tarian parents as the average fraction among 50 different model simulations.


whereas the relationship is flat in the two high-SES neighborhoods. Once again,
the estimated model fits these empirical observations well.


5    Parents, Peers, and the Effect of Policy Interventions
In this section, we study how parenting practices respond to policy interventions
that change the peer environment. In particular, we run counterfactual policy
experiments based on the estimated structural model. We consider two sets of
experiments. The first is a "busing policy" that moves some children from a dis-
advantaged to a wealthy neighborhood. The second is a change in the initial con-
ditions, which we interpret as resulting from interventions affecting children's
skills before they start high school.

                                               35
5.1   Busing Policy

Consider a policy experiment moving children from the synthetic neighborhood
with the second-lowest SES (henceforth, N2) to the synthetic neighborhood with
the highest SES (henceforth, N4). Recall that the median family income of N2 is
$48,000, whereas that of N4 is $102,000. These numbers compare to a national
median family income of $58,000 in 2016, the year in which income is measured.
The initial difference in children's mean skills between these neighborhoods is
0.87 standard deviations. We are interested in the individual treatment effect of
being moved to a better neighborhood, the mechanisms behind this treatment
effect, and how the treatment effect changes as the policy is scaled up to include
more students.

                         Figure 5: Treatment Effects of Moving




  The figure shows the treatment effect on a child's skills of moving a child in 9th grade from
  N2 to N4. The blue line displays the baseline skills dynamics for the median child in the
  skills distribution in N2. The red line shows the counterfactual skills dynamics if the child
  is moved to N4 at the beginning of her 9th grade. The skill dynamics are calculated by
  averaging among 50 different model simulations.


Individual Treatment Effects: Figure 5 shows the dynamic treatment effect for

                                               36
a single child who is relocated from N2 to N4 when entering 9th grade. The
blue line displays the average evolution of skills for a typical child staying in N2
throughout the high school years. The red line shows the counterfactual evolu-
tion of skills if the same child is moved to N4. The treatment effect starts show-
ing up in 10th grade because skills are predetermined at the beginning of 9th
grade. Subsequently, a growing gap opens up between the benchmark and coun-
terfactual skills. The treatment effect increases over time because of the dynamic
complementarity between skill accumulation and friendship formation. More
concretely, the gain in skills accruing to the moved child in 10th grade has a pos-
itive effect on skill accumulation in the following periods and also improves the
peer group the child is exposed to owing to the homophily bias in preferences.

To gauge the quantitative importance of the policy, we compare our treatment ef-
fect with the quasi-experimental evidence of Chyn (2018). Chyn studies the effect
of a plausibly exogenous shock, namely public housing demolition, that forced
many families to leave very poor neighborhoods in Chicago. Three years after
demolition, the displaced families lived in neighborhoods with lower poverty
and less violent crime compared to similar families who did not have to move.
The children who moved out of the very poor neighborhoods earned on average
$602 more per year during their first adult years than those who stayed--a differ-
ence of 16 percent. In addition, displaced children had 14 percent fewer arrests
for violent crimes and a significantly lower probability of dropping out of high
school.

To compare the effect of moving one child from N2 to N4 in our model to Chyn's
results, we perform the following back-of-the-envelope calculation. First, we
convert differences in children's school performance into differences in earnings
by regressing adult earnings in the Add Health data on our measure of skills dur-
ing adolescence. Second, we note that according to our estimates, a child bused
from N2 to N4 experiences an increases in skills equal to about 0.2 standard devi-
ations. These two pieces of information imply that moving a child (in isolation)
from N2 to N4 increases future annual earnings by about $900 to $1,000.31

Our back-of-the-envelope calculation yields an effect that is 50 percent larger
  31
       For comparability with Chyn (2018), we express monetary values in 2012 dollars.


                                                37
than the causal effect estimated by Chyn (2018). To account for the difference, re-
call that our busing policy moves children from a moderately poor neighborhood
to the best available neighborhood in the economy. This change in neighborhood
quality is larger than the typical experience of a child who was displaced by the
public housing demolition. Furthermore, our monetization of the skill differ-
ences in Add Health is based on an empirical correlation of test scores and earn-
ings that may be larger than the causal effect of test scores. With these caveats
taken into account, the sizeable policy effects predicted by the model are in the
ballpark of recent estimates of neighborhood effects in the literature.

Scaling Effects: Figure 5 refers to the case in which one child is moved in iso-
lation from N2 to N4. If many children are moved together, the treatment effect
changes, because the policy has a larger effect on the peer environment in N4.
Figure 6 shows how the effect of busing children from N2 to N4 changes with
the scale of the policy. The upper and lower panels show the effects for the chil-
dren who are relocated and for those in the receiving community, respectively. A
small-scale policy yields large gains for the moved children and very small effects
on the receiving community. As the number of children increases, the positive ef-
fects for the moved children decline, while the negative effects for the receiving
community increase. The differences are quantitatively large. When 40 children
are moved together, the positive treatment effect on bused children is almost cut
in half compared with the case of a single bused child. Moreover, the children in
the wealthy neighborhood experience skill losses that are almost as large as the
gains of the arriving ones. Given that there are more receiving children than new
arrivals (there are initially 210 children in each school), the average effect on skill
accumulation for all children involved (i.e., both moved and receiving children)
turns negative as the policy is scaled up.

Multiple factors contribute to the deteriorating effect of the policy as it is scaled
up. To start with, there is a mechanical dilution effect: as more children are relo-
cated, the peer environment of the receiving neighborhood worsens. In addition,
there are two more interesting endogenous mechanisms. The first is the endoge-
nous peer group formation. In our model, lower-skill children are attractive as
peers. This implies that as more low-skill children arrive, peer groups become


                                          38
                     Figure 6: Policy and Scaling Effects on Skills




                                      (a) Moved Children




                                    (b) Receiving Children

  The figure shows the equilibrium policy effect on skills in 12th grade of moving children
  from N2 to N4 as a function of the number of moved children. Panel (a) illustrates the aver-
  age effect for moved children. Panel (b) illustrates the average effect for receiving children.
  Each dot represents the average impact on skills for either moved children (Panel a) or re-
  ceiving children (Panel b) for a given number of moved children. Each dot is calculated by
  averaging among 50 different model simulations.


disproportionately tilted toward them. In addition, because of the homophily
bias, a large share of the bused children form ties with each other, thereby reduc-
ing the benefits from liaising with the high-skill children in the receiving com-
munity.

The second mechanism stems from the behavioral response of parents. Panels


                                                39
(a) and (b) of Figure 7 show how the parents of relocated children adjust their
behavior as the scale of the program increases. If a single child moves from N2 to
N4, the parent turns less authoritarian, which is a rational response to the more
favorable peer group in N4. On its own, this shift in parenting style promotes
skill accumulation. However, the authoritative investment of the nonauthoritar-
ian parents decreases in response to the improved peer environment. Both of
these effects fade away as more children are relocated to N4.

Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 7 show the response of parents in the host community.
The scale of the policy increases the share of authoritarian parents. Intuitively, as
more low-skill children arrive, parents in N4 increasingly worry about their own
children befriending them, and more of them turn authoritarian. Other parents,
especially those of the most proficient children, do not turn authoritarian but
rather increase the time (authoritative) investments to compensate for the weaker
peer environment. Both parental responses increase with the scale of the policy.

Both the homophily in peer-group-formation and the endogenous pushback of
parents lead to more segregation as the policy is scaled up. In other words, as
more children are bused, there is less mixing between the locals and the new
arrivals.

The Importance of Endogenous Parenting Behavior: Given the presence of mul-
tiple channels, how important is the endogenous response of parents alone? To
answer this question, we run alternative policy counterfactuals in which we hold
parenting style fixed at the baseline level while allowing all other channels (di-
lution of the peer group and endogenous peer group formation) to operate. The
results are shown in Figure 8. The upper panel compares the effect of the bus-
ing policy on the skill accumulation of the moved children with (blue dots) and
without (red dots) an endogenous response in parenting. The gains would be
substantially larger if parents did not change their behavior. A large share of this
difference stems from the decline in authoritative investments. Bused children's
parents who were already nonauthoritarian "slack off," i.e., spend less time with
their children because their children now have better peers, and peer effects and
time investments are substitutes. This effect is stronger when only a few children
are moved because the peer environment in N4 is best in this case. An effect of

                                         40
           Figure 7: Policy and Scaling Effects on Parental Behavior




     (a) Authoritarian (Moved)                         (b) Time Investment (Moved)




    (c) Authoritarian (Receiving)                    (d) Time Investment (Receiving)

The figure shows the equilibrium policy effect on the probability of being authoritarian
(Panels (a) and (c)) and on parental time investment (Panels (b) and (d)) of moving children
from N2 to N4 as a function of the number of moved children. Panels (a) and (b) illustrate
the policy effect on parental behavior for moved children. Panels (c) and (d) illustrate the
policy effect on parental behavior for receiving children. Each dot represents the average
impact on parenting style or parental investments for either moved children (Panels (a) and
(b)) or receiving children (Panels (c) and (d)) for a given number of moved children. Each
dot is calculated by averaging among 50 different model simulations.




                                            41
          Figure 8: Endogenous Parental Behavior and Policy Effects




                                    (a) Moved Children




                                  (b) Receiving Children

The figure shows the quantitative importance of the endogenous parental response for the
counterfactual policy effects. The outcome is skills in 12th grade. The blue lines represent
the equilibrium policy effects on skills in 12th grade of moving children from N2 to N4
as a function of the number of moved children (as in Figure 6). The red lines show the
effect of the policy when parental behavior is held fixed. Panel (a) illustrates the effect for
moved children. Panel (b) illustrates the effect for receiving children. Each dot represents
the average impact on skills for a given number of moved children. Each dot is calculated
by averaging among 50 different model simulations.




                                              42
the opposite sign is that fewer parents of the bused children behave in an author-
itarian fashion, but this effect appears to be smaller. Finally, skill accumulation is
adversely affected by the behavior of parents in the receiving community (more
of them turn authoritarian).

The lower panel of the figure displays results for the skill accumulation of the
children living in N4. Holding parenting behavior constant would increase skill
losses, and more so as the program is scaled up. The parents of these children
rationally protect them from a less favorable peer environment, at the expense
of the poorer children. The quantitative effect is large: when 40 children are
moved from N2 to N4, the change in parenting style of parents in N4 reduces the
negative effect on their children's skill accumulation by about 30 percent.

5.2   Changing Initial Conditions

In this section, we study counterfactual changes in the initial distribution of skills,
emphasizing different forms of reductions in inequality. We can interpret these
experiments as interventions occurring before children reach high school, which
range from early childhood education policies to targeted interventions in mid-
dle school.

Altering the initial distribution of skills will affect the process of friendship for-
mation from the first period onward and will also affect skill formation through
peer effects and endogenous parental responses. We evaluate the effect of these
policies by comparing moments of the skill distribution in 12th grade.

The first column of Table 8 describes how we change initial conditions. The other
columns report the effects (relative to the baseline) on the mean skill accumu-
lation, on three measures of inequality (where the 10th percentile is reported
to zoom in on poor families), and on parenting decisions. The table shows the
aggregate effect (across all neighborhoods) and its breakdown into below- and
above-median neighborhoods.

No Inequality. The first experiment equalizes the initial human capital of all
students while keeping the national mean at the baseline level. Although there
is no inequality in the first year, some differences materialize over time because

                                          43
     Table 8: Counterfactual Policy Experiments: Changing Initial Conditions (e.g., Early Childhood Interventions)

                                                       (1)           (2)                 (3)            (4)             (5)                 (6)
                                                                                       Panel A: Aggregate
                                                     Mean       90­10 Ratio 10th Percentile            Gini    Author Parenting Time Inv
 No Inequality                                       6.80%        -40.90%             43.33%          -0.11            -0.06               0.07
 No Between-Neighb. Inequality                      -4.23%        -12.32%              2.34%          -0.03             0.01               0.00
 No Within-Neighb. Inequality                       10.94%        -13.82%             27.33%          -0.03            -0.07               0.06
 Truncate Local Distrib. at 10th percent             8.32%         -6.68%             13.89%          -0.01            -0.03               0.00
 Halving Cost of Parental Investments               27.45%         10.39%             19.17%           0.02            -0.03               0.16
                                                                            Panel B: Low-Income Neighborhood
                                                     Mean       90­10 Ratio 10th Percentile            Gini    Author Parenting Time Inv
 No Inequality                                      29.63%        -33.95%             64.11%          -0.09            -0.11               0.05
 No Between-Neighb. Inequality                      15.91%         -0.38%             15.28%          -0.00            -0.03               -0.02
 No Within-Neighb. Inequality                        7.40%        -32.51%             34.18%          -0.09            -0.08               0.05
 Truncate Local Distrib. at 10th percent             6.45%        -11.20%             14.96%          -0.03            -0.04               0.01
 Halving Cost of Parental Investments               25.15%         9.69%              17.91%           0.02            -0.03               0.16
                                                                            Panel C: High-Income Neighborhood
                                                     Mean       90­10 Ratio 10th Percentile            Gini    Author Parenting Time Inv
 No Inequality                                     -15.96%        -19.29%             -6.01%          -0.05             0.00               0.09
 No Between-Neighb. Inequality                     -25.47%         19.28%             -33.32%          0.04             0.08               0.02
 No Within-Neighb. Inequality                       11.58%        -19.85%             25.19%          -0.05            -0.03               0.04
 Truncate Local Distrib. at 10th percent             8.72%         -8.23%             14.63%          -0.02            -0.02               -0.01
 Halving Cost of Parental Investments               29.42%         6.24%              23.93%           0.01            -0.02               0.17
 The table shows the results for a set of different counterfactuals (each row represents a different counterfactual). All the results are compared to
the baseline economy. Each result is calculated by averaging among 50 different model simulations. Columns (1) to (3) are percentage changes
relative to the baseline model, and columns (4) to (6) are absolute changes compared to the baseline.




random utility shocks lead to the formation of different peer networks. How-
ever, final inequality falls drastically short of the baseline, which is hardly sur-
prising. More interestingly, equalizing opportunities increases the average skill
accumulation--the gain in poor neighborhoods exceeds the loss in rich ones. This
results stems, in part, from a decline in the popularity of the authoritarian parent-
ing style in poor neighborhoods: the share of authoritarian parents drops from
17 to 9 percent. In the equal-opportunity society, parents cease to be worried
about protecting their children from bad influences, which boosts the productiv-
ity of the skill formation technology (recall that an authoritarian parenting style is
associated with lower total factor productivity). This effect is reinforced by a sig-
nificant increase in authoritative parental investments across all neighborhoods.
Authoritative investments increase in poor neighborhoods because parents stop
being authoritarian. In previously rich neighborhoods, parents compensate for

                                                                       44
the worse peer environment by increasing their own time investment.

No Inequality Between Neighborhoods. The second experiment equalizes ini-
tial conditions across neighborhoods, setting inequality in each location equal to
the nationwide level in the baseline economy. In other words, the overall in-
equality (measured by the variance of the log-normal distribution of skills) is
unchanged, but all inequality is within neighborhoods. The policy can be inter-
preted as an eradication of residential segregation. Like in the first experiment,
the policy increases skill accumulation in low-income neighborhoods and de-
creases it in high-income neighborhoods. However, the aggregate effect in terms
of average skill accumulation is now negative. Although inequality declines,
the gain for the families in the bottom decile is small. This might be surpris-
ing at first glance, given that disadvantaged children now live in more diverse
neighborhoods where they can interact with strong peers. However, eliminating
residential segregation does not guarantee that those children will actually form
many friendships with high-skill peers. Both the homophily bias and the increas-
ing number of authoritarian parents raise new barriers to the social integration
of children of different initial skills.

No Inequality Within Neighborhoods. In the third experiment, we remove all
within-neighborhood inequality while leaving intact the original inequality be-
tween neighborhoods.32 While the reduction in overall inequality is similar to
the previous case, this experiment boosts the average skill accumulation more
strongly. Average skills across the economy now increase, and the gains are es-
pecially large for families in the bottom decile, who enjoy a 27 percent gain rela-
tive to the baseline. Both the demise of the authoritarian parenting style and the
increase in authoritative investments explain these results.

No Lower Tail Inequality. The fourth experiment consists of truncating the ini-
tial skill distribution at the 10th percentile within each neighborhood and redis-
tributing the lower tail in proportion to the original distribution at each other

   32
     Note that in this experiment total inequality declines because we do not compensate the
reduction in within-neighborhood inequality by an increase between neighborhoods. If we do
the compensation so as to hold total inequality at the same level as in the baseline, the average
effect is still positive but highly asymmetric across rich and poor neighborhoods, which is largely
driven by the artificial increase in between-neighborhood inequality.


                                                45
percentile. This can be interpreted as a form of early childhood intervention that
targets the most-disadvantaged groups in each neighborhood's population. This
policy generates larger average gains than those associated with shutting down
inequality altogether. Although part of this gain accrues mechanically, the en-
dogenous dynamics of skills and peers ensure that the gains are persistent and
are even amplified over time. The policy triggers a significant decrease in the
incidence of the authoritarian parenting style by about one quarter relative to the
baseline. This counterfactual highlights an additional benefit of early childhood
interventions that has not been captured by past research: by reducing the share
of "problematic" low-skill peers in the population, the policy makes parenting
more relaxed overall, which reduces the barriers faced by the more disadvan-
taged children and improves skill formation.

Subsidy to Time-Intensive Parental Investments. Finally, we consider a policy
that reduces the cost of authoritative investments. The size of the policy is such
that the investment cost halves, resulting in an increase of investment by 16 per-
centage points (the investment variable ranges between 0 and 1 with an average
of 0.33). The effects of the policy are beneficial across the board. While a large
part of the gains stem from higher parental investments, there is also a shift in
parenting styles, with a reduction in the share of authoritarian parents by 2­3
percentage points.

Across all the policies considered, we find that endogenous parental responses
play an important role in shaping the effects of the intervention. There is a par-
ticularly high upside to interventions that reduce local inequality. Such policies
improve the peer environment and thereby reduce the share of parents that adopt
an authoritarian style. This shift in parenting has a direct positive impact on skill
accumulation (through productivity) and additional benefits for inequality be-
cause it promotes interactions between peers from different backgrounds.


6   Conclusions
In this paper, we examine the effect of parenting style on the skill formation of
children during the high school years. This is a phase when peers increasingly
replace parents as the most important influence on children. Nevertheless, we

                                         46
argue that parents continue to play an important role, in significant part because
of their influence on their children's peer formation, i.e., on who their children's
friends are.

We capture the mutual interactions between children, parents, and peers by con-
structing and estimating a dynamic rational choice model of skill formation with
endogenous peer effects. In the model, children choose who to be friends with.
Parents can choose whether to intervene in their child's choice of friends by dis-
couraging friendships with low-skill peers. We interpret the choice to interfere in
peer formation as adopting an authoritarian parenting style. This choice of par-
enting style involves a tradeoff: while an authoritarian parenting style can im-
prove the quality of the child's peer group, the interference jeopardizes a harmo-
nious family life and may make the child less receptive to other forms of parental
investments. Indeed, our estimation implies that authoritarian parenting reduces
the productivity of the technology of skill formation. As a result, parents adopt-
ing a nonauthoritarian style give up on directly influencing their child's selec-
tion of friends, but are more effective at fostering their children's skill formation
through other time investments.

The choice of parenting style hinges on the peer environment that children face.
In an affluent and homogeneous neighborhood, parents have little reason to be
concerned about their children's peer selection, and are likely to adopt a nonau-
thoritarian style. In contrast, in low-income and unequal neighborhoods where
there is high exposure to the influence of disruptive peers, parents are more likely
to choose to be authoritarian. This is particularly true for parents of children who
themselves have relatively low skills, because such children (given homophily
bias in peer preferences) are especially likely to associate with low-skill peers.

The model is estimated using an indirect inference approach that exploits varia-
tion in skills and peers within school and grades. The estimated model provides a
good out-of-sample fit across neighborhoods with different socio-economic char-
acteristics.

We use the estimated model to evaluate the impact of a counterfactual busing
policy whereby children from a low-SES neighborhood are moved to a school
in an affluent area. Our model is well-suited to study how the benefits of the

                                         47
policy change as it is scaled up, i.e., many disadvantaged children are moved to
a better school at the same time. We find that scaling up substantially lowers
the treatment effect: when 40 children instead of a single child are moved, the
improvement in the moved children's skills is almost cut in half. A significant
part of the treatment effect stems from endogenous parental behavior. As more
children are moved, more parents in the affluent host community adopt an au-
thoritarian parenting style and discourage their own children from befriending
the new arrivals. This defensive response reduces the benefits of the policy as it
is scaled up.

The conclusions of our study raise broader questions about the interpretation
of reduced-form estimates of neighborhood effects (e.g., Chetty, Hendren, and
Katz 2016). When a single family moves to a better neighborhood, the children
may indeed enjoy large gains, in part because of better peer effects. However,
larger-scale policies such as building social housing in affluent areas can trigger
reactions that limit their effectiveness. Our analysis highlights two types of bar-
riers that might emerge as the scale of a policy intervention grows. The first is
homophily bias in children's preferences. Residential proximity does not guaran-
tee that children from different socio-economic status will mingle with each other
and form friendships. The second is endogenous parenting decisions. When a
large number of children are moved from disadvantaged areas into an affluent
community, local parents may start to actively discourage their children from
mixing with the newcomers.

The common thread across all policy experiments we consider is that the two
forces of endogenous peer group formation and endogenous parenting behavior
have a substantial impact on outcomes. This is also apparent when we study the
effect of policies that reduce skill inequality before children enter high school.
Policies that increase the heterogeneity of peer groups tend to reinforce segre-
gation, driven both by homophily bias in children's preferences and by an in-
crease in authoritarian parenting. The result of a counterfactual experiment in
which we remove residential segregation entirely is a testimony to the challenge
of promoting integration. This policy has a negative effect on average skill accu-
mulation and limited benefits even for children in the bottom decile of the skill


                                        48
distribution. In contrast, policies that curb lower-tail local inequality are promis-
ing. Generally, successful policies work at least in part through a reduction in the
popularity of the authoritarian parenting style.
Our analysis does not consider a variety of aspects that may be important in re-
ality. We have no information on residential choice before children start high
school. We also do not emphasize heterogeneity in the quality of parental inputs
across families. The data show, for instance, that parenting style has heteroge-
neous effects across intact and single-parent family environments. Also, our data
are from the 1990s. New technologies may affect the structure of social interac-
tion across children as well as the effect of parents' interference with the process
of skill formation. Another limitation is that we proxy peer effects by the average
quality of friends. The dynamics of children's networks are clearly more complex
and worth a more thorough investigation. In spite of these and other limitations,
our paper provides a first theory- and data-driven exploration of the dynamic
interaction between parenting, children's decisions, and society in the process of
skill formation of teenagers.

References
 Agostinelli, Francesco. 2018. "Investing in Children's Skills: An Equilibrium
   Analysis of Social Interactions and Parental Investments." Unpublished
   Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
 Agostinelli, Francesco, and Giuseppe Sorrenti. 2018. "Money vs. Time: Family
   Income, Maternal Labor Supply, and Child Development." HCEO Working
   Paper 2018­017.
 Agostinelli, Francesco, and Matthew Wiswall. 2016. "Estimating the Technology
   of Children's Skill Formation." NBER Working Paper 22442.
 Akabayashi, Hideo. 2006. "An Equilibrium Model of Child Maltreatment."
   Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 30 (6): 993­1025.
 Almlund, M., A. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and T. Kautz. 2011. "Personality
   Psychology and Economics." In Handbook of the Economics of Education, Vol.
   4, edited by E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Woessmann. Amsterdam:
   Elsevier.

                                         49
Altonji, Joseph G., and Richard K. Mansfield. 2018. "Estimating Group Ef-
   fects Using Averages of Observables to Control for Sorting on Unobserv-
   ables: School and Neighborhood Effects." American Economic Review 108 (10):
   2902­46.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Kevin Lang. 2004. "Does School Integration Generate
  Peer Effects? Evidence from Boston's Metco Program." American Economic
  Review 94 (5): 1613­34.
Arcidiacono, Peter, Gigi Foster, Natalie Goodpaster, and Josh Kinsler. 2012.
   "Estimating Spillovers Using Panel Data, with an Application to the Class-
   room." Quantitative Economics 3 (3): 421­70.
Attanasio, Orazio. 2015. "The Determinants of Human Capital Formation Dur-
   ing the Early Years of Life: Theory, Measurement, and Polices." Journal of the
   European Economic Association 13 (6): 949­97.
Attanasio, Orazio, Sarah Cattan, Emla Fitzsimons, Costas Meghir, and Marta
   Rubio-Codina. 2020. "Estimating the Production Function for Human Cap-
   ital: Results from a Randomized Control Trial in Colombia." American Eco-
   nomic Review 110 (1): 489­85.
Attanasio, Orazio, Costas Meghir, and Emily Nix. 2019. "Human Capital De-
   velopment and Parental Investment in India." NBER Working Paper 21740.
Badev, Anton. 2016. "Discrete Games in Endogenous Networks: Theory and
   Policy." Unpublished Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
Baumrind, Diana. 1967. "Child Care Practices Anteceding Three Patterns of
   Preschool Behavior." Genetic Psychology Monographs 75 (1): 43­88.
Bifulco, Robert, Jason M. Fletcher, and Stephen L. Ross. 2011. "The Effect of
   Classmate Characteristics on Post-Secondary Outcomes: Evidence from the
   Add Health." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (1): 25­53.
Blume, Lawrence E., William A. Brock, Steven N. Durlauf, and Rajshri Jayara-
   man. 2015. "Linear Social Interactions Models." Journal of Political Economy
   123 (2): 444­96.
Blume, Lawrence E., L. E., W. A. Brock, S.N. Durlauf, and Y. M. Ioannides. 2011.
   "Identification of Social Interactions." In Handbook of Social Economics, edited

                                       50
   by J. Benhabib, A. Bisin, and M. O. Jackson, Volume 1, 853­964. Amsterdam:
   Elsevier.
Brenøe, Anne Ardila, and Thomas Epper. 2019. "Parenting Values and the Inter-
   generational Transmission of Time Preferences." Unpublished Manuscript,
   University of St. Gallen.
Brock, William A., and S. N. Durlauf. 2001a. "Interactions-Based Models." In
   Handbook of Econometrics, edited by J. J. Heckman and E. E. Leamer, Volume 5,
   3297­380. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Brock, William A., and Steven N. Durlauf. 2001b. "Discrete Choice with Social
   Interactions." Review of Economic Studies 68 (2): 235­60.
      . 2002. "A Multinomial-Choice Model of Neighborhood Effects." Ameri-
   can Economic Review 92 (2): 298­303.
Brooks, Jane. 2013. The Process of Parenting. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Calvó-Armengol, Antoni, Eleonora Patacchini, and Yves Zenou. 2009. "Peer
   Effects and Social Networks in Education." Review of Economic Studies 76 (4):
   1239­67.
Carrell, Scott E., Bruce I. Sacerdote, and James E. West. 2013. "From Natural
   Variation to Optimal Policy? The Importance of Endogenous Peer Group
   Formation." Econometrica 81 (3): 855­82.
Case, A., and L. F. Katz. 1991. "The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family
   and Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths." NBER Working Paper 3705.
Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2018a. "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on
  Intergenerational Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects." Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 133 (3): 1107­62.
        . 2018b. "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility
   II: County-Level Estimates." Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3): 1163­228.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. "The Effects of Ex-
  posure to Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Mov-
  ing to Opportunity Experiment." American Economic Review 106 (4): 855­902.



                                      51
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014.
  "Where is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational
  Mobility in the United States." Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4): 1553­
  623.
Chyn, Eric. 2018. "Moved to Opportunity: The Long-Run Effects of Public
  Housing Demolition on Children." American Economic Review 108 (10): 3028­
  56.
Cobb-Clark, Deborah A., Nicolas Salamanca, and Anna Zhu. 2019. "Parent-
  ing Style as an Investment in Human Development." Journal of Population
  Economics 32 (4): 1315­52.
Cunha, Flavio, and James J. Heckman. 2007. "The Technology of Skill Forma-
  tion." American Economic Review 97 (2): 31­47.
       . 2008. "Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Technology of Cog-
   nitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation." Journal of Human Resources 43 (4):
   738­82.
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, and Susanne M. Schennach. 2010. "Estimat-
  ing the Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation." Econo-
  metrica 78 (3): 883­931.
Currarini, Sergio, Matthew Jackson, and Paolo Pin. 2009. "An Economic Model
  of Friendship: Homophily, Minorities and Segregation." Econometrica 77 (4):
  1003­45.
Cutler, David M., and Edward L. Glaeser. 1997. "Are Ghettos Good or Bad?"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (3): 827­72.
Dahl, Gordon B., and Lance Lochner. 2012. "The Impact of Family Income on
  Child Achievement: Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit." Ameri-
  can Economic Review 102 (5): 1927­56.
Del Boca, Daniela, Christopher Flinn, Ewout Verriest, and Matthew J. Wiswall.
   2019. "Actors in the Child Development Process." Unpublished Manuscript,
   University of Wisconsin.
Del Boca, Daniela, Christopher Flinn, and Matthew Wiswall. 2014. "Household
   Choices and Child Development." Review of Economic Studies 81 (1): 137­85.

                                     52
Doepke, Matthias, Giuseppe Sorrenti, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2019. "The Eco-
  nomics of Parenting." Annual Review of Economics 11:55­84.
Doepke, Matthias, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2017. "Parenting with Style: Altruism
  and Paternalism in Intergenerational Preference Transmission." Econometrica
  85 (5): 1331­71.
      . 2019. Love, Money, and Parenting: How Economics Explains the Way We
   Raise Our Kids. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Durlauf, Steven N. 2004. "Neighborhood Effects." In Cities and Geography, edited
  by Henderson J. Vernon and Jacques-François Thisse, Volume 4 of Handbook
  of Regional and Urban Economics, 2173­242. Elsevier.
Durlauf, Steven N., and Yannis M. Ioannides. 2010. "Social Interactions." An-
  nual Review of Economics 2 (1): 451­78.
Eckert, Fabian, and Tatjana Kleineberg. 2019. "Can We Save the American
   Dream? A Dynamic General Equilibrium Analysis of the Effects of School
   Financing on Local Opportunities." Unpublished Manuscript, Yale Univer-
   sity.
Feld, Jan, and Ulf Zölitz. 2017. "Understanding Peer Effects: On the Nature,
   Estimation, and Channels of Peer Effects." Journal of Labor Economics 35 (2):
   387­428.
Fogli, Alessandra, and Veronica Guerrieri. 2018. "The End of the American
   Dream? Inequality and Segregation in US Cities." Unpublished Manuscript,
   University of Chicago.
Harris, Judith Rich. 1998. The Nurture Assumption: Why Children Turn Out the
  Way They Do. Free Press.
Heckman, James J., and Stefano Mosso. 2014. "The Economics of Human De-
  velopment and Social Mobility." Annual Review of Economics 6 (1): 689­733.
Heckman, James J., Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter A. Savelyev. 2013. "Understand-
  ing the Mechanisms through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program
  Boosted Adult Outcomes." American Economic Review 103 (6): 2052­86.




                                      53
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. "The Effects of Cog-
  nitive and Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Be-
  havior." Journal of Labor Economics 24 (3): 411­82.
Hoxby, Caroline. 2000. "Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender
  and Race Variation." NBER Working Paper 7867.
Jackson, Matthew. 2010. Social and Economic Networks. Princeton University
   Press.
Jencks, Christopher, and Susan E. Mayer. 1990. "The Social Consequences of
   Growing Up in a Poor Neighborhood." In Inner-City Poverty in the United
   States, edited by E. Lynn Laurence Jr. and Michael G. H. McGeary, 111­185.
   Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Kim, Jun Hyung. 2019. "The Economics of Parenting Skill and Child Develop-
   ment." Unpublished Manuscript, Jinan University.
List, John, Fatemeh Momeni, and Yves Zenou. 2019. "Are Estimates of Early
   Education Programs Too Pessimistic? Evidence from a Large-Scale Field Ex-
   periment that Causally Measures Neighbor Effects." CEPR Discussion Paper
   13725.
Lizzeri, Alessandro, and Marciano Siniscalchi. 2008. "Parental Guidance and
   Supervised Learning." Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (3): 1161­95.
Løken, Katrine V., Magne Mogstad, and Matthew Wiswall. 2012. "What Linear
   Estimators Miss: The Effects of Family Income on Child Outcomes." Ameri-
   can Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (2): 1­35.
McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James Cook. 2001. "Birds of a
  Feather: Homophily in Social Networks." Annual Review of Sociology 27:415­
  44.
Mele, Angelo. 2019. "Does School Desegregation Promote Diverse Interac-
  tions? An Equilibrium Model of Segregation Within Schools." Unpublished
  Manuscript, Johns Hopkins Carey Business School.
Olivetti, Claudia, Eleonora Patacchini, and Yves Zenou. 2020. "Mothers, Peers,
   and Gender-Role Identity." Journal of the European Economic Association 18
   (1): 266­301.

                                     54
Özdemir, Yasemin. 2019. "Parental Investment and Peer Effects in Cogni-
  tive and Non-Cognitive Skills." Unpublished Manuscript, University of
  Mannheim.
Patacchini, Eleonora, and Yves Zenou. 2011. "Neighborhood Effects and
   Parental Involvement in the Intergenerational Transmission of Education."
   Journal of Regional Science 51 (5): 987­1013.
Sacerdote, Bruce. 2001. "Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for
   Dartmouth Roommates." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2): 681­704.
      . 2011. "Peer Effects in Education: How Might They Work, How Big Are
   They and How Much Do We Know Thus Far?" In Handbook of the Economics of
   Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woess-
   man, Volume 3, 249­77. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Sampson, Robert J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Thomas Gannon-Rowley. 2002.
   "Assessing "Neighborhood Effects": Social Processes and New Directions in
   Research." Annual Review of Sociology 28 (1): 443­78.
Tamayo Castano, Jorge Andres. 2016. "The Impact of Peer Effects on Student
   Outcomes: Evidence from Colombia." Unpublished Manuscript, University
   of Southern California.
Todd, Petra E., and Kenneth I. Wolpin. 2003. "On the Specification and Esti-
   mation of the Production Function for Cognitive Achievement." Economic
   Journal 113 (485): F3­F33.
      . 2007. "The Production of Cognitive Achievement in Children: Home,
   School, and Racial Test Score Gaps." Journal of Human Capital 1 (1): 91­136.
Weinberg, Bruce A. 2001. "An Incentive Model of the Effect of Parental Income
  on Children." Journal of Political Economy 109 (2): 266­80.
Zimmerman, David. 2003. "Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from
   a Natural Experiment." The Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (02): 9­23.
Zumbuehl, Maria, Thomas Dohmen, and Gerard Pfann. 2018. "Parental In-
  volvement and the Intergenerational Transmission of Economic Preferences
  and Attitudes." The Swiss Leading House on Economics of Education, Firm
  Behavior and Training Policies Working Paper 148.

                                     55
Appendices
A    Additional Figures and Tables
This section provides additional figures and tables aimed at complementing the
empirical analysis of the paper.

Figure A-1 shows the correlation between parenting styles and neighborhood
quality. The definition of parenting styles mirrors the one in Doepke and Zili-
botti (2017) and is based on the answer parents give to the question: "Of the fol-
lowing, which do you think is the most important thing for a boy/girl to learn?
Be well-behaved, work hard, think for himself, help others, be popular." We de-
fine authoritarian parents as those who choose "be well-behaved," authoritative
parents as those opting for "work hard," and permissive parents as those who
choose "think for themselves." Neighborhood quality is defined as the median
family income in the school attended by the child (left panels), or as the 90­10
ratio for family income at the school level (right panels).

Table A-1 shows the summary statistics for the variables used in the empirical
analysis.

Table A-2 replicates the analysis of the effect of neighborhood quality on authori-
tarian parenting by using the within-school within-grade GPA Gini coefficient as
the measure for inequality.

Tables A-3 through A-6 show the sample fit of the model. Table A-3 reports the
sample fit for the estimates of a linear probability model of authoritarian parent-
ing style on a child's and peers' skills. Table A-4 focuses on the linear regression
model of a child's next-period skills on current skills, peers' skills, and author-
itarian parenting style. Table A-5 shows the estimates for the regression of the
next-period average peers' skills on the child's current period skills, peers' skills,
and authoritarian parenting style. Finally, Table A-6 reports the estimates for
regressions of authoritative parental investments on the child's current period
skills and peers' skills, with a breakdown between authoritarian and nonauthor-
itarian parents.

                                         56
                              Figure A-1: Parenting Style and Neighborhood Quality
    % Permissive Parents




                                                                                 % Permissive Parents
     .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                  .5   .6   .7    .8
                              2             4              6            8                                  4         6         8               10 12
                                  Median Family Income at School ($10k)                                        Family Income 90­10 ratio at School
    % Authoritative Parents




                                                                                 % Authoritative Parents
     .06 .08 .1 .12 .14 .16




                                                                                   .08 .1 .12 .14




                              2             4              6            8                                  4         6         8         10        12
                                  Median Family Income at School ($10k)                                        Family Income 90­10 ratio at School
    % Authoritarian Parents




                                                                                 % Authoritarian Parents
      0 .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                  .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4




                              2             4              6            8                                  4         6         8         10        12
                                  Median Family Income at School ($10k)                                        Family Income 90­10 ratio at School



The figure shows how the incidence of the three parenting styles (permissive, authorita-
tive, and authoritarian) varies with within-school average family income (left panel) and
inequality (right panel). The measure of parenting style follows Doepke and Zilibotti (2017)
and is discussed in the text. Inequality is measured by the 90th­10th percentile ratio of
within-school family income. The top, central, and bottom panel show the incidence of
permissive, authoritative, and authoritarian parenting style, respectively.




                                                                            57
                                 Table A-1: Sample Statistics

                                                                 Wave I: In-School Inteview
                                                                  Mean        SD          Obs
 English Grade                                                     2.84      0.97       38,300
 Math Grade                                                        2.71      1.03       38,300
 History Grade                                                     2.89      0.99       38,300
 Science Grade                                                     2.81      1.01       38,300
 Child's GPA                                                       2.81      0.78       38,300
 N of Schools                                                       66
                                                                  Wave I: In-Home Inteview
                                                                  Mean        SD          Obs
 Real family income (in 2016 US dollars)                         75,544     81,151       7,685
 Talked with your mom about a party you attended                   0.52      0.50        9,627
 Talked with your mom about a personal problem                     0.41      0.49        9,627
 Worked with your mom on a project for school                      0.11      0.31        9,627
 Do your parents let you choose your own friends?                  0.13      0.34       10,057
 PPVT Score                                                       66.16     11.13        9,838
                                                                             Wave II
                                                                  Mean        SD          Obs
 English Grade                                                     2.89      0.93        3,744
 Math Grade                                                        2.70      1.02        3,744
 History Grade                                                     2.94      0.97        3,744
 Science Grade                                                     2.86      0.98        3,744
 The table shows some summary statistics for the variables and sample used in our estimation. Note
that we restrict the original sample in Add Health to high schools with at least 200 children and to
cohorts with at least 100 students.




                                                58
             Table A-2: Authoritarian Parenting and Neighborhood Quality



                                                            Authoritarian
                                     (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)
 Mean GPA within Grade            -0.114**                   0.025      -0.059                 0.025
                                   (0.046)                  (0.056)    (0.042)                (0.052)

 Gini GPA within Grade                         0.032*** 0.036***                  0.021** 0.025**
                                               (0.008)      (0.011)               (0.009)     (0.011)
 Mean Dep                           0.130       0.130        0.130      0.130      0.130       0.130
 Obs                                10057       10057       10057       10057      10057      10057
 Clusters                             63          63          63          63         63         63
 Controls                            No          No           No         Yes         Yes        Yes
 School F.E.                         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
 The table shows the estimated coefficients of regressions whose dependent variable is an indicator
variable for authoritarian parenting at the individual level. The Gini GPA grade is the Gini coefficient
for GPA at the school and grade level. All models include school fixed effects. The regressions include
mother's education, family income, and child's race, age, and gender as control variables. Standard
errors are clustered at the school level.




                                                  59
                           Table A-3: Sample Fit of the Model:
                           Parenting Style



                                                            Authoritarian
                                                              (1)       (2)
                                                            Model      Data
                            Child's Skills                  -0.075     -0.016
                            Peer Skills                     -0.021     -0.017
                            Mean Dep. Variable               0.135     0.140
                            The table shows the sample fit for the esti-
                           mates of a linear probability model of author-
                           itarian style on a child's skills and on the peer's
                           skills. Column (1) displays the estimates gen-
                           erated from the simulated model. Column (2)
                           shows the estimates from the data. We calcu-
                           late the model's predicted coefficients by aver-
                           aging among 50 different model simulations.

                    Table A-4: Sample Fit of the Model: Skill Accumulation



                                                               Next-Period Skills
                                         Pooled Sample        Authoritarian = 0       Authoritarian = 1
                                           (1)        (2)       (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)
                                         Model      Data      Model        Data       Model        Data
 Child's Skills                           0.889     0.823      0.917       0.835       0.776       0.650
 Peer Skills                              0.316     0.144      0.332       0.129       0.194       0.212
 Authoritarian                           -0.048     0.047
 Mean Child's Skills (Grade 9)           -0.039     -0.017
 Mean Child's Skills (Grade 10)           0.053     0.082
 Mean Child's Skills (Grade 11)           0.204     0.130
 Mean Child's Skills (Grade 12)           0.313     0.341
 The table shows the estimates for a linear regression model of the next-period child's skills on the current
period child's skills, peer's skills, and parenting style. Odd columns display the estimates generated from
the simulated model. Even columns show the estimates from the data. We calculate the model's predicted
coefficients by averaging among 50 different model simulations.


                                                    60
                      Table A-5: Sample Fit of the Model: Peer Skills



                                                         Next Period Peer Skills
                                   Pooled Sample           Authoritarian = 0         Authoritarian = 1
                                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)    (6)
                                   Model         Data      Model         Data        Model     Data
 Child's Skills                    0.283         0.223      0.277        0.223        0.321    0.152
 Peer Skills                       0.179         0.314      0.183        0.327        0.149    0.248
 Authoritarian                     0.070         0.012
 Mean Number of Friends            6.812         6.935
 The table shows the estimates for a linear regression model of next-period average skill of peers on
current period child's skills, peer's skills, and parenting style. Odd columns display the estimates
generated from the simulated model. Even columns show the estimates from the data. We calculate
the model's predicted coefficients by averaging among 50 different model simulations.




               Table A-6: Sample Fit of the Model: Parental Investments



                                                   Parental Investments
                                       Authoritarian = 0             Authoritarian = 1
                                           (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)
                                       Model             Data        Model        Data
            Child's Skills              0.153           0.114        0.003        0.035
            Peer Skills                 -0.093          -0.065       0.002        0.028
            Mean Dep. Variable          0.028           0.025        -0.178       -0.192
            The table shows the estimates for a linear regression model of authorita-
           tive parental investments on current period child's skills and peer's skills
           with breakdown by (authoritarian) parenting style. Odd columns display
           the estimates generated from the simulated model. Even columns show
           the estimates from the data. We calculate the model's predicted coefficients
           by averaging among 50 different model simulations.



                                                 61
B        Measuring Skills and Parental Investments in Add Health
In this section we provide additional details on how we measure children's skills
and parental investment in Add Health.

Parenting Style. We measure parenting style using the following yes-no question
asked to children during the in-home survey: "Do your parents let you make
your own decisions about the people you hang around with?" We classify a par-
ent whose child answers "No" as adopting an authoritarian parenting style.

Other Parental Investments (Time). We measure parental investments using the
following yes-no questions asked to children during the in-home survey about
certain activities they engaged in with their mothers: "Talked with your mom
about a party you attended"; "Talked with your mom about a personal prob-
lem"; "Worked with your mom on a project for school."We aggregate the three
measures using a principal component analysis.

Children's Skills: We measure children's skills using both grades at school (En-
glish, Math, History and Science) and a standardized test of receptive vocabu-
lary (Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, PPVT).33 Similar to Cunha and Heckman
(2007), Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010), Agostinelli and Wiswall (2016),
Attanasio, Meghir, and Nix (2019), and Attanasio et al. (2020), we use a linear
measurement system to have a comparable scaling between different measures.
                                                                              m
The measurement model maps each of the five observed measures above (Mi,t       )
into children's skills (i,t ) as follows:

                                   m                        m
                                  Mi,t = 0,m + 1,m ln i,t + i,t .           (B-1)

This model allows us to have a linear transformation for each measure m that
                                 m    M m -0,m            m 34
measures the children's skills: Mi,t  i,t
                                        1,m
                                               = ln i,t + i,t . Once we have
                                               5
                                 m
the set of re-scaled measures Mi,t      , we aggregate them using a principal
                                    m=1
component analysis to deal with the measurement error ( ). The estimates of the
measurement parameters in Equation (B-1) are shown below:

    33
         Add Health includes the PPVT scores only for Wave I.
    34                                      m     m
         The re-scaled measurement error is i,t = 1i,t
                                                   ,m
                                                       .


                                                   62
Table B-1: Estimates for the Measurement Model in (B-1)



                                   0       1
             English Grade       2.55    0.76
             Math Grade          2.48    0.55
             Math Grade          2.60    0.82
             History Grade       2.51    0.76
             PPVT                60.53   2.65
             The table shows the estimates for
            the measurement model in Equation
            (B-1). The parameter are estimated
            under a zero mean and unitary vari-
            ance normalization of the log-skills
            in 9th grade (see Cunha and Heck-
            man (2007), Cunha, Heckman, and
            Schennach (2010), and Agostinelli
            and Wiswall (2016) for further de-
            tails).




                            63
C        Robustness Analysis
C.1      Additional Specifications for the Technology of Skill Formation

Tables C1-1 through C1-3 provide the results for a set of robustness analyses. In
all the different exercises we use the same estimator as in our baseline estimation
algorithm (Simulated Method of Moments). We describe each case below.

General CES Technology for Both Parenting Styles. In this first robustness exercise
we specify a different unconstrained CES technology for each parenting style
(authoritarian and nonauthoritarian parents). Because the model is already over-
identified, we do not add additional statistics to our set of moments to match.
Moreover, we already included key identifying information as we already al-
lowed the auxiliary regressions about next-period skills to differ between au-
thoritarian and nonauthoritarian parents (see Table A-4). Table C1-1 shows the
estimates for the new technological parameters. The estimated complementary
parameter for authoritarian parents is close to zero, suggesting that the technol-
ogy in this case is effectively Cobb-Douglas. The rest of the parameters are in line
with our baseline estimates (see Table 5).35

Restricted CES Technology. In this case we impose various restrictions on how the
technology of skill formation varies between authoritarian and nonauthoritarian
parents. In the first case, we impose that authoritarian and nonauthoritarian par-
ents share the same technology of skill formation (CES), although we still allow
parenting style to affect the technological TFP. We estimate the specification of
this new model. Table C1-2 shows the results for the estimated technology. We
estimate a lower effect of parenting style on the technological TFP (2 ) relative
to our baseline estimates. However, the specification is not able to replicate the
heterogeneity of the elasticity of parental investments with respect to peers' skills
between authoritarian and nonauthoritarian parents (previously reported in Ta-
ble A-6). In the second case, we restrict the TFP to also be invariant to parenting
style on top of the same technological restrictions described above. The results
are shown in Table C1-3. Even in this case, this specification is not able to repli-

    35
   In Section 4.1 we discuss how to compare the parameters between the CES and the Cobb-
Douglas case.


                                          64
cate the heterogeneous responses of parental investments with respect to changes
in peer quality between authoritarian and nonauthoritarian parents.

Taken together, these robustness checks suggest that allowing the technology of
skill formation to vary between authoritarian and nonauthoritarian parents is
essential for getting a good model fit and that imposing a Cobb-Douglas specifi-
cation for authoritarian parents fits the data well.




   Table C1-1: Estimates for the Technology of Skills Formation (General
   Two CES Case)

                                                               CES (Authoritarian = 1)
     Complementarity Parents vs. Peer (4,0 )                            0.009
     Share Self-Production (1,0 )                                       0.772
     Share Peer Skills (2,0 )                                           0.382
     Complementarity Self-Production vs. Parents-Peer (3,0 )            0.009
     CES Return to Scale (5,0 )                                         0.502
                                                               CES (Authoritarian = 0)
     Complementarity Parents vs. Peer (4,1 )                            0.789
     Share Self-Production (1,1 )                                       0.565
     Share Peer Skills (2,1 )                                           0.381
     Complementarity Self-Production vs. Parents-Peer (3,1 )            -1.613
     CES Return to Scale (5,1 )                                         1.103
                                                               Total Factor Productivity
     TFP Constant (0 )                                                  0.393
     TFP Age Trend (1 )                                                 0.024
     TFP Parenting Style (2 )                                           -0.365
   The table shows the estimates for the technology of skill formation for the general
   model with two CES production functions.




                                               65
Table C1-2: Estimates for the Technology of Skills Formation (One Tech-
nology for All Parents)

                                                              CES (For All Parents)
 Complementarity Parents vs. Peers (4,0 )                             0.808
 Share Self-Production (1,0 )                                         0.558
 Share Peer Skills (2,0 )                                             0.393
 Complementarity Self-Production vs. Parents-Peers (3,0 )            -1.766
 CES Return to Scale (5,0 )                                           0.954
                                                            Total Factor Productivity
 TFP Constant (0 )                                                    0.427
 TFP Age Trend (1 )                                                   0.028
 TFP Parenting Style (2 )                                            -0.026
 The table shows the estimates for the technology of skill formation. In this case, we
assume one technology for all parents.




Table C1-3: Estimates for the Technology of Skills Formation (One Tech-
nology for All Parents with same TFP)

                                                              CES (For All Parents)
 Complementarity Parents vs. Peers (4,0 )                             0.817
 Share Self-Production (1,0 )                                         0.564
 Share Peer Skills (2,0 )                                             0.397
 Complementarity Self-Production vs. Parents-Peers (3,0 )            -1.755
 CES Return to Scale (5,0 )                                           0.947
                                                            Total Factor Productivity
 TFP Constant (0 )                                                    0.423
 TFP Age Trend (1 )                                                   0.027
 The table shows the estimates for the technology of skill formation. In this case, we
assume one technology for all parents with the same TFP term.




                                            66
C.2    Model with Parental Education

In this section we generalize our model by including heterogeneous parents with
respect to their education. In particular, we divide parents into low- and highly
educated parents (Ei  {0, 1}), depending on whether they attained a college
degree. We allow parental education to affect both technology and preferences:
highly educated parents have a differential TFP term as well as a different pa-
rameter for the disutility of engaging in an authoritarian parenting style.

The new technology of skill formation is defined as follows:

                          s(i,t , ¯i,t , Ii,t , Pi,t = p) = Ap (t) × Hp (i,t , ¯i,t , Ii,t ),           (C2-1)

where p  {0, 1}, Ap (t) = exp(0,1 + 0,2 · Ei + 1 · t + 2 · p), where 0,2 represents
the additional TFP for highly educated parents (Ei = 1). A positive value for 0,2
means that highly educated parents have higher total factor productivity relative
to low-educated parents. The rest of the technological parameters are the same
as in Equation (7).

Low- and highly educated parents differ in their disutility of being authoritarian.
We model the new parents' preferences as follows:

       U (Ii,t , Pi,t ,   i,t )   = 1 ln(1 - Ii,t ) + 2,1 (1 + 2,2 · Ei ) Pi,t +         i,t (Pi,t ),   (C2-2)

where the parameter 2,2 captures the differential cost of engaging in an authori-
tarian parenting style. A negative value for 2,2 means that highly educated par-
ents are less prone to be authoritarian relative to low-educated parents.

The model is estimated using the Simulated Method of Moments (SMM), where
we add to the previous set of moments two additional statistics to match: 1) the
auxiliary coefficient of the marginal effect of parental education on the proba-
bility of becoming authoritarian, and 2) the auxiliary coefficient of the marginal
effect of parental education on the next-period skills.36

Table C2-1 shows the estimates for the new parameters. The results suggest
  36
    In Add Health we measure parental education based on the mother's reported highest grade
concluded.


                                                         67
that TFP differences between parents are minimal, while highly educated par-
ents show a 25 percent higher disutility in becoming authoritarian relative to
low-educated parents. The rest of the estimated parameters are unchanged with
respect to our previous estimates.




      Table C2-1: Estimates for Heterogeneous TFP and Preferences by
      Education


       Technology:


       TFP Contant (0,1 )                                                       0.412

       Additional TFP (highly educated parents, 0,2 )                           0.012


       Preferences:


       Disutility of Authoritarian (2,1 )                                       -2.110

       Additional Disutility of Authoritarian (highly educated parents, 2,2 )   -0.510

       The table shows the main estimates for the TFP technology and preferences for
      a model with heterogeneous parents (education). In this case, parents are het-
      erogeneous with respect to their education (college graduates versus non-college
      graduates). The table shows the estimated parameters. The rest of the model's
      parameters are assumed homogeneous, and they are omitted from the table be-
      cause they are in line with the previous estimates. Results are available upon
      request.




                                            68
