                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          A STICKY-PRICE VIEW OF HOARDING

                                      Christopher Hansman
                                         Harrison Hong
                                        Áureo de Paula
                                          Vishal Singh

                                      Working Paper 27051
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27051


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




This paper subsumes our earlier work on hoarding and commodity bubbles. We thank seminar
participants at CICF 2019, INSEAD, Aalto, Peking University, Warwick University, Cambridge
University, NBER Universities Conference on Commodities, HKUST, New York University,
PUC-Rio and Yale University for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Quisha Peng,
Pengfei Wang, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Emi Nakamura, Hassan Afrousi, Michael Woodford,
William Goetzmann, Hank Bessembinder, Manuel Arellano, Orazio Attanasio, Richard Blundell,
Marcelo Fernandes, Bo Honoré, Guy Laroque, Valerie Lechene and Elie Tamer for useful
conversations. de Paula gratefully acknowledges financial support from the European Research
Council through Starting Grant 338187 and the Economic and Social Research Council through
the ESRC Centre for Microdata Methods and Practice grant RES-589-28-0001. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christopher Hansman, Harrison Hong, Áureo de Paula, and Vishal Singh. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Sticky-Price View of Hoarding
Christopher Hansman, Harrison Hong, Áureo de Paula, and Vishal Singh
NBER Working Paper No. 27051
April 2020
JEL No. D1

                                         ABSTRACT

Hoarding of staples has long worried policymakers due to concerns about shortages. We quantify
how sticky store prices---delayed price adjustment to shocks by reputable retailers---exacerbate
hoarding. When prices are sticky, households hoard not only for precautionary motives but also
non-precautionary motives: they stockpile as they would during a standard retail promotion or for
the purpose of retail arbitrage. Using US supermarket scanner data covering the 2008 Global
Rice Crisis, an episode driven by an observable cost shock due an Indian ban on raw rice exports,
we find that sticky prices account for a sizeable fraction of hoarding. Hoarding is mostly for own
use and more prevalent among richer households. Our findings are consistent with media reports
of distributional concerns associated with hoarding during the Covid-19 Pandemic.


Christopher Hansman                             Áureo de Paula
Imperial College Business School                University College London
Imperial College London                         a.paula@ucl.ac.uk
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ                                  Vishal Singh
U.K.                                            New York University
c.hansman@imperial.ac.uk                        vsingh@stern.nyu.edu

Harrison Hong
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1022 International Affairs Building
Mail Code 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
hh2679@columbia.edu
1       Introduction

Household hoarding of staples--the accumulation of inventories during disasters or supply disruptions--

has long been a concern of governments.1 Most recently, the COVID-19 pandemic has led to a

widely-documented run on staple foods, hand sanitizers and masks, creating shortages in crucial

items needed by public health workers. There are also a number of famous historical episodes:

Amartya Sen's influential Poverty and Famines argued that hoarding played a key role in the 1943

Bengali Famine, while historians have emphasized the role of gas hoarding by consumers dur-

ing the energy crises of the 1970s, which amplified prices at the pump and fed back into higher

international oil prices.2 Household hoarding is similarly thought to have aggravated the 2000s

commodities boom and the 2008 global rice crisis.3

        While discussions of hoarding naturally emphasize a precautionary motive, i.e. an outward

shift in consumer demand due to a desire to hedge market uncertainty or because of some be-

havioral panic, we highlight and quantify how sticky store prices -- delayed price adjustment to

shocks by reputable retailers -- exacerbate hoarding. After all, a large literature documents that

retailers uniformly delay price adjustments after shocks (Bils & Klenow, 2004; Nakamura & Steins-

son, 2008), including during disasters such as earthquakes, hurricanes or snowstorms that cause

costs to rise (Cavallo et al. , 2014; Gagnon & Lopez-Salido, 2015). Even in quiet times, there are

a number of reasons why stores may pursue sticky price strategies. These include menu costs,

customer anger (e.g. Anderson & Simester, 2010; Anderson et al. , 2017; Rotemberg, 2005) and

costly attention or information gathering (Mankiw & Reis, 2002; Woodford, 2009). During market

disruptions, concerns about customer anger or the imposition of anti-price gouging laws may be

amplified.4 In other words, theory and evidence suggest that prices may be sticky in hoarding

periods.

        Sticky prices are likely to exacerbate hoarding for a number of reasons, regardless of the un-
    1
     See (Gráda, 2009) for a review of the role of hoarding in famines going back as far as back Antioch as far back 362
A.D.
   2
     Priest (2012) writes: "Motorists, whose consumption of gasoline rose from 243 gallons per capita in 1950 to 463 gal-
lons per capita in 1979, compounded supply problems by hoarding fuel, idling their engines in gas lines, and frantically
topping off their tanks with frequent trips to the local filling station."
   3
     See, e.g. "How Fear Turned A Surplus into Scarcity," National Public Radio, November 4, 2011.
   4
     For instance, the first US state law directed at price gouging was enacted in New York in 1979, during a period of
commodity market instability and concerns about shortages. Since then anti-gouging laws have proven popular--the
majority of states have adopted some type of regulation (Davis et al. , 2008). These measures typically get adopted
during or following commodity shortages (see, e.g., Zwolinski, 2008; Giberson, 2011).


                                                           1
derlying mechanism causing stickiness. Perhaps the simplest follows directly from basic supply

and demand logic: for a given a shift in demand due to precaution, a lack of price response will

result in greater quantity sold. However, Benabou (1989) shows that sticky prices create at least

two additional incentives for anticipatory stockpiling following a cost shock to a storeable good,

even holding precautionary demand fixed.5 The first is an implicit promotional effect: sticky prices

offer a temporary sale to consumers. Recognizing that prices will rise in the future when the sale

ends, consumers are then driven to shift demand intertemporally and stockpile (Gönül & Srini-

vasan, 1996; Erdem et al. , 2003; Sun et al. , 2003; Sun, 2005). The second is retail arbitrage or resale.

Households can hoard to take advantage of the strategies of or constraints on reputable retailers

by buying and reselling at a later date through informal channels (i.e. online or through smaller

retailers that are less bound by reputation norms).6

       While the potential role of sticky prices is recognized by economists, quantifying its importance

has been challenging because of the lack of sufficiently detailed micro-data.7 To understand how

sticky prices influence hoarding behavior, it is necessary to go beyond aggregates and observe

both the shelf prices households face and the inventories that they hold. This poses a difficulty, as

many large-scale hoarding episodes are historic or in developing countries where granular data is

difficult to come by.

       We exploit the availability of US supermarket scanner data during the 2008 Global Rice Crisis

to systematically analyze the determinants of hoarding. This episode is, we believe, the first in-

stance of large scale hoarding for which detailed retailer and consumer micro-data is available. No

doubt the availability of scanner data in a few years covering the COVID-19 pandemic will permit

detailed further research, but this rice hoarding episode provides a particularly clean setting in

which to consider the role of sticky prices, as we explain further below. Further, a number of our
   5
     It is possible for there to be simultaneously sticky prices and bounded speculative storage in a game between
consumers and firms when there are menu costs. Benabou (1989) extends classic menu cost models (i.e. fixed costs
of price adjustment following Barro, 1972; Sheshinski & Weiss, 1977), which feature firm's nominal costs rising due
to inflation, to allow for storeable goods. The well-known sticky pricing strategy, or (S,s) rule, derived under non-
storeability is shown to hold when there are only moderate amounts of speculative storage.
   6
     Such retail arbitrage strategies are akin to speculative or resell motive discussed in commodity markets (Scheinkman
& Schechtman, 1983; Deaton & Laroque, 1992) that apply even in flexible price settings.
   7
     While there is now a large body of research on the role of institutional speculators in the 2000s commodity bubble
(see, e.g. Kilian & Murphy, 2014; Hamilton, 2009; Tang & Xiong, 2010; Singleton, 2013; Acharya et al. , 2013), the role
of households has remained unexplored. See also Gorton et al. (2013) and Fama & French (1987) on the more general
on the relationship between inventory and commodity prices and Bessembinder (1992) for the relationship between
hedging by institutional investors and futures prices.



                                                           2
findings foreshadow current news reports on hoarding during the pandemic.

      We begin by documenting aggregate patterns in wholesale prices and quantities during the

crisis. Market disruptions in the form of a ban on Indian rice exports in the fall of 2007 led to

an increase in the international price of rice of more than 300 percent, peaking in April and May

of 2008. In other words, the root cause of the episode was a relatively pure supply shock, with

no corresponding shock to public health or safety that might trigger a simultaneous change in

demand (as in a pandemic or natural disaster). This makes the episode a particularly clean one

in which to study sticky prices. Rice futures markets similarly spiked in late April, predicting a

roughly 20 percent increase in prices throughout the summer.

      Household hoarding coincided with or slightly lagged the increase in wholesale prices: retail

store sales were 40 percent higher than average in late May and early April 2008. Elevated Google

search volumes (Choi & Varian, 2012; Da et al. , 2011) for the term "rice price" coincided with

abnormal store sales, pointing to consumer awareness of the cost shock and the potential for higher

prices in the future (Goel et al. , 2010). These searches were prompted by significant media coverage

in mid-April 2008 of rising food prices and the cost shock to rice (Fang & Peress, 2009; Engelberg

& Parsons, 2011).

      We then turn to the micro-data and show evidence of ubiquitous stickiness in prices at the retail

level. Shelf prices for rice at retailers in our sample remained near-uniformly flat even as wholesale

price rose. Retail prices stayed effectively constant through the most hoarding periods, and subse-

quently only slowly increased to a permanently higher level (in line with the permanent long run

increase in wholesale prices). The lack of retail price response in the face of a clear cost or supply

shock highlights a key contribution of our study. Discussions of pricing during hoarding episodes

typically focus on the dangers (or lack thereof) of gouging by retailers--with price-gouging usu-

ally referring to sharp increases in prices to match increased hoarding-driven demand.8 Hesitancy

to increase prices even to match cost changes observed in our data suggests that concerns over

gouging (or, alternatively, concerns over the restrictiveness of anti-gouging regulations) may be

misplaced, at least for the relatively reputable retailers observed in our data.

      One advantage of our data relative to earlier studies on price stickiness during disasters is that
  8
   See https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/27/us/coronavirus-price-gouging-hand-sanitizer-masks-wipes.
html,    https://hbr.org/2013/07/the-problem-with-price-gouging-laws,    or   https://www.ftc.gov/
public-statements/2006/02/moneyball-and-price-gouging


                                                    3
our panel allows us to estimate household inventories. We use a standard algorithm (see, e.g.,

Hendel & Nevo, 2006) and show that consumer hoarding actually preceded any increase in retail

prices. Put differently, consumers purchased rice in bulk at relatively low cost before shelf prices

rose, suggesting they may have benefited from sticky prices during the hoarding period.

   In the third part of our paper we ask what fraction of hoarding during the 2008 rice crisis can be

attributed to sticky prices. Answering this question requires credible estimates of consumer price

elasticities. We recover these elasticities using an IV approach and our scanner data, adjusting to

account for a dynamic stockpiling incentive following Hendel & Nevo (2006). Because we are in-

terested in the total quantity responses of consumers when prices change, we conduct our analysis

at the local market level (in our main analysis, we use zipcodes as a proxy for the local market, but

we obtain similar results at higher levels of aggregation). Our primary approach is instrumental

variables strategy (in the general style of Hausman, 1996) exploiting the fact that supermarket

chains practice uniform pricing across stores, as documented in DellaVigna & Gentzkow (2017).

For each chain×market×time period we construct a leave-market-out chain-level average price.

In other words, the average price at stores in the same chain, but located in other markets. We

then aggregate across stores to create a market level instrument. Not surprisingly, we find very

elastic demand for rice. Our estimates imply that a temporary price discount of 10 percent would

generate an increase in quantity purchased of roughly 9 percent.

   To quantify stickiness, we consider the extent of the cost shock. Comparing the long run price

of rice (i.e. in late 2008 and 2009) to the price during the hoarding period indicates that sticky

prices generated an implicit promotion of at least 22 percent, that is, prices were 22 percent below

the long run level. This long run price corresponds to an approximately 30 percent passthrough

from global raw rice prices (which converged to a long run level over 85 percent higher than the

pre-crisis level) to retailers. This is similar to what studies have found for other storeable goods

such as coffee (Nakamura & Zerom, 2010). Combining a 22 percent implicit promotion with our

estimated elasticity suggests that sticky prices can account for approximately half of the 40 percent

increase in quantity purchased during the crisis.

   While these estimates suggest that sticky prices contributed significantly to hoarding, we can-

not in general differentiate the fraction of excess purchases due to precaution versus other chan-

nels. However, if we are willing to entertain additional assumptions, we can use the granularity of


                                                    4
our consumer panel to infer whether hoarding purchases were for own use or resale. Our strategy

is based upon identifying exceptionally large purchase precisely during the hoarding period, rel-

ative to each particular household's history of purchases. While we find a handful of consumers

that appear to be purchasing for arbitrage purposes, the large majority of households increase

their purchases by quantities small enough that meaningful resale would be difficult. Eliminating

potential resellers from our sample does not substantially change aggregate hoarding, suggesting

that individual consumption is largely responsible for the observed patterns.

    Our granular data also allows us to characterize the propensity to hoard across demographic

groups. Unsurprisingly, we find stronger hoarding in areas that tend to eat more rice. Perhaps

more interestingly, we find that higher income households hoard significantly more than low-

income households, consistent with reports on hoarding during the COVID-19 pandemic. This

also matches past research on the relationship between income and coupon usage or other more

standard promotions (see Kwon & Kwon, 2007). One explanation is liquidity concerns: low income

households may simply be unable to take advantage of implicit promotions.

    We conclude by briefly discussing external validity--namely that a number of our findings

foreshadow media reports on hoarding during the Covid-19 Pandemic--and drawing out two

potential policy implications of our analysis. The first is that concerns over price gouging at large

scale retailers, like those featured in the scanner data, may be misplaced. The second concerns the

distributional consequences of sticky prices and hoarding.



2   Data

Our primary sources of retailer and household data are the Nielsen datasets held at the Kilt's

Center. Retail scanner data includes prices and quantities sold at the product level from thousands

of stores. We restrict our sample to the years of 2007-2009, and include weekly data on just under

9000 unique stores. While detail on a wide variety of rice products are available--differing by

brand, bag-size, and type--we aggregate these to create two primary variables of interest. The

first is straightforward: the total volume of rice sold in ounces across all products. The second,

price, is slightly more complicated. To aggregate across products to a single store level price index,

we take a sales weighted average across all products, normalized to 80 ounces. Results are robust


                                                  5
to alternative price definitions, for example defining price as the average price for an 80-ounce bag

or the price of the most popular UPC within each store. We merge on demographic information at

the county (FIPS Code) level. Panel A of Table 1 presents summary statistics on store level data.

The average store sells approximately 8500 ounces of rice per week, with an average price of $5.33

for 80 ounces. On average, median income in the counties in which the stores are located is just

over $57,000.

    The household panel has over 100,000 demographically balanced U.S. households who use

hand-held scanners to record every bar-coded grocery item purchased. The broader dataset runs

from 2004-2009 and records every purchase made at the Universal Product Code (UPC) level.

There is also detailed demographic information. Appendix Figure A.I plots the distributions of

various demographics of the Nielsen Panel. There are on average 2.6 household members, and the

average age is approximately 50 years. Median household income is around $48,000 dollars, and

most of the sample has some college education. Consumers in the panel stay on for an average of

three years, and there are approximately 18,000 households with five or more years of purchase

histories.

    We restrict our panel to households who appear at least once in each year from 2007-2009, and

who buy rice at least once over this period. This leaves us with just over 1.1 million monthly obser-

vations on roughly 42,000 households. We construct monthly quantity purchased by households

by aggregating over all rice purchases at the household level.

    Panel B of Table 1 presents summary statistics on our restricted household sample. The av-

erage quantity purchased by a household in a given month is approximately 10 ounces, although

households typically purchase about 80 ounces in months in which they actually buy rice. Average

household income in this restricted sample is just under $59,000, and the average household has

just over 2.5 people.



3   Background: News Coverage, Consumer Attention and Hoarding

Rice is the main food staple for billions of people and global supply is subject to significant regu-

lations from governments around the world. Consequently, international rice prices often exhibit

distinct patterns relative to other commodities. According to Dawe & Slayton (2010) and Slay-


                                                 6
ton (2009), the 2008 global rice crisis was triggered by India's politically motivated 2007 ban of

rice exports, and continued until Japan agreed to release their rice reserves to global markets in

mid 2008.9 The black line in Figure 1 plots the global price of rice over this period, showing these

events: a sharp increase following the first vertical line, which represents the Indian ban on exports

in October 2007, and a correction corresponding to the second vertical line, which represents the

late May 2008 news of an agreement by Japan. Despite this correction, the global price converged

to a level well above the pre-ban average.

       This boom-bust price pattern is disconnected from fluctuations in energy during this period.

The price of oil began to rise in 2005, peaked in late 2008, crashed in 2009, and recovered in 2010.

Conversely, the price of rice was relatively flat until the India ban was announced, and crashed

well before the price of oil. Moreover, even after the price of oil recovered it did not track the price

of rice, which is highly subject to government interventions and manipulations. This is particularly

a feature of rice relative to other food staples--for example, barley, corn, and wheat--which track

the price of oil much more closely.

       Given the lack of connection between the boom-bust pattern in rice prices and more general

commodity price fundamentals, prevailing narratives of the rice crisis suggest that hoarding gener-

ated artificial shortages and drove up prices due to a precaution narrative.10 There were numerous

media reports of hoarding and related events between India's October 2007 ban and Japan's 2008

agreement:


       · March 2008: Media reports of hoarding in Egypt

       · April 2008: Media reports of hoarding in the Phillipines, Haiti, Vietnam, Indonesia, Brazil,

         U.S.

          April 4: Food riots in Haiti due to spiking rice price

          April 12: UN peaceworker killed

          April 15: Philippines government asks for an emergency meeting

          April 19-May 10: Coverage of hoarding in US stores
   9
     The supply of rice from Japan has traditionally been withheld from world markets through a trade agreement
between the US and Japan that mandates that Japan buy US rice.
  10
     Retrospectives on this episode emphasize a precaution or fear narrative ("How Fear Turned A Surplus into Scarcity,"
National Public Radio, November 4, 2011 and "A Run on Rice in Asian Communities," New York Times May 1, 2008).


                                                           7
    · May 2008: potential for supply from Japan via agreement with United States. Crisis ends.


    Given the extent of press coverage, producers and stores were likely aware of the cost shock

emanating from the India ban, and they certainly could have aggregated this information from rice

futures and wholesale prices. In Figure 2, we plot the prices of rice futures contracts for delivery

in May, July and September of 2008. At the peak of the hoarding period in April 2008, consumers

and stores both expected rising rice prices in the medium term. July futures prices for rice were

above May and both prices were much above September futures prices. In other words, the market

expected prices to rise until at least September 2008, and this information was publicly available.

These futures indicated a 10 to 20 percent increase in raw rice prices.

    The blue line in Figure 1 shows a search volume index on Google Trends for the term "Rice,"

specifically the weekly intensity of Google searches in the US between 2007-2009. 100 is normalized

as the highest intensity over the period. The red vertical line denotes the week of April 20th, 2008.

There is a notable spike in search volume interest in April consistent with wider interest among

media and households over this same period. This elevated Google search points to consumer

awareness of the cost shock and the potential for higher prices in the future. These searches were

likely prompted by significant media coverage in mid April 2008 of rising food prices and the cost

shock to rice. These search patterns suggest that consumers were particularly attentive to store

prices for rice during this period.



4    Store Sales, Sticky Prices and Household Inventory

In this section we document severe consumer hoarding coinciding with or slightly lagging the

shocks to global and wholesale rice prices shown in Section 3. We then show that, for effectively

all retailers, rice prices on the shelf were sticky--largely unchanged--in the face of these shocks.

In other words, while consumer hoarding followed a sharp increase in wholesale prices, it ac-

tually preceded any increase in shelf prices. Consumer inventory--computed using a standard

algorithm--led retail prices. This is consistent with a sticky-price stockpiling view as a motive for

consumer hoarding in this episode.

    Without access to retail level data, one might naturally interpret these plots as evidence of

a precautionary motive: consumers built up inventories when international prices were at their

                                                  8
peak. That is, the precautionary or hedging narrative has consumers purchasing excess quantities

in the face of high prices. Implicitly, this view depends on flexible retail-prices: with scarcity

driving up prices, and consumers responding by increasing purchases.

       However, the blue line, which displays retail prices, shows that--in line with store sales--

inventories actually peaked before store level prices because store prices are sticky. This granular

data suggests that consumers, aware of the rise in global prices from the media, futures prices, or

other sources, might have seen that prices on the shelf were still low and chose to stock-up, even

holding fixed their precautionary demand.


4.1      Behavior of Store Sales and Prices

We begin by showing the sharp jump in consumer purchases that occurred during the rice crisis.

The red line in Figure 1 shows a significant spike in store-level purchases, peaking in late April and

early May, 2008. Average purchases at the store level in this hoarding period--which we define as the

last two weeks in April and first two week of May, 2008--were 11909 per week, 40 percent above

the average of 8476 in all other weeks in our sample period. The most intense week of hoarding

featured average purchases that were more than 65 percent above average. Notably, this increase

in store sales roughly coincided with or slightly followed the peak of international prices. The

same pattern is evident in Figure 3, where the red line once again captures store-level purchases

and the black line captures a proxy for US wholesale prices, which largely track international rice

prices.

       Figure 3 also shows evidence of the key phenomenon considered in our study: sticky store

prices. The light blue line displays the time series of the weekly average shelf price of rice at

retailers in our sample. While wholesale prices began to rise before the peak of hoarding in late

April and Early may, store-level prices do not rise at all with wholesale prices, staying flat or even

declining slightly until after the peak of hoarding. In other words, hoarding anticipates delayed

updating of shelf-prices.11
  11
     One potential concern is that the observed delay in adjustment of our price index might be an artifact of consumer
substitution across types or qualities of rice. For example, if retailers increased all rice prices, and consumers responded
by substituting to the cheapest products, the two effects might cancel out in our aggregated price index. To address this,
Appendix Figure A.II replicates Figure 3 but includes a measure of prices that holds product types fixed. In particular,
this figure shows the average price across stores for the most popular UPC within each store, defined based upon 2007
revenue.



                                                             9
      Crucially, this delayed updating is not simply an average effect: virtually all stores failed to

update prices until after the hoarding period. To show this, Figure 4 displays the fraction of stores

that updated retail prices in the wake of the shock to international prices. While there is no standard

definition of price adjustment, we take what we believe to be a relatively conservative approach.

We define a store to have updated its price if the price is greater that 125 percent of the 2007 aver-

age. The red portion denotes the hoarding period as defined above. Note that during this period, a

very small fraction of stores updated prices, according to our metric, and even this limited fraction

appears to be on trend with gradual and standard price increases relative to 2007. However, in the

weeks following the hoarding period, stores update rapidly: within a few weeks more than half of

stores updated prices and more than 75 percent updated within a few months.

      These patterns are consistent with a large literature in macroeconomics: retail or supermarket

prices, which consumers face, are sticky and lags the wholesale prices. In particular, we note the

similarity of our finding to work of Nakamura & Zerom (2010) on the gradual passthrough of

wholesale coffee prices to retail coffee prices. The finding that shelf prices are sticky is true for

stores around the world.


4.2     Behavior of Household Inventory and Store Prices

Given that excess store sales actually preempted any change in store prices, we next turn to a

new motive for consumer hoarding: an implicit promotion generated by sticky prices. The logic

of this motive is simple: if there is a shock to wholesale prices, but retailers are slow to respond,

consumers have an incentive to build up inventories before shelf-prices rise. The implicit discount

(relative to a sustainable long run price) generated by sticky prices will cause consumers to shift

demand dynamically and stock up.

      To analyze the role of a sticky-price stockpiling motive, we require a view into consumer in-

ventories. While we are unable to observe inventories directly, the dynamic purchase history in

our household panel allows us to infer them following the method of Hendel & Nevo (2006). To
                                                                                               qit
                                                                         ¯i = T
do so, we estimate monthly consumption as the average household purchase q    t=1              T     over

the entirety of our sample for each consumer i. Setting initial inventories in our sample to zero for

all households, we then calculate inventories for household i at time  as t=1 (qit - q
                                                                                     ¯i ). Put dif-

ferently, inventories at any time  are measured as the cumulative sum of deviations in purchases

                                                   10
from the individual long long-run average purchase in our sample.

    Figure 5 shows that household inventories follow a pattern consistent with a sticky-price stock-

piling or implicit promotion motive. The black line again shows the time-series of international

rice prices. The red line shows average consumer inventory in our household panel, constructed

according to the process described above. In line with the store sales patterns shown in Figure 3,

household inventories just slightly lag the rise in international prices. Consumers sharply built up

inventories following the shock to global prices and gradually drew them down.

    In Table 2 we show more formally that changes in household inventories predict changes in

shelf prices, but that the opposite is not true. This holds at both the national aggregate level,

and locally, at the county level. In the first two columns, we focus on time series regressions

using national aggregates. In the first column, we regress monthly changes in shelf prices on

lagged changes in monthly inventory. We see that the coefficient of interest is 0.055 and statistically

significant at the 5% level. In the second column, we regress monthly changes in inventory on

lagged changes in shelf prices. We find a coefficient of -0.851 but it is not statistically significant.

    In columns 3 and 4, we use panel data at the county level to run analogous regressions, in-

cluding both county and month fixed effects. In column 3, we find a highly statistically significant

coefficient of 0.023 when regressing changes on shelf prices on lagged changes in inventories. This

suggests that the counties in which households built up larger inventories later saw larger changes

in shelf prices. This again aligns with the sticky-price driven implicit promotion motive.

    Conversely, in column 4 we find no evidence that county level changes in shelf prices predict

county level changes in inventories. Areas that saw larger than average jumps in shelf prices did

not see corresponding jumps in household inventories. In general, the basic patterns displayed in

Figure 5 and Table 2 are difficult to rationalize with precaution as the sole driver of this hoarding

episode well, and align well with a implicit promotion view.



5   Estimating Elasticities and Calculating Counterfactuals

The relative timing of changes in global prices, store sales, and shelf prices suggest that sticky

prices is likely to have played a major role in the 2008 rice hoarding episode. In this section, we

gauge and quantify the importance of stick prices. Doing so naturally requires us to estimate the


                                                   11
elasticity of demand for rice among consumers in our sample, which we estimate using an IV

strategy described below. We then consider the responses implied by this elasticity in the context

of the observed retail price patterns and cost shock in our sample to understand the importance of

sticky prices in explaining observed hoarding patterns.


5.1      Sample and Zip-Level Approach

In principle, we could use either household panel data or store level data to calculate demand

elasticities. While there are advantages to each, a major disadvantage of household-level data is

that we are unable observe prices for households who do not purchase rice. As a result, using the

household panel would require us aggregate or associate these households to a particular store

price or zipcode-average price.

       With this in mind, we focus our analysis on our store level data, which poses challenges of its

own. Consumers may respond to an increase in rice prices at a given store by both decreasing pur-

chases and substituting across stores. Consequently, naively calculated price elasticities combine a

consumption response and cross-store substitution. Because our counterfactual focuses on the re-

sponse of aggregate quantities purchased to market wide changes in price, we aggregate individual

stores and conduct our analysis at the market level. In our main specifications, we take a zipcode

as a market, and hence aggregate our data to the zipcode level.12 In other words, our object of
                                                                               ¯ jt ) to changes in the
interest is the sensitivity of average store level quantity sold in zipcode j (Q
                              ¯jt ).
average price of rice in j : (P


5.2      First-Stage Regressions

                                                  ¯jt that exploits the tendency toward national
We propose an instrumental variables strategy for P

uniformity of prices across retail chains, as documented in DellaVigna & Gentzkow (2017).13 To

begin constructing our zipcode level instrument, our first step is to develop a proxy for store level

prices (Pi,k,j ,t for store i belonging to store chain k in zip-code j in week t) using a retail chain level

leave-out mean. That is, for store i which belongs to chain k in zipcode j we construct the average
  12
     Our results are robust to using more general definitions of a market (e.g. states).
  13
    Chain-level policies explain a significant portion--but not all--of individual prices. For example, a regression of
zip-level prices on the chain level instrument we describe below has an R2 of 0.7. This rises to 0.89 in our specification
with full fixed effects.



                                                           12
                                                                   ¯k,xj ,t . Here, the xj subscript
weekly price at retail chain k excluding all stores in zipcode j : P

denotes the exclusion of zipcode j in the mean.

       The purpose of this instrument is to exclude variation in prices that is driven by or correlated

with store level variation in demand. We rely on the fact that prices at individual stores that

are members of national chains are, at least in part, driven by chain level decisions. The key

assumption for identification is that individual store level demand is orthogonal to national pricing

policies.

       There are two natural potential issues with our instrument, which follows generally in the tra-

dition of those proposed by Hausman (1996) and Nevo (2001) (although distinct due to an explicit

focus on chain versus product specific pricing).14 The first is the presence of time varying chain spe-

cific demand shocks--for whatever reason, consumers across the country want to buy rice from a

given chain in a given week--with a corresponding chain level price response. While such a shock

could be generated by chain level advertising policies, we otherwise hope that such shocks will be

absorbed by state × week fixed effects. The second is the possibility that certain stores, or spatially

clustered groups of stores, are so dominant in a given chain that they effectively determine the

national pricing policy. This latter issue we can address using our data on the geographic distribu-

tion of stores (which we do in our specifications that exclude high concentration zipcodes below). In

general, although our strategy requires strong assumptions, we believe it provides a valuable first

pass to understanding consumer elasticities in this market.

       Before conducting our zipcode level instrumental variables strategy, we first confirm that our

chain level leave out mean is correlated with store level prices. To do so we regress weekly log
                                                                              ¯k,xj ,t )):
prices at the store×week level (log (Pi,k,j ,t )) on the leave-out mean (log (P


                                                       ¯k,xj ,t ) + i + s(j ) × t + i,k,j ,t
                         log (Pi,k,j ,t ) = 0 + 1 log (P                                                              (1)


Here i is a store fixed effect and s(j ) × t is a state×week fixed effect. We cluster standard errors

at the zipcode level.

       The first column of Table 3 shows that chain level pricing is indeed predictive of individual
  14
     Specifically our approach is distinct because our instrument considers the average price for rice averaged across
different UPCs, and only includes prices at the same retailer (and not the price at other retailers in different markets).
Furthermore, we ultimately generate a weighted average across retailers and include state × time fixed effects.



                                                           13
store level pricing. Our specification, which includes the full set of fixed effects shown in Equa-

tion 1 gives a coefficient of roughly 0.9 which is highly statistically significant. This is consistent

with DellaVigna & Gentzkow (2017). While the degree to which our instrument explains the first

stage suggests our IV regressions will be quite similar to the OLS, we view this as a validation of

our assumption that prices reflect chain level policies rather than idiosyncratic local variation in

demand.

    To aggregate our store price leave-out mean to the zipcode level we construct a within zipcode

average of chain level leave-out means, weighted by the shares of each chain in the zipcode:


                                            ¯xj ,t =
                                            P           kj P
                                                           ¯k,xj ,t .
                                                       k


Here, kj is the share of total stores in zipcode j that are members of chain k . In our main IV
                                                         ¯xj ,t ) in our first stage:
specifications, we instrument for log (Pj ,t ) with log (P


                                                    ¯xj ,t ) + j + s(j ) × t + j ,t .
                          log (Pj ,t ) = 0 + 1 log (P                                               (2)


Here j represents a zipcode fixed effect and s(j ) × t is again a state×week fixed effect.

    In the remaining columns of Table 3, we show our first stage results, which are consistent with

those shown at the store level. Average store prices at the zipcode level are well predicted by the

national pricing strategies of the stores operating within the zipcode. In columns 2-4, the unit of

observation is the zipcode-week. In column 2 we use the full sample, and find a highly significant

coefficient of .955. The third column--labeled non-hoarding--leaves out the weeks of the hoarding

period, which we define as April 19th to May 10. The results are virtually identical to the full

sample.

    In the fourth column, which is labeled low concentration, we show that our approach is robust to

excluding areas in which chains have particularly large presences (in case demand in those areas

is driving pricing policies). To do so, we leave out stores in what we call high concentration areas

for each chain. Specifically, for each chain k , we calculate the fraction of stores in each state. If

that fraction exceeds 0.32 (the median), we omit all stores in chain k in that state. Our estimated

coefficient is very similar to our earlier results at 0.976.



                                                        14
      The final column shows that our first stage results are robust to defining a market at the state

rather than zipcode level. We aggregate our date to the state level (with a leave out chain price ex-

cludes stores in the state in question). The coefficient is smaller at 0.812 but still strongly significant

with an F-statistic of 118.1.


5.3     Second-stage Regressions

                                                                                  ¯ jt ) is given by
Our second-stage regressions for the average store sales in a zipcode×week level (Q


                                     ¯ jt ) = 0 + 1 log (P
                                log (Q                   ¯jt ) + j + s(j ) × t + jt .                   (3)


     ¯ jt represents the average store level quantity sold within zipcode j , and P
Here Q                                                                            ¯jt represents

the average zipcode level price. Again j represents a zipcode fixed effect and s(j ) × t a state

week fixed effect. This specification hence focuses only on cross-zipcode variation in prices within a

state×week. Under the assumption that households located in a zip code buy their rice from stores

in that zip code, the coefficients identify price sensitivities that are based only on intertemporal

substitution or true consumption elasticities.15

      In the first column of Table 4, we present results from a simplified OLS version of Equation

3, which provides a baseline elasticity while also allowing us to validate the aggregate increase

in sales during the hoarding period. Specifically, we regress log quantities on log prices while

controlling for week of year fixed effects (to adjust for seasonality), zipcode fixed effects, and an

indicator equal to one in all zipcodes during the hoarding period (April 19th to May 10). The

coefficient on Hoarding Period is 0.321 and statistically significant. This implies that average store

level volume in a zip-code rose by 37.85 percent (100*(exp(0.321)-1)=0.3785) during the hoarding

period. As expected, this is very similar to the estimated 40 percent increase we found when

considering simple means in Subsection 4.1.

      The estimated elasticity with this minimal set of fixed effects is -0.719, suggesting that a 1 per-

cent increase in average zipcode level prices decreases sales by just over 0.7 percent. We find

similar results when using an OLS approach to estimate the full specification outlined in Equation

3, with a coefficient of -0.849.
 15
      Our estimates based on state level aggregation display similar results.



                                                            15
       In columns 3 through 5, we conduct a two stage least squares approach on various samples. All

provide results consistent with the OLS. Throughout, in the first stage, we instrument for log prices

according to the specification outlined in Equation 2. Column 3, which includes the full sample,

gives an elasticity of -0.825. Column 4, which excludes the hoarding period, gives an elasticity

of -0.874, and column 5, which excludes stores in high concentration zipcodes, gives an elasticity

of -0.818. While defining a market at the state level considerably reduces our sample size, it has

little effect on the magnitude or significance of the elasticity, which we estimate at -0.802. In what

follows, we take the coefficient in column 4 as our preferred estimate, as it is not contaminated

by the unusual dynamics occurring during the hoarding period. This estimate suggests that, in

normal times, a one percent increase in rice prices generates a roughly 0.87 percent reduction in

rice purchased.


5.4      Gauging the Importance of the Sticky-Price Motive

In this subsection, we use our estimated price elasticities to account for the excess quantity sold.

Of course, doing so requires an estimate on the implicit price discount faced by consumers at the

time. During the hoarding period the average price of an 80 ounce bag was $4.69. Ultimately, this

price rose to $6.04 on average in the post-hoarding period of our sample. Note that this suggests an

approximately 30 percent pass-through from from global raw rice prices to retail prices, which is

similar to what studies typically find for other storeable goods such as coffee (Nakamura & Zerom,

2010).16

       From an ex-post perspective, this represents an implicit 22 percent promotion on rice. In other

words, households benefited from a more than 20 percent discount in prices during the hoarding

period. Directly applying our demand elasticity estimates (-0.874) to this discount suggests that

stickiness was responsible for half of the 40 percent increase in quantity purchased during the

crisis.

       However, using our estimates directly requires a strong assumption, which is that -0.874 cap-

tures the relevant demand elasticity for consumers facing a one-off (and large) deviation in prices.

As Hendel & Nevo (2006) note, consumer responses during promotional periods may be higher

relative to consumer responses to permanent price changes, exactly because consumers shift de-
  16
       The IMF rice series indicates that global prices in the post-hoarding period were 86 percent above the 2007 price.


                                                             16
mand dynamically and stock up, as we have emphasized. While the variation in our instrument

may include some short term promotions,17 it is likely to also include some longer term price

trends. Consequently, it is possible that the above may be an underestimate of the appropriate

elasticity.

      To account for this underestimation, we scale our estimated elasticity by 1.3 based on the find-

ings in Hendel & Nevo (2006). With this scaled estimate, we find that a 23 percent discount during

the hoarding period accounts for a 26 percent increase in sales (0.874*1.3*0.22), representing more

than 65 percent of the total hoarding observed during this episode. These exercises are approxi-

mate, and represent a range of potential estimates based on a series of reasonable assumptions.


5.5     Consumption Versus Retail Arbitrage

We cannot in general distinguish between how much of the hoarding was due to precautionary,

implicit promotion effect or retail arbitrage with this approach, only that stick prices contributed

significantly to hoarding. However, we can potentially distinguish between own use and resell

using our house panel data. Notably, households may purchase in bulk in order to resell at higher

prices through alternative means, perhaps online or through non-traditional retailers.18

      Specifically, we track within-household purchases over our full sample period, and define re-

tail arbitrageurs as households that exhibit extraordinary purchases during the hoarding period

(relative to their history). We define an extraordinary purchases as five or more standard 80 ounce

bags of rice (400 ounces or more). We see this as a cautious definition, assuming that arbitrage

on a scale of fewer than 5 bags is unlikely to be profitable. We then consider two definitions of

retail arbitrageurs. We define likely retail arbitrageurs as households that never purchase more than

one bag (80 ounces) of rice in a month outside of the hoarding period, but purchase 400 ounces or

more in at least one month during the hoarding period (for households, defined as April and May,

2008). As a more conservative approach, we define potential retail arbitrageurs as households that

never purchase more than five bag (80 ounces) of rice in a month outside of the hoarding period,

but purchase 400 ounces or more in at least one month during the hoarding period.
  17
     Given the relatively small aggregate change in consumption before versus after the hoarding period, despite a
massive price change, it is possible that our estimated elasticity is largely driven by dynamic re-allocations in response
to short term promotions. In this case, using our estimated elasticity directly would be appropriate.
  18
     Online price gouging has received significant attention during the COVID-19 pandemic, e.g. https://www.
nytimes.com/2020/03/14/technology/coronavirus-purell-wipes-amazon-sellers.html.


                                                           17
      We put forth two broad takeaways from this exercise. The first is that there do appear to be

retail arbitrageurs, including a small handful of households that never purchase outside of the

hoarding period, and purchase more than 2000 ounces of rice in a single month within the period

itself. In other words, there appear to be some households that purchase in patterns consistent

with a resale motive.

      The second is that these households do not appear to be responsible for a large fraction of

the excess purchases we observe in our household sample. Figure 6 displays averages quantities

purchased over time for (i) the full sample in black, (ii) the full sample excluding likely arbitrageurs

in blue, and (iii) the full sample excluding potential arbitrageurs in red. While eliminating these

households naturally reduces the peak of hoarding somewhat, the reduction is marginal, even for

our conservative estimate. There is pronounced hoarding excluding these households. In other

words, most hoarding is driven by households purchasing quantities that are larger than is typical

for them, but not so large that they could profitably resell.

      To quantify the patterns shown in Figure 6 , Table 5 shows regressions of monthly quantities

purchased at the household level on dummies for hoarding months, as well as a constant. The

coefficients on these dummies represent the quantity of excess purchases in the hoarding period.

In the first column we include the full sample, while columns two and three exclude likely and

potential arbitrageurs, respectively. The key result in these tables is that there was significant

excess hoarding even in the populations excluding these arbitrageurs. For example, if we leave

out the likely arbitrageurs, excess quantities purchased in April 2008 decline by only 10 percent

relative to the full sample (while they decline by only 30 percent when leaving out all potential

arbitrageurs).


5.6     Using Placebos to Address Peak Demand and Loss Leader Pricing

Another concern is that the patterns we observe might simply be an artifact of a focused period of

peak demand for consumer staples more broadly, with stores keeping the price of rice low to draw

in customers. Evidence suggests that producers often do not raise prices during periods of peak

demand, perhaps due to loss-leader pricing strategies (see, e.g., Chevalier et al. , 2003). Perhaps

rice, which is not typically considered a loss leader good, might serve a role during this particular

hoarding period. To confirm that our findings are not driven by such loss leader pricing strategies,

                                                  18
we check to see whether a similar hoarding effect occurred in rice substitutes such as noodles,

dumplings, and spaghetti.

      Appendix Figure A.III indicates that there is no such pattern when we consider noodles and

dumplings or spaghetti. Aggregate sales of either category do not exhibit any abnormal increase

around April and May 2008 when compared to similar periods in 2007 and 2009. Regressions

similar to those we conduct in earlier subsections confirm this finding (if anything, we see slight

decreases in purchases during these periods). In sum, our placebo tests using other staple foods

like pasta or noodles do not find any discernible hoarding in this other staples, i.e. stores do not

appear to be practicing loss leader pricing.

      The lack of excess demand for other goods displayed in these placebos also highlight a key dif-

ference between our paper and earlier work on sticky store prices in the aftermath of disasters, be

it earthquakes, hurricanes or snowstorms (see, e.g. Cavallo et al. , 2014; Gagnon & Lopez-Salido,

2015). A crucial difference is that those papers view such disasters as demand shocks, at least

in part. Facing restricted access to roadways and potentially closed restaurants, many consumers

stockpile food during disasters due to the hassle of having to shop during or after the storm. How-

ever, this demand interpretation makes it difficult to isolate a sticky-price motive for stockpiling.



6     Heterogeneity by Geographic and Household Demographics

6.1     Heterogeneity Across High vs. Low Demand Areas

To further confirm the existence and relevance of sticky prices in this context, our final exercises

consider differences in hoarding and price dynamics across demographic groups. We first con-

sider price and quantity variation across areas with high vs. low demand for rice. We show that

despite significant geographic variation in the degree of hoarding, price dynamics were similar

throughout. We consider two definitions of high demand. The first, an ex-post measure, defines

high demand areas as the ten states the experienced the largest proportional deviation in quantity

sold during the hoarding period. The second, an ex-ante measure, is the set of zipcodes with above

median rice purchases per capita in 2007. The differences in quantities between these areas and

all other areas is perhaps shown most clearly in the solid black and red lines presented in all three

panels of Figure 7.

                                                  19
   In both panels, the sample of stores is split into two groups. Black lines show store sales aver-

ages for those in "high demand" areas while red lines show averages for those in "low demand"

areas. The differences between the red and black solid lines in each of these panels shows that

there was significant geographical heterogeneity in the intensity of hoarding during this period.

We also plot average store prices across these two areas to see if there are any differences in the

average gradual price adjustment pattern we documented earlier. Despite large differences in the

magnitude of hoarding in these differences there is little difference in store price dynamics, i.e. the

dotted store price lines, consistent with sticky prices.

   In Panel A of Table 6, we estimate the differences in hoarding across these zip codes more

formally. The first column of Panel A estimates the baseline or average hoarding across all areas

using a simple regression of weekly store level rice sales on a dummy variable equal to one for all

stores during the hoarding period. In our weekly data, we define this to be the weeks of April 19th

to May 10th. We further include store and week-of-year fixed effects (i.e. 52 week dummies, to

control for seasonality). Our sample includes all store-weeks between 2007-2009, and we cluster

standard errors at the zipcode level. The coefficient suggests that, during the hoarding period,

stores sold 3780 additional ounces of rice per week on average, consistent with our earlier findings.

The estimate is highly significant.

   The last two columns of Panel A in Table 6 then split up this effect for high versus low demand

areas using the definitions for areas as in the plots in Figure 7. We display the coefficient 1 from

the following specification. For store i, in zipcode j and week t we estimate:


 Volumeijt = 0 + 1 (1{t  Hoarding Period} × 1{j  High Demand Area}) + i + t +                  ijt   (4)


Our dependent variable of interest is again weekly store-level volume. Our primary regressor of

interest is the interaction of an indicator for the hoarding period with a proxy for location j being

a high demand area. Our proxies are exactly those included in Figure 7. We include store fixed

effects i and week fixed effects t . We cluster standard errors at the county level.

   Across both specifications, we see that our proxies for high demand areas indeed translate

to larger and statistically significant increases in quantity sold during the hoarding period. The

coefficient in the second column suggests that high hoarding states saw a differential rise of just


                                                  20
over 5000 ounces per week when compared to other states. Similarly, stores in high rice consuming

zipcodes sold just over 3000 additional ounces per week during the hoarding period, on average,

when compared to other zipcodes.

       In Panel B, we repeat the specifications shown in Panel A, but include the price in store i, in

zipcode j and week t as a dependent variable. The first column shows a significant negative coeffi-

cient on aggregate during the hoarding period. This simply reflects the fact that prices were much

lower during these weeks compared with the average in the post-hoarding period. However, the

remaining three columns show that there was little or no difference in prices across these regions,

despite the massive difference in hoarding. While there are small positive coefficients, on the order

of $0.04, these are extremely small in comparison to the more than $1 jump in prices seen after the

hoarding episode concluded.


6.2      Heterogeneity by Wealth

We next consider heterogeneity in the quantity of rice purchased across the distribution of wealth

in our household panel. Panel A of Figure 8 shows average quantities purchased inside (in red) and

outside (in black) the hoarding period across all bins of household income available in our data.19

The basic pattern is evident in this figure. At the very low end of the income distribution the dif-

ference in purchases is not substantial inside and outside of this period, while the degree of excess

purchases in the hoarding period--the difference between the red and black lines--increases for

higher income households. Panel B shows the degree of excess purchases more succinctly. House-

holds with incomes below $10000 exhibit the smallest excess purchases during the period, while

the highest income individuals have the largest. Excluding a slight dip for those with income

between $100,000-200,000, the pattern is monotonic. Higher income households purchased more

during the hoarding period.

       Table 7 quantifies this basic pattern: low income households hoarded significantly less in this

episode. This table shows regressions of monthly quantity purchased at the household level on

month×year fixed effects, a dummy for low-income households, and the interaction between the

low-income dummy and the hoarding period (defined as April and May of 2008 in this monthly
  19
   Our data does not report exact income levels, but rather income in relatively coarse bins. We plot each point at the
midpoint of the relevant bin.



                                                          21
data). The coefficient on the low-income dummy represents the average difference in quantity

purchased for low-income households, while the coefficient on the interaction shows the difference

in excess purchases for low-income households during the hoarding period. A negative coefficient

on the interaction suggests that low-income household hoard to a lesser degree. We consider four

definitions of low income: the lowest bin in our sample (households within incomes below $5000),

the lowest ventile, the lowest decile, and the lowest quartile.

    Across all definitions we see negative and significant coefficients on the interaction, suggest-

ing that low income households do not hoard to the same degree as middle and high income

households. For the lowest household income bracket, the increase in rice purchased during the

hoarding period was 4.8 ounces below the increase for other households. This is true despite the

fact that the lowest income bracket purchases roughly 2.5 ounces more rice per month than wealth-

ier households in normal times. For the lowest ventile, the increase in rice purchased during the

hoarding period was 2.5 ounces below the increase for other households. Similarly, the lowest

decile and quartile both saw increases that were roughly 1.5 ounces below the average the increase

for higher income households.

    Notably, this pattern holds both when considering the lowest income bracket, which is com-

posed of households that actual purchase more rice on average in typical periods (compared with

higher income households), and when considering the lowest quartile, households that purchase

less rice on average compared with higher income households. While we cannot confirm the mech-

anism underlying these results, a natural explanation given the importance of sticky prices is the

difference in liquidity across high and low income households. Even if both recognize the implicit

promotion provided by sticky prices, low income households may be unable to take advantage of

the promotion if they do not have sufficient cash on hand.



7   External Validity, Covid-19 Pandemic and Policy Implications

A number of empirical findings foreshadow reports on the nature and concerns of hoarding dur-

ing the Covid-19 Pandemic--alleviating any concerns about external validity. First, reports point

to some issues with retail arbitrage due to sticky prices, but the vast majority was for own use

consistent with our findings. Second, much of the concerns were about hoarding by rich house-


                                                 22
holds creating distributional concerns for low income households, very much consistent with our

findings.20

         We see two potential policy implications that follow from our study. The first is that regula-

tions and concern over price gouging for the types of reputable retailers observed in the Nielson

data may be misplaced. The patterns we observe suggest that retailers are inherently slow at or

unwilling to raise prices, even in the face of relatively straightforward cost shocks. Of course,

this does not mean that price gouging does not exist, but rather that it may be concentrated in

less formal establishments. Consistent with our sticky-price view of hoarding, media coverage

of the Covid-19 hoarding episode points to price gouging among online resellers as being a far

bigger issue than reputable retailers.21 Quantity restrictions may be effective in preventing such

price-gougers, to the extent that they operate by purchasing at formal establishments before prices

rise (although our analysis suggests that this sort of retail arbitrage is not the primary driver of

hoarding episodes).

         Secondly, concerns over price gouging are often framed in terms distributional concerns: rel-

atively low income or otherwise vulnerable groups may be unable to afford exorbitant prices.

However, our results suggests that low income households hoard to lesser degrees even in the

absence of any price increase. To the extent that this finding is driven by liquidity, this suggests

that price controls may be insufficient to protect key groups in hoarding episodes. For example,

low income households may not have sufficient cash on hand to stock up on staples before short-

ages occur. Policies that ensure protected groups retain access to staples--as, for example, some

grocery stores have done for the elderly during the COVID-19 pandemic--should be considered

within the regulatory toolkit.



8        Conclusion

Using US supermarket scanner data during the 2008 Global Rice Crisis, we point to the neglected

role of sticky store prices in generating an additional motive for intertemporal storage. Follow-

ing US news coverage of global supply disruptions, Google searches and household inventories
    20
     For a contemporary report on this phenomenon, see a W ashington Post article at https://www.washingtonpost.
com/business/2020/03/20/if-coronavirus-doesnt-get-us-starvation-will-growing-number-americans-say-they-cant-afford
  21
     See Forbes article coverage of this issue at https://www.forbes.com/sites/joanverdon/2020/03/04/
coronavirus-related-price-gouging-is-a-risky-business-for-retailers/


                                                     23
spiked, anticipating delayed retail-price adjustment. Holding fixed precautionary demand, sticky

shelf prices generate an incentive for households to hoard. Recognizing that prices are temporarily

low, households shift demand intertemporally and stockpile as if they were facing a retail promo-

tion or to engage in retail arbitrage. We estimate that this sticky-price effect can generate stockpil-

ing responsible for a non-trivial portion of observed hoarding--with the vast majority of hoarding

we attribute to own use. Interestingly, we find that hoarding is concentrated in richer households,

consistent with distributional concerns reported in media during the Covid-19 Pandemic hoarding

episode. We draw out new policy implications.




                                                  24
References

A CHARYA , V IRAL V, L OCHSTOER , L ARS A, & R AMADORAI , TARUN. 2013. Limits to arbitrage and

  hedging: Evidence from commodity markets. Journal of Financial Economics, 109(2), 441­465.

A NDERSON , E RIC , M ALIN , B ENJAMIN A, N AKAMURA , E MI , S IMESTER , D UNCAN , & S TEINSSON ,

  J ÓN. 2017. Informational rigidities and the stickiness of temporary sales. Journal of Monetary

  Economics, 90, 64­83.

A NDERSON , E RIC T, & S IMESTER , D UNCAN I. 2010. Price stickiness and customer antagonism.

  The quarterly journal of economics, 125(2), 729­765.

B ARRO , R OBERT J. 1972. A theory of monopolistic price adjustment. The Review of Economic Studies,

  39(1), 17­26.

B ENABOU , R OLAND. 1989. Optimal price dynamics and speculation with a storable good. Econo-

  metrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 41­80.

B ESSEMBINDER , H ENDRIK. 1992. Systematic risk, hedging pressure, and risk premiums in futures

  markets. The Review of Financial Studies, 5(4), 637­667.

B ILS , M ARK , & K LENOW, P ETER J. 2004. Some evidence on the importance of sticky prices. Journal

  of political economy, 112(5), 947­985.

C AVALLO , A LBERTO , C AVALLO , E DUARDO , & R IGOBON , R OBERTO. 2014. Prices and supply dis-

  ruptions during natural disasters. Review of Income and Wealth, 60, S449­S471.

C HEVALIER , J UDITH A, K ASHYAP, A NIL K, & R OSSI , P ETER E. 2003. Why don't prices rise during

  periods of peak demand? Evidence from scanner data. American Economic Review, 93(1), 15­37.

C HOI , H YUNYOUNG , & VARIAN , H AL. 2012. Predicting the present with Google Trends. Economic

  Record, 88, 2­9.

D A , Z HI , E NGELBERG , J OSEPH , & G AO , P ENGJIE. 2011. In search of attention. The Journal of

  Finance, 66(5), 1461­1499.




                                                   25
D AVIS , C ALE W REN , et al. . 2008. An analysis of the enactment of anti-price gouging laws. Ph.D. thesis,

  Montana State University-Bozeman, College of Agriculture.

D AWE , D AVID , & S LAYTON , T OM. 2010. The world rice market crisis of 2007-2008. Pages 15­29 of:

  D AWE , D AVID (ed), The rice crisis: Markets, policies and food security. London, Earthsan and FAO.

D EATON , A NGUS , & L AROQUE , G UY. 1992. On the behaviour of commodity prices. The review of

  economic studies, 59(1), 1­23.

D ELLAV IGNA , S TEFANO , & G ENTZKOW, M ATTHEW. 2017. Uniform pricing in us retail chains. Tech.

  rept. National Bureau of Economic Research.

E NGELBERG , J OSEPH E, & PARSONS , C HRISTOPHER A. 2011. The causal impact of media in finan-

  cial markets. The Journal of Finance, 66(1), 67­97.

E RDEM , T ÜLIN , I MAI , S USUMU , & K EANE , M ICHAEL P. 2003. Brand and quantity choice dynam-

  ics under price uncertainty. Quantitative Marketing and economics, 1(1), 5­64.

FAMA , E UGENE F, & F RENCH , K ENNETH R. 1987. Commodity futures prices: Some evidence on

  forecast power, premiums, and the theory of storage. Journal of Business, 60(1), 55­73.

FANG , L ILY, & P ERESS , J OEL. 2009. Media coverage and the cross-section of stock returns. The

  Journal of Finance, 64(5), 2023­2052.

G AGNON , E TIENNE , & L OPEZ -S ALIDO , D AVID. 2015. Small price responses to large demand

  shocks. Journal of the European Economic Association.

G IBERSON , M ICHAEL. 2011. The problem with price gouging laws. Regulation, 34, 48.

G OEL , S HARAD , H OFMAN , J AKE M, L AHAIE , S ÉBASTIEN , P ENNOCK , D AVID M, & WATTS , D UN -

  CAN   J. 2010. Predicting consumer behavior with Web search. Proceedings of the National academy

  of sciences, 107(41), 17486­17490.

G ÖNÜL , F ÜSUN , & S RINIVASAN , K ANNAN. 1996. Estimating the impact of consumer expectations

  of coupons on purchase behavior: A dynamic structural model. Marketing science, 15(3), 262­279.

G ORTON , G ARY B, H AYASHI , F UMIO , & R OUWENHORST, K G EERT. 2013. The fundamentals of

  commodity futures returns. Review of Finance, 17, 35­105.

                                                    26
G RÁDA , C ORMAC Ó. 2009. Famine: a short history. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

H AMILTON , J AMES D. 2009. Causes and consequences of the oil shock of 2007-08. Tech. rept. National

  Bureau of Economic Research.

H AUSMAN , J ERRY A. 1996. Valuation of new goods under perfect and imperfect competition.

  Pages 207­248 of: The economics of new goods. University of Chicago Press.

H ENDEL , I GAL , & N EVO , AVIV. 2006. Sales and consumer inventory. The RAND Journal of Eco-

  nomics, 37(3), 543­561.

K ILIAN , L UTZ , & M URPHY, D ANIEL P. 2014. The role of inventories and speculative trading in the

  global market for crude oil. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29(3), 454­478.

K WON , K YOUNG -N AN , & K WON , Y OO J IN. 2007. Demographics in sales promotion proneness: a

  socio-cultural approach. ACR North American Advances.

M ANKIW, N G REGORY, & R EIS , R ICARDO. 2002. Sticky information versus sticky prices: a pro-

  posal to replace the New Keynesian Phillips curve. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4),

  1295­1328.

N AKAMURA , E MI , & S TEINSSON , J ÓN. 2008. Five facts about prices: A reevaluation of menu cost

  models. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4), 1415­1464.

N AKAMURA , E MI , & Z EROM , D AWIT. 2010. Accounting for incomplete pass-through. The Review

  of Economic Studies, 77(3), 1192­1230.

N EVO , AVIV. 2001. Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry. Econometrica,

  69(2), 307­342.

P RIEST, T YLER. 2012. The Dilemmas of Oil Empire. Journal of American History, 99(1), 236­251.

R OTEMBERG , J ULIO J. 2005. Customer anger at price increases, changes in the frequency of price

  adjustment and monetary policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(4), 829­852.

S CHEINKMAN , J OSE A, & S CHECHTMAN , J ACK. 1983. A simple competitive model with produc-

  tion and storage. The Review of Economic Studies, 50(3), 427­441.


                                                 27
S HESHINSKI , E YTAN , & W EISS , Y ORAM. 1977. Inflation and costs of price adjustment. The Review

  of Economic Studies, 44(2), 287­303.

S INGLETON , K ENNETH J. 2013. Investor flows and the 2008 boom/bust in oil prices. Management

  Science, 60(2), 300­318.

S LAYTON , T OM. 2009. Rice crisis forensics: How Asian governments carelessly set the world rice market

  on fire. Tech. rept.

S UN , B AOHONG. 2005. Promotion effect on endogenous consumption. Marketing science, 24(3),

  430­443.

S UN , B AOHONG , N ESLIN , S COTT A, & S RINIVASAN , K ANNAN. 2003. Measuring the impact of

  promotions on brand switching when consumers are forward looking. Journal of marketing re-

  search, 40(4), 389­405.

TANG , K E , & X IONG , W EI. 2010. Index investment and financialization of commodities. Tech. rept.

  National Bureau of Economic Research.

W OODFORD , M ICHAEL. 2009. Information-constrained state-dependent pricing. Journal of Mone-

  tary Economics, 56, S100­S124.

Z WOLINSKI , M ATT. 2008. The ethics of price gouging. Business Ethics Quarterly, 18(3), 347­378.




                                                  28
                                        TABLE 1: S UMMARY S TATISTICS

                                             XXXXXXXXX           XXXXXXXXX           XXXXXXXXX           XXXXXXXXX
                                                                    Panel A: Store Level Data
                                                  Mean                 S.D.                Min.                Max
 Volume (oz)                                      8564.1             19788.0                 4               1648736
 Price (80oz)                                      5.33                1.56                0.63                43.8
 Local Population (1000s)                         1173.4              2018.8               3.35               9840.0
 Median Income (1000s)                             57.2                15.5                22.4                120.1
 Total Stores                                      8870
 Weeks                                             156
                                                                 Panel B: Household Panel Data
                                                  Mean                S.D.                 Min.                Max
 Quantity (oz)                                     10.1               57.0                  0                 10000
 Quantity Cond. on Purchase (oz)                   78.0               140.9                 2                 10000
 Monthly Purchases                                 0.15                0.42                 0                   13
 HH Income (1000s)                                 58.8                34.9                 3                  220
 Household Size                                    2.58                1.33                 1                    9
 Total Households                                 42172
 Months                                             36
 Summary statistics for store level and household panel data. Volume (oz) refers to volume sold at the store× week level.
Quantity refers to the total purchased by a household at the monthly level. Price is measured as the average unit price sold
at the store × week level, normalized to 80oz. Population and income are merged to stores at the zip level.




                                                            29
             TABLE 2: H OUSEHOLD I NVENTORIES P REDICT S HELF P RICES

                             XXXXXXXXX          XXXXXXXXX          XXXXXXXXX           XXXXXXXXX
                                  National Aggregates                        County Level
                              Shelf Price         Inventory          Shelf Price         Inventory
 Lagged  Inventory                0.055                                  0.023
                                 (0.021)                               (0.006)
 Lagged  Shelf Price                               -0.851                                   0.035
                                                   (1.409)                                 (0.037)
 Mean of Dep. Var.                0.052              -0.041              0.061             -0.045
 R2                                0.19              0.011               0.036             0.069
 N                                  34                 34                5425               5431
 County FE                         No                  No                 Yes                Yes
 Month FE                          No                  No                 Yes                Yes
 Regressions of monthly changes in shelf prices on lagged monthly changes in consumer inventory, and vice
versa. Shelf prices are measured as the average unit price paid by consumers in our household panel, av-
eraged across all consumers. Inventories are calculated following the procedure in Hendel & Nevo (2006).
For each household, we estimate monthly consumption based on average purchases throughout our sam-
ple period. We then construct inventories in each month as the cumulative difference between purchases
and consumption up to that month. Columns 1 and 2 show results aggregated at the national level, while
columns 3 and 4 show results aggregated at the county level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                  30
            TABLE 3: F IRST S TAGE ­ S TORE P RICES A RE D RIVEN BY N ATIONAL C HAIN P RICING P OLICIES

                                         XXXXXXXXX            XXXXXXXXX            XXXXXXXXX                 XXXXXXXXX               XXXXXXXXX
                                          Store Level          Full Sample        Non-Hoarding           Low Concentration             State Level

 Log(Leave-Out Chain Price)                   0.906                0.955                 0.952                    0.976                    0.812
                                             (0.0130)             (0.0175)              (0.0181)                 (0.0215)                 (0.0747)
 F-Statistic                                 4891.0               2972.5                2751.1                   2058.5                    118.1
 N                                          1382371               223379                217652                   178919                    7644
 Week FE                                        No                  No                    No                        No                      No
 Week × Year FE                                Yes                  Yes                   Yes                      Yes                      Yes
 Store/Zipcode/State FE                        Yes                  Yes                   Yes                      Yes                      Yes
 State × Week × Year FE                        Yes                  Yes                   Yes                      Yes                      No
 First stage regressions of log rice prices on leave out chain level rice prices. In the first two columns, the unit of observation is the store-week
prices are constructed as the average unit price sold within each store. To construct the leave out chain price for store i belonging to chain k in
zipcode j and week t, we take the average week t price for all stores in chain k in excluding those in zipcode j . In columns 3-5, the unit of obser-
vation is the zipcode-week. Prices, in these columns, refer to the equal weighted average of the prices used in the first two columns across stores
in zipcode j . The leave out chain price is similarly the equal weighted average of this measure across all stores in zipcode j . The final column
shows a similar aggregation, but at the state level (and the leave out chain price excludes stores in the state in question). The column labeled
non-hoarding leaves out the weeks of the hoarding period. The column labeled low concentration restricts the sample by leaving out stores in
high concentration areas for each chain. Specifically, for each chain k, we calculate the fraction of stores in each state. If that fraction exceeds 0.32
(the median), we omit all stores in chain k in that state. The column labeled state level repeats the full sample specification, but averages prices
and quantities at the state level. All specifications show standard errors clustered at the zipcode level (or state level, in column 6) in parentheses.
Store/Zipcode/State FE refers to store fixed effects in columns 1 and 2, zipcode in 3 through 5, and state in 6. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                          31
                                                      TABLE 4: S ECOND S TAGE ­D EMAND E LASTICITIES

                                  XXXXXXXXX            XXXXXXXXX            XXXXXXXXX                XXXXXXXXX                    XXXXXXXXX                 XXXXXXXXX
                                                  OLS                      IV: Full Sample        IV: Non-Hoarding          IV: Low Concentration           IV: State Level

 Hoarding Period                       0.321
                                      (0.00505)
 Log(Price of 80oz Bag)              -0.719               -0.849               -0.825                   -0.874                       -0.818                    -0.802
                                     (0.0152)             (0.0190)             (0.0456)                 (0.0408)                     (0.0592)                  (0.157)
 Mean of Dep. Var.                      8.014               8.013                8.014                    8.005                        8.004                      8.564
 N                                     223691              223535               223379                   217652                       178919                      7644
 Week FE                                 Yes                 No                    No                      No                           No                         No
 Week × Year FE                          No                  Yes                   Yes                     Yes                          Yes                        Yes
 Zipcode/State FE                        Yes                 Yes                   Yes                     Yes                          Yes                        Yes
 State × Week × Year FE                  No                  Yes                   Yes                     Yes                          Yes                        No
 Regressions of log average store level volume sold on the log price of a 80oz bag, and, in column 1, a dummy for the hoarding period. The hoarding period is defined
as the weeks of April 19th-May 10th, 2008. In columns 1-5, the unit of observation is the zipcode-week. In column 6, the unit of observation is the state-week. Prices
are constructed as the average unit price sold within each store, and then averaged across stores. In all IV specifications, Log(Price of 80oz Bag) is instrumented with the
Log(Leave-Out Chain Price). For each zipcode, this instrument is constructed using the following procedure: For store i belonging to chain k in zipcode j and week t, we
take the average week t price for all stores in chain k in excluding those in zipcode j . We then take the equal weighted average of this measure across all stores in zip-
code j . The column labeled non-hoarding leaves out the weeks of the hoarding period. The column labeled low concentration restricts the sample by leaving out stores in
high concentration areas for each chain. Specifically, for each chain k, we calculate the fraction of stores in each state. If that fraction exceeds 0.32 (the median), we omit
all stores in chain k in that state. The column labeled state level repeats the full sample specification, but averages prices and quantities at the state level (and constructs
the leave out mean by excluding any store in the state in question). All specifications show standard errors clustered at the zipcode level (or state level, in column 6) in
parentheses. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                     32
                              TABLE 5: O WN C ONSUMPTION VERSUS R ETAIL A RBITRAGE

                 XXXXXXXXXXXXX                        XXXXXXXXXXXXX                                   XXXXXXXXXXXXX
                      Full Sample            Without Likely Retail Arbitrageurs            Without Potential Retail Arbitrageus
 April 2008               6.752                                6.193                                           4.781
                         (0.455)                              (0.437)                                         (0.368)
 May 2008                 4.523                                3.677                                           2.722
                         (0.394)                              (0.347)                                         (0.315)
 N                      1187057                               1187057                                        1187057
 Regressions of monthly household rice purchases in ounces for our household panel on dummies for April and May of 2008. Non-
hoarding periods refers to all other months between 2007 and 2009, and represents the constant in the regression. Full sample refers to our
full household panel. Without likely retail arbitrageurs excludes any households that (i) have a maximum purchase of 80 or fewer ounces
of rice in any month outside of the hoarding period and (ii) purchase more than 400 ounces of rice in either April or May of 2008. Without
potential retail arbitrageurs excludes any households that (i) have a maximum purchase of 400 or fewer ounces of rice in any month out-
side of the hoarding period, and (ii) purchase more than 400 ounces of rice in either April or May of 2008. Standard errors are clustered
at the household level. p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                   33
                                 TABLE 6: C HANGES IN Q UANTITY AND P RICE D URING H OARDING P ERIOD
                                              A CROSS H IGH VS . L OW H OARDING R EGIONS

                                               XXXXXXXXX           XXXXXXXXX           XXXXXXXXX           XXXXXXXXX           XXXXXXXXX           XXXXXXXXX
                                                     Volume Sold at Store Level (Ounces)                                 Price for 80 Ounce Bag

 Hoarding Period                                3689.927                                                      -0.542
                                                (223.625)                                                     (0.012)
 Hoarding Period x Hoarding State                                   4878.239                                                        0.043
                                                                    (508.100)                                                      (0.023)
 Hoarding Period x High Rice FIPS                                                       3032.942                                                        0.043
                                                                                        (405.325)                                                      (0.020)
 Mean of Dep. Var.                                 8564.3               8564.3              8564.3               5.33                5.33                5.33
 N                                                1383462              1383462             1383462             1383462             1383462             1383462
 Store FE                                            Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 Week FE                                             Yes                 No                   No                 Yes                  No                  No
 Week × Year FE                                      No                  Yes                 Yes                  No                 Yes                 Yes
 The first three columns show OLS regressions of weekly store level volume of rice sold in ounces on indicators for the hoarding period and the hoarding period
interacted with indicators for high demand locations. All weeks from 2007-2009 are used. The first column shows the coefficient on an indicator for the hoarding
period--the weeks of April 19th-May 10th, 2008--and includes both store fixed effects and fixed effects for week of the year to control for seasonality. The following
two columns include store and week × year fixed effects, and show coefficients on the interaction between an indicator for the hoarding period and indicators that
proxy for high demand locations. In the second column, our proxy is the set of states that experienced the largest proportional deviation in quantity sold during
the hoarding period: Connecticut, California, Florida, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, and Utah. In the third column,
our proxy is the set of counties with above median 2007 rice consumption. The last three columns repeat the exercise, but with store level prices, constructed as the
average unit price paid within store, normalized to 80 ounces. Standard errors are clustered at the FIPS county code level. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                34
                  TABLE 7: H OARDING C ONCENTRATED IN H IGHER I NCOME H OUSEHOLDS

                                                       XXXXXXXXX          XXXXXXXXX           XXXXXXXXX           XXXXXXXXX
                                                             Dependent Variable: Quantity Purchased (Monthly)
 Lowest HH Income Bracket (<5000 USD)                       2.492
                                                           (1.371)
 Lowest Bracket × Hoarding Period                         -4.822
                                                          (2.092)
 Lowest Ventile HH Income                                                     -0.608
                                                                              (0.387)
 Lowest Ventile × Hoarding Period                                             -2.484
                                                                              (1.014)
 Lowest Decile HH Income                                                                         -1.384
                                                                                                 (0.307)
 Lowest Decile × Hoarding Period                                                                 -1.460
                                                                                                 (0.828)
 Lowest Quartile HH Income                                                                                           -1.344
                                                                                                                     (0.320)
 Lowest Quartile × Hoarding Period                                                                                   -1.446
                                                                                                                     (0.618)
 Mean of Dep. Var.                                          10.2                10.2                10.2                10.2
 N                                                        1187057             1187057             1187057             1187057
 Month FE                                                    Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 Regressions of monthly household rice purchases in ounces for our household panel on month fixed effects, indicators for the
household's position in the wealth distribution, and those indicators interacted with a dummy for the hoarding period (April and
May of 2008). In column 1, the indicator is equal to 1 if the household is in the lowest income bracket in our data (less than 5000
USD). In column 2, the indicator is equal to 1 if the household is in the lowest ventile of the income distribution. In column 3, the
indicator is equal to 1 if the household is in the lowest decile of the income distribution. In column 4, the indicator is equal to 1
if the household is in the lowest quartile of the income distribution. Standard errors are clustered at the FIPS county code level. *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                35
             F IGURE 1: G LOBAL R ICE C OMMODITY P RICES R ISE F OLLOWING I NDIA E XPORT B AN




                                                                          Japan Agreement
   Normalized Price/Quantity/Searches
                                1.5




                                        India Export Ban
        .5        0  1




                                         April 2007            April 2008                      April 2009                                  172

                                                Global Price        Quantity Sold                       Google Searches


Notes: The black line displays monthly international rice prices provided by the IMF, the red line shows weekly total quantity sold for
stores in our sample, and the blue line shows weekly Google search volume. All variables are normalized by the mean over the sample
period. The first vertical line denotes India's ban on rice exports in October 2007,while the second vertical line denotes June 2008, to
approximate the timing of Japan's agreement to release rice reserves in late May.




                                                                     36
                                                F IGURE 2: R ICE F UTURES


                                                      F UTURES P RICES
           24      22
   Rice Futures Price
         2018
           16




                        March 23, 2008               April 23, 2008               May 23, 2008                 June 23, 2008

                               May 2008                           July 2008                         September 2008


Notes: Figure plots the prices for futures contracts for rice with expiration in May 2008, July 2008 and September 2008. The futures
contract is for 2,000 cwt (hundred weight), which corresponds to about 200,000 pounds or circa 91 metric tons, of rough rice, no. 2 or
better.




                                                                 37
                                                   F IGURE 3: H OARDING A NTICIPATES S HELF P RICE S HOCK
                                         1.5
    Price or Quantity (Norm. by 07-09 Avg.)
              .5       0    1




                                               April 2007             April 2008               April 2009                                172

                                                     US Wholesale Price            Quantity Sold                Shelf Price


Notes: The black line displays a proxy for the US wholesale rice price at the monthly level. The proxy is based on average f.o.b.
price for long grain rice at selected milling centers in Southwest Louisiana. Data provided by USDA, based on data from Agricultural
Marketing Service, National Weekly Rice Summary. The red line displays average weekly sales at the store level, based on scanner data.
The blue line displays the weekly average shelf price based on our store level rice price index. All variables are normalized by the
average over the period shown: 2007-2009.




                                                                             38
                                               F IGURE 4: S TORES U PDATE G RADUALLY TO H IGHER P RICE
                     1
   Fraction of Stores With Updated Prices
       .25           0.5         .75




                                            April 2007              April 2008                    April 2009


Notes: Plot displays the fraction of stores that have updated prices in the wake of the shock to international prices. A store is determined
to have updated its price if the price is greater that 125 percent of the 2007 average. The red portion highlights the weeks starting on
the 19th of April through the 10 of May 2008.




                                                                         39
                              F IGURE 5: H OUSEHOLD I NVENTORIES L EAD R ETAIL P RICES
            2




                                                                                                                          10
                    1.5
   Normalized Price




                                                                                                                          Inventory (oz)
                                                                                                                                      5
          1




                                                                                                                          0
            .5




                                                                                                                          -5
            0




                          April 2007                April 2008                         April 2009

                                       Global Price                          Household Inventory
                                       Shelf Prices


Notes: Black line shows global rice prices normalized to the mean over our sample period. The blue line shows shelf prices, calculated
as the average unit price paid by households in our panel. The red line shows household inventories. Inventories are calculated
following the procedure in Hendel & Nevo (2006). For each household, we estimate monthly consumption based on average purchases
throughout our sample period. We then construct inventories in each month as the cumulative difference between purchases and
consumption up to that month.




                                                                 40
                                 F IGURE 6: H OARDING P RIMARILY D RIVEN BY O WN C ONSUMPTION
             16
   Average Quantity Purchased
    4        08          12




                                April 2007              April 2008                            April 2009

                                       Full Sample       Without Likely Scalpers                   Without Potential Scalpers



Notes: Plots of average monthly household rice purchases in ounces for our household panel. The vertical line represents April, 2008.
Full sample refers to our full household panel. Without likely scalpers excludes any households that (i) have a maximum purchase of 80
or fewer ounces of rice in any month outside of the hoarding period and (ii) purchase more than 400 ounces of rice in either April or
May of 2008. Without potential scalpers excludes any households that (i) have a maximum purchase of 400 or fewer ounces of rice in any
month outside of the hoarding period, and (ii) purchase more than 400 ounces of rice in either April or May of 2008.




                                                                 41
      F IGURE 7: C ROSS -S ECTIONAL S TRENGTH OF H OARDING D OES NOT P REDICT P RICE
                                        M OVEMENTS


                              PANEL A: H OARDING VS . N ON -H OARDING S TATES
                                                                                40000
                                          Avg. Quantity Purchased (Store Level)




                                                                                                                                                                       6
                                                                    30000




                                                                                                                                                                       Avg. Price (Store Level)
                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                               10000     20000




                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                        April 2006    April 2007   April 2008   April 2009   April 2010   April 2011

                                                                                                     Quantity: Hoarding States                Price: Hoarding States
                                                                                                     Quantity: Other States                   Price: Other States



               PANEL B: A BOVE VS . B ELOW M EDIAN P ER -C APITA R ICE C ONSUMPTION
                                                                                40000
                                          Avg. Quantity Purchased (Store Level)




                                                                                                                                                                       6
                                                                    30000




                                                                                                                                                                       Avg. Price (Store Level)
                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                               10000     20000




                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                        April 2006    April 2007   April 2008   April 2009   April 2010   April 2011

                                                                                                     Quantity: High-Rice FIPS                  Price: High-Rice FIPS
                                                                                                     Quantity: Other FIPS                      Price: Other FIPS




Notes: Plots show average store level prices and average store level quantity sold in ounces. In each, the sample of stores is split into
two groups, with black lines showing averages for those in high demand areas and red lines showing those in low demand areas. Solid
lines show quantities, while dashed lines show prices. We show three definitions of high demand areas. In Panel A, the black lines
denote the 10 states which saw the largest proportional deviation in quantity sold during the hoarding period: Connecticut, California,
Florida, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York and Utah. In Panel B, the black lines represent
counties (FIPS codes) who had above median rice purchases per capita in our sample of stores in 2007.




                                                                                                                                42
            F IGURE 8: H OARDING C ONCENTRATED IN H IGHER I NCOME H OUSEHOLDS


           Panel A: Average Purchases Within and Outside Hoarding Period by HH Income
                      Average Quantity Purchased
                          6    9      12  3
                                          0 15




                                                                    0         50              100            150           200
                                                                                             HH Income Bin

                                                                                   Hoarding Period     Normal Times


  Panel B: Difference in Average Purchases Within and Outside Hoarding Period by HH Income
                                                                9
                        Excess Purchases During Hoarding Period
                                  3           0  6




                                                                        <10   10-25         25-50     50-100     100-200    200+
                                                                                      HH Income (Thousands of USD)



Notes: Top panel shows average rice purchase in ounces at the household-month level for each household income category available
in our data. Red lines show average purchases during the hoarding period (April and May of 2008) while the black line shows average
purchases between 2007-2009 outside of the hoarding period. Dots are located at the midpoint of the associated category. Bottom panel
shows the difference in average purchases between the hoarding period and all other times for a collapsed set of income categories.




                                                                                               43
Internet Appendix: For Online Publication




                                 F IGURE A.I: N IELSEN PANEL D EMOGRAPHICS




Notes: This figure plots the distribution of demographics of the overall Nielsen Panel.




                                                                  44
      F IGURE A.II: A LTERNATIVE P RICE M EASURES : F IXING P RODUCT C HARACTERISTICS
                                   W ITHIN S TORES (UPC)
   1.5
   1
   .5
   0




              April 2007                             April 2008                              April 2009
                                                                       d

                           US Wholesale (f.o.b.) Proxy                                    Total Quantity Purchased
                           Shelf Price (Fixed UPC)                                        Shelf Price (Average)


Notes: This figure recreates Figure 3 but includes an alternative price metric. The solid blue line shows the average shelf price across
products and stores, weighted by units purchased as in Figure 3, in other words, total expenditures on rice over total units sold. The
dotted line shows the price for the most popular UPC code within each store (based on 2007 revenue) averaged across stores.




                                                                  45
   F IGURE A.III: R ICE S UBSTITUTES : W EEKLY Q UANTITIES OF N OODLES AND D UMPLINGS
                                       AND S PAGHETTI




Notes: This figure plots the quantities purchased of noodles and dumplings and spaghetti over the 2007-2009 period.




                                                                46
