                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PERSISTENCE THROUGH REVOLUTIONS

                                          Alberto F. Alesina
                                            Marlon Seror
                                           David Y. Yang
                                             Yang You
                                           Weihong Zeng

                                        Working Paper 27053
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27053


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2020




Alberto has poured his passion and creativity into this project, all the way until the very morning
of his passing. We cherish and are immensely grateful for the joyful, but unfortunately short,
experience of working together with Alberto. Helpful and much appreciated suggestions and
comments were provided by Maxim Boycko, Raj Chetty, Melissa Dell, John Friedman, Paola
Giuliano, Ed Glaeser, Claudia Goldin, Sergei Guriev, Larry Katz, Gerard Padr´o i Miquel, Elias
Papaioannou, Nancy Qian, Andrei Shleifer, and participants at many seminars and conferences.
We also benefited from outstanding research assistance from Yanzhao Liu, Jiabao Song, Angela
Yu, and a dedicated data entry team in digitizing the County Gazetteer data, and from Jeanne de
Montalembert in digitizing additional 1930s survey data.The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alberto F. Alesina, Marlon Seror, David Y. Yang, Yang You, and Weihong Zeng. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Persistence through Revolutions
Alberto F. Alesina, Marlon Seror, David Y. Yang, Yang You, and Weihong Zeng
NBER Working Paper No. 27053
April 2020, Revised August 2020
JEL No. N15,Z1

                                          ABSTRACT

Can efforts to eradicate inequality in wealth and education eliminate intergenerational persistence
of socioeconomic status? The Chinese Communist Revolution in the 1950s and Cultural
Revolution from 1966 to 1976 aimed to do exactly that. Using newly digitized archival records
and contemporary census and household survey data, we show that the revolutions were effective
in homogenizing the population economically in the short run. However, the pattern of inequality
that characterized the pre-revolution generation re-emerges today. Almost half a century after the
revolutions, individuals whose grandparents belonged to the pre-revolution elite earn 16 percent
more and have completed more than 11 percent additional years of schooling than those from
non-elite households. In addition, individuals with pre-revolution elite grandparents hold different
values: they are less averse to inequality, more individualistic, more pro-market, and more likely
to see hard work as critical to success. Through intergenerational transmission of values,
socioeconomic conditions thus survived one of the most aggressive attempts to eliminate
differences in the population and to foster mobility.

Alberto F. Alesina                               Yang You
Department of Economics                          Harvard University
Harvard University                               Littauer Center
Littauer Center 210                              1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138                              Cambridge, MA 02138
and IGIER                                        yangyou@g.harvard.edu

Marlon Seror                                     Weihong Zeng
Department of Economics                          Jinhe Center for Economic Research
University of Bristol                            Center for Aging and Health Research
12A Prior Road                                   Xi'an Jiaotong University
BS8 1TU                                          No.28 West Xianning Road
Bristol                                          Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, 710049
UK                                               P. R. CHINA
marlon.seror@bristol.ac.uk                       zengwh@xjtu.edu.cn

David Y. Yang
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-31
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
davidyang@fas.harvard.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27053
                                             One cannot remain rich for more than three generations.
                                                                                     A Chinese Proverb




1   Introduction
A society with much intergenerational mobility of income and wealth is one in which the rich of
today may be the not-so-rich of tomorrow. In a socially mobile society, inequality is more accept-
able since the poor are not always stuck at the bottom of society. Researchers have highlighted
that many factors could contribute to the lack of mobility, from taxation schemes to the educa-
tion system and neighborhood influence. These factors often fundamentally shape individuals'
access to physical capital and accumulation of human capital, two of the most important drivers
for success.
    Can efforts to eradicate inequality in wealth and education eliminate intergenerational persis-
tence of socioeconomic status? Or would the rich and powerful be able to recreate their advantage
in an environment where wealth and access to education have been thoroughly reshuffled? In this
paper, we investigate these questions in the context of two major revolutions that occurred back
to back in China -- the Communist Revolution in the 1950s and the Cultural Revolution from
1966 to 1976. These revolutions represent one of the most extreme attempts in human history to
eliminate the advantages of the elite, to eradicate inequality in wealth and education, and to erase
cultural differences in the population, especially between the rich and the poor. The revolutions
aimed to shut down two critical channels of intergenerational transmission: transmission through
income and wealth (e.g., inheritance) and transmission through formal human capital accumula-
tion (e.g., schooling). Specifically, during the Communist Revolution and the subsequent Cultural
Revolution, land assets were expropriated from the rich and redistributed to the poor, secondary
schools and universities were closed throughout the country, and the values associated with being
educated and being rich were heavily stigmatized.
    Take the family history of Guangyu Huang as an example. Guangyu was born in 1969. His
grandfather was a rich landlord in Guangdong, who lost most of his land and assets during the
Communist Revolution. Guangyu's father, Changyi Huang, grew up in the midst of the Com-
munist and Cultural Revolutions, and as a result received no inheritance, no formal education,
and eked out a living by extracting persimmon oil. Guangyu grew up after the revolutions, but
lived by collecting trash with his siblings during his early childhood. Eventually, Guangyu grad-
uated from Renmin University, one of China's most prestigious colleges. Guangyu's fate changed
in 1987 when he seized the opportunity of the first wave of private enterprise boom during the
reform era of China, and founded GOME Electronics. GOME became a huge success, making
Guangyu the richest man in mainland China between 2004 and 2018, with a net worth of RMB 36
billion (approximately US$ 5 billion).

                                                 1
   While this is certainly an extreme example, we trace the socioeconomic conditions of the pre-
revolution elite and their descendants, and show that Huang's family story represents a more gen-
eral pattern across China: despite extraordinary repression, the descendants of the pre-revolution
economic elite are significantly better off today than the descendants of the pre-revolution poor.
We show this by following three generations in rural China: the "grandparents," i.e., the genera-
tion that grew up before the revolutions, thus roughly individuals born before 1940; the "parents,"
i.e., the generation that grew up during the Communist and Cultural Revolutions -- those born
between, say, 1940 and 1965, -- who experienced shocks such as the expropriation (or redistribu-
tion) of land and school closure; and the "children" -- the third generation, -- who were teenagers
by the time the Communist and Cultural Revolutions had ended, secondary schools and univer-
sities had reopened, and China had started to implement the reforms that would enable private
asset accumulation and private enterprises again. These "children" are individuals born roughly
after 1965.
   To systematically examine various socioeconomic outcomes among these three generations,
we rely on three main data sources. First, to measure land asset ownership across Chinese coun-
ties before and after the Communist Revolution, we digitize all of the County Gazetteers, a set of
archival records that each county keeps to chronicle important events. This allows us to systemat-
ically examine not just the levels, but, crucially, the distribution of land ownership by residents in
a particular county in the 1940s and 1950s, just before and after the Communist Revolution. This,
to the best of our knowledge, is the first national data set on historical inequality in land assets
that has been systematically collected in China. Second, to measure contemporary inequality, we
use the 2000 Population Census and construct inequality in residents' housing situation in the cor-
responding counties. Third, to measure socioeconomic outcomes as well as values and attitudes
among descendants of the pre-reform elite and non-elite, we use the China Family Panel Studies,
a large, representative survey of Chinese households. We link individuals in the survey to pre-
revolution asset ownership levels based on the "class labels" assigned to their grandparents at the
beginning of the Communist Revolution (see Section 2.2 for details on "class labels").
   We first document that the Communist and Cultural Revolutions were successful in homog-
enizing the "parents" generation. The wealth expropriation during the Communist Revolution
was thoroughly implemented. The Land Reform (1947­1953), a core component of the Commu-
nist Revolution, confiscated land from the landlords and reallocated it equally to everyone in the
village. Landlords, who used to own more than 6 times as much land per household as the rest
of the population, no longer owned more than poor peasants in the immediate aftermath of the
Communist Revolution. The county-level Gini coefficient in land ownership decreased from 0.5
right before the Land Reform to below 0.1 right afterwards. The Cultural Revolution was also
effective in leveling the educational advantage of the former elite households. Those in the "par-
ents" generation from an elite background were discriminated against in access to education and
did not achieve a higher level of education than those from non-elite households -- if anything,


                                                  2
the elite did worse in educational attainment than the non-elite amongst the "parents" generation.
We also show that the pre-revolution elite, in the "parents" generation, did not enjoy differential
access to resources, as they were more likely to suffer from hunger during the famine and much
less likely to be members of the Communist Party, a marker of political and social status after the
revolutions.
    The Communist and Cultural Revolutions effectively made the "parents" generation of the
pre-revolution elite enjoy no more tangible advantages in wealth and educational attainment than
their non-elite peers. In fact, counties that were among the most unequal in terms of land assets
before the Communist Revolution became the most equal in real estate wealth in 2000.1 Such a
reversal, to the best of our knowledge, has never been documented and suggests that the heavy-
handed revolution may have put historically unequal regions in China on a different path, toward
relatively more equality. This lies in contrast with many failed land reforms and attempts to con-
fiscate wealth from the very rich in recent history in many other parts of the world, and Latin
America in particular.
    However, despite the immediate and immense impact of the Communist and Cultural Revolu-
tions, the patterns of inequality that characterized the "grandparents" generation are re-emerging
among the third, "children" generation. By 2010, individuals whose grandparents were part of
the pre-revolution elite earned 16­17 percent higher income each year, and have completed more
than 11 percent additional years of schooling than those from the non-elite households. Since the
pre-revolution elite constituted approximately the top decile of the population, the income gap
among the "children" generation implies that individuals whose grandparents belonged to the
pre-revolution elite have a 14.5% chance of staying in the top decile. This is even higher than the
persistence rate of the top decile (extrapolated from the two-generation transition matrix) in the
U.S. -- 14.1% (Chetty et al., 2014), and much higher than that in Canada -- 11.1% (Corak and
Heisz, 1998). To put it differently, while the revolutions were explicitly aimed to reverse the order
of the rankings of socioeconomic status, especially between elite and non-elite households, they
did not manage to do so beyond one generation. The persistence rate of the elite over three gener-
ations is much higher than zero, and the Chinese revolutions did not raise China's social mobility
above the levels reached by two exemplifying capitalist and market economies.2
    What explains the resurgence of the pre-revolution elite among the children generation? The
effect of the Land Reform and the Cultural Revolution on the parents generation indicates that
the two formal channels of transmission -- inheritance (physical capital) and access to education
(formal human capital) -- are unlikely to explain the persistence. A related possibility would be
that the pre-revolution elite may have managed to hide wealth from the confiscation. For those
   1 While urbanization could lead us to overestimate the reversal in land and real estate inequality, taking the urban-
ization rate into account does not alter the pattern of reversal in county inequality -- see Section 5 for a discussion.
    2 One may argue that without the revolutions, social mobility in China might have been much lower than what it

is today. Such a counterfactual is inherently difficult to assess. Existing genealogical evidence shows that intergenera-
tional mobility was quite low in China between 1300 and 1900 (Shiue, 2018).



                                                           3
who stayed in Mainland China, this was very unlikely since private assets of any sort were illegal
until the 1980s. Transferring wealth overseas was a viable, but largely irrelevant, option for the
rural population that we study here.3
    We find that intergenerational transmission of values is an important reason that explains this
rebound. Individuals whose grandparents were part of the pre-revolution elite exhibit different
values and attitudes today: they are less averse to inequality, more individualistic, and more likely
to consider effort as important to success. This is in line with a revealed preference for working
longer hours during workdays and spending less time on leisure during weekends. Such values
can be considered as "informal" human capital, as it is acquired and transmitted within the house-
hold, rather than through formal education institutions that were absent due to the revolutions.
Consistent with vertical transmission of values, these patterns are much stronger for those among
the "children" generation who co-live with their parents, and absent for those whose parents
have passed away prematurely, suggesting that time spent together through co-residence could
be critical for values to be passed down through generations.4 The gap in income between the
grandchildren of landlords and rich peasants and their peers from non-elite households largely
disappears once we control for their differences in educational attainment and expressed values,
suggesting that these are important channels in the rebound of pre-revolution elite advantages.
Intriguingly, while those among the parents generation in pre-revolution elite households are not
significantly more likely to express strong work ethics and valuation of effort than their peers with-
out elite background, they work longer hours and thus exert more effort at work. This suggests
that while the Communist and Cultural Revolutions have successfully stigmatized some values
publicly expressed, privately held values could still be transmitted across generations through ac-
tual behavior. The intergenerational transmission thus allowed certain values such as work ethics
to survive one of the most aggressive attempts to eliminate differences among people in recent
history.
    The survival of social networks, especially those based on traditional families, is a complemen-
tary channel of persistence. We find supporting evidence that such networks are a more important
component in the lives of individuals whose grandparents were part of the pre-revolution elite.5
This suggests that stronger pre-revolution networks among elite households may have survived
the revolutions, despite the fact that the parents generation was poor and their networks thus less
economically valuable.
    This paper bridges two strands of literature: on social inequality and mobility, and on cultural
persistence within families. Studies of intergenerational transmission of socioeconomic status typ-
   3 Another  possibility would be policies favoring the pre-revolution elite during the Reform and Opening era. To the
best of our knowledge, there are no such policies. Yet another possibility is differences in innate characteristics such as
genes and personality traits; we do not have direct evidence to support or reject this interpretation.
   4 The choice of cohabitation is of course partly endogenous, but the early death of parents less so.
   5 Such interpersonal connections have been shown in the sociological literature to play a major role in post-revolution

China (Gold, 1985; Walder, 1986; Yang, 1994; Bian, 1997).



                                                            4
ically explain persistence by formal channels: inheritance (physical capital) and the reproduction
of productive skills and networks through education in elite schools (formal human capital). An
important omission is the informal channels of transmission, in particular, the transmission of val-
ues -- namely, a set of "cultural traits" and attitudes -- from parents to children.6 We contribute to
these two strands of literature by showing that value transmission within households, and espe-
cially the robustness of this transmission even when formal transmission channels are shut down,
have important consequences on intergenerational mobility.
    Both strands of the literature are enormous, and we simply cannot do justice to all previous
works. On social inequality and intergenerational mobility, Chetty et al. (2014) and Chetty and
Hendren (2018a,b) explore patterns of social mobility in detail in the United States, Alesina et al.
(2018) compare the U.S. and several countries in Europe, and Piketty et al. (2019) document the
rising inequality in wealth due to capital accumulation and the resumption of private property in
China. Alesina et al. (2019) study Africa, Asher et al. (2019) investigate educational mobility across
Indian regions, and Narayan et al. (2018) construct measures of intergenerational mobility in edu-
cation and income across many countries using survey data. Closest to our paper in context, De la
Rupelle and Li (2012) and Treiman and Walder (2019) both study the persistence of inequality in
China in the second half of the 20th century using household survey data. This paper differs from
theirs by showing the evolution of inequality, both at the county (using the County Gazetteers)
and at the household level over three generations, and by investigating channels of transmission.7
All these works focus on two generations, with the rare exceptions of Boserup et al. (2014), Long
and Ferrie (2018), and Shiue (2018).8 We contribute to the literature on social mobility by provid-
ing one of the first evidence of intergenerational mobility across three generations in terms of asset
ownership, and by relating mobility to the transmission of cultural values within households.
    We also contribute to the literature on the persistence of cultural values across generations,
   6 Ample  evidence documents that vertical transmission of values could lead to long-term persistence of certain val-
ues within a family lineage. Bisin and Verdier (2001) provide a workhorse model of intergenerational transmission of
values. Alesina and Giuliano (2015) review recent empirical evidence regarding this type of transmission.
   7 Treiman and Walder (2019) focus on the impact of class labels on life chances as measured in a 1996 survey; De la

Rupelle and Li (2012) focus on heterogeneity in the impact (measured in 2002) of the revolutions due to the heritage of
the Long March. In line with their research questions, they look at the effect of household class labels on post-Reform
outcomes and do not study the leveling of conditions across elite and non-elite households during the Communist and
Cultural Revolutions ("parents" generation). A related paper is Hanley and Treiman (2004), who study the resurgence
of property relations in six post-Communist European countries. Interestingly, they find a similar resurgence as shown
by our results in China; they however argue that it is mostly explained in their context by incomplete expropriations
and later restitution policies, although they do find some evidence of "indirect transmission" through educational
attainment and high occupational status during the Communist period -- channels all shut down during the Chinese
revolutions.
   8 Boserup et al. (2014) estimate intergenerational wealth mobility across three generations in Denmark, and find

that persistence across three generations can be higher than that across two. Similarly, Long and Ferrie (2018) find
substantial persistence of occupational status between grandfathers and grandsons, even controlling for the fathers'
occupations, between 1850 and 1910 in the U.S. and Britain. Shiue (2018) uses biographical information in genealogies
to study intergenerational mobility (in terms of status) over five generations between 1300 and 1900; she finds that
transmission from grandparents to grandchildren has little impact on the latter's status, compared to transmission
from fathers to sons or from uncles to nephews.



                                                          5
surveyed by Alesina and Giuliano (2014, 2015). Our paper relates in particular to studies of the
transmission of values promoting effort, education, and delayed gratification (see, among others
           ¨
Galor and Ozak,  2016; Dohmen et al., 2018; Figlio et al., 2019), as well as to the literature in soci-
ology originating in Max Weber's "culturalist" approach (see, for instance, Szel´
                                                                                enyi, 1988, on the
transmission of an "entrepreneurial spirit" in post-Communist Europe).9 More closely related to
our empirical context, Chen et al. (forthcoming) find that a culture of valuing education is per-
sistent among localities in China that are historically more densely packed with individuals who
excelled at the imperial civil service examinations. While we focus on how such values could be
transmitted from the grandparents generation in the midst of revolutions, it is important to note
that the values of the elite could be the result of a much longer evolution.
    Our results are related to several recent papers that examine the persistent impact (or lack
thereof) of large shocks to a specific group. Acemoglu et al. (2011) document that the Holocaust
and the disruption of social structure that it entailed led to long-term decline in local social, eco-
nomic, and political conditions, which suggests a negative effect of mass murder on the remaining
community. The affected group themselves, on the other hand, could partially recover from the
negative shock: Ager et al. (2019) show that the white southern households that lost substantial
slave assets after the U.S. Civil War had recovered in income and wealth by 1880; and Becker et al.
(2020) demonstrate that forced migrants from eastern Poland after the Second World War invested
more heavily in human capital in subsequent generations, a behavior that the authors explain by
preferences shifting away from physical, material possessions. In a context more directly related to
our study, Chen et al. (2015) find that urban dwellers in China exhibit high mobility in terms of ed-
ucational attainment among the generation that grew up during the Cultural Revolution, and low
mobility (i.e., high persistence) for the cohorts that grew up after the Revolution; Xie and Zhang
(2019) show that the grandchildren of the pre-Land Reform elites attained more education.10 We
contribute to these existing works by examining a broad set of outcomes among the victims of
one of the most aggressive attempts to eradicate inequality in recent history, during which both
physical assets and formal human capital accumulation were disrupted. We extend the persis-
tence phenomenon beyond educational attainment, and we present evidence on the mechanisms
of such persistence across generations.
    Our paper also relates to the literature on the impact of the Communist and Cultural Revo-
lutions in China. Roland and Yang (2017) show that individuals who missed the re-opening of
universities at the end of the Cultural Revolution are more likely to believe that effort is not im-
portant for success even decades later; Chen et al. (2017) demonstrate that making the episode of
   9 Szel´
         enyi (1988) puts forward the transmission of "values and ideals" across generations through early socialization
in the family -- in particular, "those related to autonomy and risk taking, resistance to being subordinated to the
bureaucratic order and to accepting ascribed ranks in hierarchy, desire to be one's own boss, value attached to hard
work, and willingness to delay consumption may be decisive in the formation of an entrepreneurial class."
  10 Interestingly, Bautista et al. (2020) document that descendants of those who were deprived of educational opportu-

nities during Pinochet's rule in Chile persistently did worse in education attainment.



                                                           6
the Land Reform more salient makes the beneficiaries (those who gained land) more supportive
of state redistribution, and the victims (those who lost land) more averse to redistributive policies;
and Chen and Yang (2019) show that individuals with traumatic experiences during the Commu-
nist Revolution -- those who experienced the Great Chinese Famine at the end of the 1950s and
early 1960s -- update their beliefs on government trustworthiness based upon both their starva-
tion experiences and the context of such experiences. In this paper, instead of examining the extent
to which specific values, preferences, and beliefs are shaped by experiences during the Commu-
nist and Cultural Revolutions, we investigate, taking the two revolutions as a whole, whether
such aggressive and traumatic revolutions are sufficient to uproot existing differences between
pre-revolution elite and non-elite households in the long run, across three generations.
      This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides institutional and historical background
on the Communist Revolution and the Cultural Revolution in China. Section 3 describes our data
collection effort. Section 4 shows that the revolution was successful in eliminating inequality and
homogenizing culture for one generation, that of the "parents." Section 5 presents our results
on how the grandchildren of the pre-revolution elite (the "children" generation) are substantially
richer today, as well as on the transmission of values from grandparents to grandchildren. Sec-
tion 6 discusses various concerns related to data, robustness of the results, and alternative inter-
pretations. The last section concludes.


2     The Communist and Cultural Revolution
In this section, we describe the Communist Revolution and the Cultural Revolution. Many books
                                                                                           ¨
have been written about the historical details (e.g., MacFarquhar and Schoenhals, 2006; Dikotter,
2016); here we focus on the particular aspects of the revolutions that intended to eradicate the
advantages of the pre-revolution elite, including confiscating their assets, removing their access to
secondary and higher education, and even stigmatizing attitudes and values that they might have
held prior to the revolutions.

2.1     The Communist Revolution and Land Reform
The Communist Revolution was a series of movements that allowed the Chinese Communist
Party to consolidate political power throughout China toward the end of the Chinese Civil War.11
The Land Reform during the Communist Revolution was a crucial effort aimed at gaining the sup-
port of the rural masses for the new regime (Kung et al., 2012). The Land Reform started in 1947 in
the newly "liberated" regions under the Communist Party's rule and concluded in 1953 when the
reform reached the entire country. It is one of the most extreme examples of wealth equalization
  11 Some of the background description here is also shown in Chen et al. (2017). In this paper, we primarily focus on the

rural component of the Communist Revolution, namely, the Land Reform. A parallel movement of wealth confiscation
and redistribution was carried out in the urban sector, often named the "Socialist Remold of Capitalist Enterprises."



                                                            7
in a short period of time in human history -- at least 43% of all land assets in rural China changed
hands during the reform (Wong, 1973a).
    Before the Land Reform, landlords owned 6 times more land (per capita, on average) than poor
peasants (see Section 4 for details). In other words, while land assets were unequally distributed
prior to the Land Reform, the Chinese context does not resemble the extreme land concentration
observed in Latin America, characterized by the predominance of large plantations or latifundia --
e.g., 92% of cultivated land in Bolivia in 1952 before the land reform (Wagner, 1989). Landlords in
China owned a relatively small amount of land, working on the land themselves, and sometimes
hiring labor (Fei et al., 1992). Thus, Chinese landlords were closer to well-off farmers in small-scale
farming economies than rentiers who own huge plots of land.
    The Land Reform was formalized and implemented as a nationwide policy by the Agrarian Re-
form Law in late 1950. The law was based on China's Agrarian Reform Law Framework approved in
1947 and built upon the Party's earlier land reform experiences. The law emphasizes the Commu-
nist Party's commitment to expropriating the landlord class and to advocating the proprietorship
of the peasantry. Article 1 of the law states the overarching principles of the Land Reform:

      "The land ownership system of feudal exploitation by the landlord class shall be abolished and
      the system of peasant land ownership shall be introduced in order to set free the rural productive
      forces, develop agricultural production, and thus pave the way for New China's industrializa-
      tion."

    The rest of the law lays out specific guidelines for transferring land ownership from landlords
to poor peasants. Section 2, titled "Confiscation and Requisitioning of Land," orders the land-
lords' land, cattle, "excessive production tools," and real estate properties to be confiscated (e.g.,
Article 2). Section 3, "Distribution of Land," further instructs that the confiscated land and other
assets should be distributed uniformly, fairly, and reasonably among landless peasants and poor
peasants who owned very limited assets (e.g., Article 10).
    The Agrarian Reform Law establishes a set of uniform principles that guide decision-making and
the implementation of the Land Reform across China.12 The Communist Party emphasized that
peasants should actually receive land and landlords be expropriated. To maximize the chances
that implementation would go smoothly and efficiently, the central government devolved all land
reform responsibilities to local governments, leaving considerable flexibility to interpret, adapt,
plan, and carry out the Land Reform in each locality.13
    The redistribution process typically consisted of two stages. First, the locality formed ad hoc
  12 The  Agrarian Reform Law was nationally oriented in tone and content, so that more detailed rules and explicit
regulations pertaining to implementation needed to be provided in the form of supporting documents, including im-
plementation legislation and important speeches by the central government and provincial authorities.
  13 This heavy emphasis on the informal and often personalized approach of implementing the Land Reform reflects

the reality that the core field staff of the reform -- local cadres complemented by the Peasants' Association -- were
technically under-trained but politically dedicated (Wong, 1973a).


                                                         8
committees and teams, mobilizing the rural masses via propaganda and indoctrination, and cru-
cially, assigning class labels to families based on investigations of land holdings and discussions
in mass meetings (Hinton, 1966). (We discuss class labels in detail in Section 2.2.) Second, based
on the class labels, land and other production tools were confiscated from the landlords and rich
peasants, and redistributed to the landless and poor peasants. The expropriation and redistribu-
tion were operationally one process, and in the vast majority of the cases, what was expropriated
has been entirely redistributed (Wong, 1973b).14 The Land Reform was a zero-sum game, and
the government made sure that the victims complied and the beneficiaries indeed received asset
transfers. Both physical and psychological violence (or the threat of violence) were deployed dur-
ing the confiscation process to suppress opposition from the expropriated households. A militia
was organized for the purpose of the Land Reform, and it is estimated that for every landlord
there were 8 organized peasants assisting the Land Reform implementation, among whom one
was armed (Wong, 1973a).15
    Property rights over land during this period were complicated. The Land Reform confiscated
land from the landlords and rich farmers, and redistributed the land to the poor and landless.
During this period, effective private ownership over land was still allowed. In 1954, the first Con-
stitution of the People's Republic of China abolished private land ownership. Individual farmers
could lease land from the state and grow crops, although no rents were effectively paid to the state.
The endowed land that individual farmers could grow food on was essentially land (re)allocated
to them during the Land Reform (Lardy, 2008).
    While scholars debate on the exact magnitude of land redistribution during the Land Reform, it
has undeniably resulted in a "monumental and profound" socioeconomic revolution that affected
almost every rural resident in China (Huang, 1995). In 1953, the central government declared that
the Land Reform had achieved its goals in most of China. The landlord class was essentially elimi-
nated, and their asset level brought down to that of middle or even poor peasants. Landless, poor,
and middle peasants received farmland for cultivation amounting to 43% of total land acreage in
China, according to some estimates -- among others, see, Wong (1973b); Lippit (1974); Perkins
(2013). The far-reaching social impact of the Land Reform is described by Schurmann (1971) as
follows:

      [...] as a social revolution, land reform succeeded in destroying the traditional system of social
      stratification in the rural areas. The old rural gentry, whether based on the village or residing in
      towns, was destroyed. A social element, which had exercised leadership in the village by virtue
      of its status, its ownership of land, and its access to power had ceased to exist.
  14 Appendix  Figure A.1 presents a photo taken during the Land Reform when rural residents were measuring the
land in preparation for the redistribution.
  15 Forced confessions in small groups and mass trials attended by tens of thousands were also employed to induce

submission through intense psychological pressure.




                                                        9
2.2     Class labels
In order to facilitate asset confiscation and subsequent redistribution during the Communist Rev-
olution, each household was assigned a class label based on what they owned. The specific class
labels (in both rural and urban sectors) are listed as follows:



                                               Rural                    Urban

                            Non-elite      Hired labor         Poor peasants in the city
                                          Poor peasants               Workers
                                         Middle peasants             Employees

                            Elite         Rich peasants           Enterprise owners
                                           Landlords                 Capitalists


      More specifically, to supplement the Agrarian Reform Law and to aid the implementation of
the Land Reform, the State Council issued a document titled "Decisions on Assigning the Class
Labels in the Rural Sector" in 1950. It called local reform committees to divide up all rural resi-
dents into the broad classes listed above, and these uniform class labels would act as the basis for
redistributive decisions during the Land Reform.
      The class label was the only criterion used for asset redistribution. Those who were classified as
landlords or rich peasants had their "excessive" assets confiscated, and those classified as middle
peasants, poor peasants, and hired labor received asset transfers. Landlords and rich peasants
were also the joint target of class-based discrimination until the 1980s (see Bian, 2002, for a review).
We thus group the landlords and rich peasants as the pre-revolution elite (approximately 6% of
the population in the rural sector) and the rest as non-elite, according to the asset redistribution
(during the Communist Revolution) and discrimination (until after the Cultural Revolution) that
they faced. We investigate below alternative definitions of the elite. Our baseline results are robust
to considering only the rich peasants, namely the "working" elite without the rentiers.
      While the exact cutoffs used to categorize the class labels were often left to the discretion of lo-
cal Land Reform committees, the State Council document offered general guidelines. Importantly,
these labels were determined by family asset ownership prior to the reform,16 and particularly
land assets in rural areas: all members of a family shared the same label. For example, regard-
ing household labeling as "landlord" versus "rich peasants," the document stipulated that "in
the landlord households, if there were people who regularly worked, and at the same time hired
people to work on some of the land, then as long as the land rented out was more than 3 times as
large as the land tilled by household members, these households should be classified as landlords
  16 Contrary  to later political campaigns, no quotas were set during the Land Reform -- e.g., in terms of a number
or share of landlord labels (Kung et al., 2012). Local leaders may have however felt pressure to identify at least some
"targets for class struggle" (Friedman et al., 1991).


                                                          10
rather than rich peasants." Such a rule suggests that landlords working on the land they owned
was a common phenomenon in rural China.
      Until the Agrarian Reform Law was repealed in 1987, the label was stable over time and through
generations, making it a major element of family and personal identity: once a label was assigned
it was rarely revised (Unger, 1984), and forging class labels was nearly impossible, for three rea-
sons. First, class labels were common knowledge in villages (Wemheuer, 2019), and the new elite
with "good" class backgrounds had little incentive to collude with "bad" elements. Second, a
double record of class labels was kept: one in individual dossiers, which in rural areas were held
by the collective (4,000­5,000 households on average), and another, separate record held by central
security organs for Party cadres (Cheng and Selden, 1994; Wemheuer, 2019); both records were in-
accessible to the individuals concerned. Third, class background was subject to potential rechecks
by external teams during political campaigns (Brown, 2015), and "providing false or misleading
information could lead to serious consequences if, for example, a "landlord who had escaped the
net" was uncovered" (Wemheuer, 2019). While the initial assignment of the class labels signaled
the regime's judgment about the "inherent loyalties of families" (Walder and Hu, 2009), class labels
were preserved along patriarchal lines regardless of the actual political inclination and behavior
of individuals. Moreover, each citizen was required to know her own class label. In other words,
the elicitation of class labels allows researchers to trace family lineages, in particular the broad
level of household assets prior to the revolutions. We describe in greater detail the elicitation of
class labels in our data in Section 3.
      The motivation behind class labels was to identify and therefore discriminate against the for-
mer elite and eliminate any educational or income advantage they might retain over the masses,
consistent with the overarching goal of the Communist Revolution and the subsequent Cultural
Revolution. Class labels determined in particular the likelihood of admission to high school and
college, job assignments, promotions, and access to Party membership (Kraus, 1981; Unger, 1982;
Lee, 1991). One unintended consequence of the system was, however, to remind people of who
their parents and grandparents were, perhaps making family history and identity more salient.

2.3     The Cultural Revolution
The Cultural Revolution is a massive sociopolitical movement launched by Mao Zedong in 1966,
intended to preserve the fruits of the Communist Revolution. While it began as a purge of "dis-
loyal" Communist Party officials, its scope quickly widened to target all elite groups and authority
figures, leading to a decade long of chaos and violence until Mao's death in 1976. We focus here on
two main aspects of the Cultural Revolution: its stance toward the former elite, and its disruptive
education policy.17
  17 The  mass mobilization at the core of the Cultural Revolution led to large-scale disorganization. Before the impo-
sition of martial law, the Cultural Revolution caused in less than two years a complete collapse of the state apparatus
and severely disrupted production. Industry value added dropped from 44.6 to 12.6 million Chinese yuan (in constant


                                                          11
    Since its inception, the Cultural Revolution was concerned with status inheritance. One of
its primary goals was to prevent the pre-revolution or emerging elite from passing down their
privileges to their offspring (Whyte, 1973; Deng and Treiman, 1997; Andreas, 2009) and thus "de-
stratify" Chinese society (Parish, 1984). The initial motivation was to prevent the entrenchment of
a bureaucratic elite, whom Mao viewed as a threat to the revolution. He feared that they became
"a `privileged stratum' and take the capitalist road, as allegedly [had] happened in the Soviet
Union" (Bernstein, 1977). The scope of the Cultural Revolution quickly widened to encompass all
high-status groups. Former elite households often managed to secure elite professional occupa-
tions in the Communist regime (Rosen, 1982; Unger, 1982; Andreas, 2002; Walder and Hu, 2009).
This fact, combined with the view that individuals with a "bad" class background -- namely those
with elite class labels -- were inherently "revisionist," or hostile to the revolution, justified in the
eyes of Mao further discrimination and violence during the Cultural Revolution. In an interview
given in 1965 to the French Minister of Cultural Affairs, Andr´
                                                              e Malraux, Chairman Mao claimed
that there was a broad "revisionist layer" in China, "large not in numbers but in the influence
it exerts. This layer is made up of the former landlords, former rich peasants, former capitalists
[...], and part of their children" (Andrieu, 1996). The goal then was to completely eliminate any
remaining advantage of the former elite and their descendants over the masses.
    The risk that the elite might be able to maintain their influence through education lies behind
the radical and disruptive educational policy initiated during the Cultural Revolution (MacFar-
quhar and Schoenhals, 2006). The revolution severely disrupted higher education in two main
ways. First, almost all high schools and colleges were shut down between 1966 and 1968, and
most universities remained closed until 1972 (Bernstein, 1977; Unger, 1982).18 Second, merit-based
admission into higher education was suspended throughout the Cultural Revolution. When uni-
versities reopened in 1972, admission was primarily based on class labels (at the expense of the
elite, of course) and political achievements rather than academic credentials (Shirk, 1982). The
only eligible applicants were workers, peasants, and soldiers, except for small quotas (below 5%)
established for the "educable children [of class enemies]" (Deng and Treiman, 1997).19
    Besides disrupting education, the Cultural Revolution induced a wide range of disturbances
across Chinese society. The inheritance of culture and values from the pre-Communist era was
regarded with suspicion: teachers became the targets of "struggle sessions," which included pub-
lic humiliations, beatings, and torture (Wang, 2001).20 An entire generation of urban students
1990 prices) between 1966 and 1967, and it would not recover until 1980 (Dong and Wu, 2004).
   18 Appendix Figure A.2 presents a photo of students at Peking University, one of the best universities in China, during

the Cultural Revolution, where students gathered to chant revolutionary slogans.
   19 From the outset, the Chinese Communist Party oscillated between promoting mass education and a meritocratic

elite with the technical skills and expertise necessary for economic development (Deng and Treiman, 1997; Andreas,
2009; Chen et al., 2015). In some years, admission into higher education was granted by "recommendation only," and
priority was given to workers, peasants, and children of "revolutionary cadres and martyrs" (Deng and Treiman, 1997).
In other periods, the national college recruitment examination was re-established. Applicants with an undesirable class
background were, however, systematically discriminated against (policy of "priorities among equivalents").
   20 Children were also encouraged to expose their parents' counter-revolutionary behaviors, representing a broad



                                                           12
was sent to the countryside for political reeducation through manual work and contact with the
masses (the "Sent-Down Movement"). Zhou (2004) shows that the probability of being sent down
increased with the father's education attainment. The separation of children and parents during
formative years of their lives could have significant implications on the vertical transmission of
cultural values. However, this is less of a concern for our study as we focus on rural households,
none of which sent away children during the Cultural Revolution since there were already resid-
ing in the countryside.


3     Data

3.1     Distribution of land wealth at the county level
In order to document the immediate effect of the Land Reform during the Communist Revolution
on wealth distribution, in particular that of land assets, we digitize the County Gazetteers and sys-
tematically collect land distribution information around 1950 throughout rural China. The County
Gazetteers, published in the 1990s, are the county- or city-level archives that cover the historical
period from 1949 to 1986. Each locality maintains its own gazetteer, compiling local narrative
and statistical information on historical development, socioeconomic progress, major events, and
notable instances. Data quality and completeness varies across counties. Some counties gather
quantitative data, while others just rely on descriptive narratives.
      We manually collect land ownership and population by the five rural social classes correspond-
ing to the class labels assigned during the Communist Revolution: landlords, rich peasants, mid-
dle peasants, poor peasants, and landless peasants.21 The distribution of land ownership is avail-
able both immediately before and immediately after the Land Reform. Our data set is, to the best
of our knowledge, the first national data set on historical inequality in land assets that has been
systematically collected in China. Due to the decentralized nature of the gazetteer compilation,
such land ownership information is not always recorded in the same format. For example, some
counties record land ownership information in table format (see Appendix Figure A.3 for an exam-
ple), while others embed such information in unstructured narratives (see Appendix Figure A.4
for an example).
      Our data collection procedure is based on the county name list in 2000. We identify 639
counties in the gazetteers with the pre-Land Reform land distribution data necessary to calcu-
effort to weaken the nuclear family structure.
   21 Landlords sometimes lived in urban areas and had only tenuous links to the villages where they owned land

(Liu, 2007; Huang, 1995). Such "absentee landlords" should have little effect on our estimates of pre-Land Reform
inequality or our analysis of persistence. First, absentee landlords usually accounted for a small share of the landlord
population, especially in the north (Huang, 1985; Kung et al., 2012). Second, the most salient variation in the prevalence
of absentee landlordism is across provinces (Liu, 2007; Kung et al., 2012) and is thus accounted for by province fixed
effects throughout our specifications. Third, the land owned by absentee landlords is counted in the Gazetteers, as such
land constituted a large share of land transfers in provinces where absentee landlords existed (Roll, 1974).



                                                           13
late within-county inequality, i.e., with population and land ownership data for hired peasants,
poor peasants, middle peasants, rich peasants, and landlords, corresponding to the 5 groups of
the population as categorized by the class labels.22 Only 576 of them can be matched with coun-
ties in 2000. Out of the 1,290 rural counties in China in the 1950s, 418 have no pre-Land Reform
records, and 296 do not provide sufficient information to construct reliable county-level inequality
measures.23 Our baseline specifications further restrict the sample to the 410 counties that have
more than 80 households in our random 0.1% extract of the 2000 Population Census; we carry out
extensive robustness checks to show that our results are not sensitive to this cutoff.
    To ensure that land distribution measures are comparable across counties, we standardize the
pre- and post-Land Reform land ownership and population data to the same units (e.g., land
ownership counts are converted to per capita, rather than per household as originally reported by
some counties). We construct various inequality measures to describe the landscape of wealth in-
equality across Chinese counties just before and after the Land Reform, such as the Gini coefficient
based on county-level land ownership. We assume that the land ownership among households
within each of the five social classes is homogeneous, and we define the county-level Gini as 1
minus twice the area under the (discrete) cumulative distribution function of land ownership.
Appendix Figure A.5 illustrates the construction of the Gini coefficients, where we normalize total
population and total land ownership to 1 and plot the cumulative land ownership for each social
class.
    Given that land ownership statistics are only available in aggregate (by category), we make the
following adjustment to re-scale the Gini coefficient to [0,1], where 0 refers to an absolutely equal
society and 1 refers to the highest possible level of inequality. Specifically, we re-scale the Gini as
follows:

                                                  maxCDF - CDF ( Land)
                                        Gini =
                                                   maxCDF - minCDF
where CDF ( Land) = Class ( PopClass × CumulativeLandClass ) is the cumulative density function
of land ownership; maxCDF is the maximum value of CDF (i.e., extreme equality) under dis-
crete distribution of population sub-groups, where everyone owns the same share of land in the
society; and minCDF is the minimum value of CDF (i.e., extreme inequality) under discrete distri-
bution, where all land is owned by landlords. The numerator ensures that the Gini coefficients are
bounded below by 0, and the denominator scales the Gini coefficients so they are between 0 and 1.
  22 We  assume that land ownership for landless hired peasants is zero if the value is missing. Some counties also list
other special classes, for example, small land renters and half-landlord rich peasants; the land owned by these special
classes, government, and other organizations is not included.
  23 We start with all areas named "counties" in 2000, which ensures that all counties can be readily matched to their

contemporary census records, described in the next subsection. Next, we expand our efforts to areas named "cities"
and add the data to our sample if the pre-Land Reform ownership distribution is available in the Gazetteers. We regard
the two as the same if they are documented under the same historical narratives in the most comprehensive Chinese
online encyclopedia, Baidu Baike. Urban districts without documentation about the Land Reform are excluded. Note
also that we exclude Tibet, Xinjiang, and Inner Mongolia due to different land policies designed for minority groups.


                                                          14
Figure 2, top panel, maps the Gini coefficients across China; darker shades indicate counties that
were more unequal prior to the revolutions. We impute the Gini coefficients of the counties with
missing data with prefecture averages.24 Appendix Figure A.6, top panel, shows the map of the
counties with non-missing observations.

3.2     Contemporary wealth distribution at the county level
In order to measure contemporary wealth distribution at the county level, we use a random 0.1%
micro sample of the 2000 Population Census. We focus on the year 2000 because it is the last census
wave before mass rural to urban migration began in China. Although migration is an important
factor in how local inequality evolves, pre-migration measures of local inequality ensure that the
pattern of persistence (or lack thereof) in regional wealth inequality is not driven by selective mi-
gration across localities. Two migration episodes may drive regional wealth inequality patterns.
First, we cannot rule out that emigration at the onset of the Communist and Cultural Revolu-
tions was affected by the pre-revolution land ownership distribution. Emigration was however a
marginal phenomenon. The main destinations in the aftermath of the Civil War were Taiwan, with
1.2 million immigrants from mainland China by 1956 (Lin, 2018), and Hong Kong, with 385,000 by
1954 (Peterson, 2012). While large, these numbers accounted but for a small share of the Chinese
population. Even if we assume all came from rural areas, these emigrants would account for less
than 0.1% of the total rural population in China in 1950. Even if they were all landlords, they
would account for less than 1% of the landlord population. Second, some rural to urban migra-
tion did occur between the introduction of economic reforms in the late 1970s and 2000. We can
however show that rural emigration was still a marginal phenomenon in the 1980s and 1990s. In
the 1990 Population Census, 2.21% of agricultural hukou holders were living outside their places
of registration.25 In 2000, 5.88% of agricultural hukou holders were living outside their counties of
registration.26 The 2000 Census further shows that migration of all household members concerned
5.59% of agricultural hukou households and 4.79% of agricultural hukou holders.27
      We use the residential housing area per capita of the household to construct a contemporary
inequality measure at the county level. We rely on residential housing area to measure real estate
property inequality because this figure is reported for everyone in the population (both home
owners and renters), and it is much less likely to suffer from self-reporting bias than savings
  24 Prefectures  are the level of administration immediately above counties, and below provinces and the central gov-
ernment. There were about 340 prefectures in China in 2000. When a prefecture-level average cannot be computed, we
take the provincial average. Provinces with no data are shown in gray.
  25 Migrants who changed their place of registration are not captured by this measure. This was however extremely

rare at the time.
  26 The relevant measure of migration for our analysis is inter-county migration. The 1990 Census however incorpo-

rates intra-county mobility, while the 2000 Census does allow us to isolate inter-county movements. Note also that the
definition of migrants differs in the two censuses: in 1990, only migrants absent from their places of registration for
more than one year were counted; in 2000, the cutoff was reduced to six months.
  27 A household is categorized as agricultural if all its members hold an agricultural hukou; it is categorized as a migrant

household if all its members are registered in a different county from the county of residence.


                                                             15
and income. Moreover, as long as the same biases exist for all counties, our comparison of the
relative differences in inequality across counties is still valid. An important caveat of inequality
measures based on housing size is that as rural areas become more urbanized, the upper tail of
the population could begin to reside in apartments that are of smaller size but higher value than
rural houses. This would underestimate the contemporary local inequality, particularly in more
urbanized counties. In Section 5, we take into account the urbanization rate and demonstrate that
the results we document are unlikely to be driven by urbanization.
      Similar to the land-based Gini coefficients in the 1950s, we construct Gini coefficients based
on housing size as one minus twice the area under the cumulative distribution function of the
housing size. Specifically, we sort all individuals i by their housing size per capita, compute the
cumulative distribution function (CDF) of housing size ownership for each county j, and define
the integral of the CDF as the modern housing Gini coefficient as follows:


                              Gini j ( Housing) = 1 - 2            CumulativeHousingi
                                                             i j

      To capture quality differences in real estate, we adjust living size based on reported housing
amenities. Specifically, we inflate the living size by 10% for each of the following modern residen-
tial characteristics: building has more than one floor, independent kitchen, equipped with gas or
electric stove, in-unit tap water available, equipped with hot bath water, or equipped with in-unit
bathrooms. The amenity adjustment would take into account structural factors that make smaller
living areas more valuable than larger ones (e.g., apartments versus rural houses). Our results are
robust to using either amenity adjusted or non-adjusted living size as the basis of the inequality
measure.

3.3     Individual outcomes across generations
Finally, the data set we use for individual-level analysis is the baseline wave of the China Family
Panel Studies (CFPS), which took place in 2010. CFPS is a large-scale, nationally representative
(except for the 6 provinces not covered) panel survey conducted by the Institute of Social Sci-
ence Survey at Peking University.28 The 25 provinces of China covered by CFPS represent about
95% of the population in mainland China. Through a multistage probability sampling procedure,
CFPS completes interviews with a total of 14,798 sampled households and all individuals living
in these households, amounting to 36,000 completed adult observations. For the baseline anal-
yses throughout the paper, we restrict our attention to the subsample of 26,400 adults in rural
counties.29
      Each respondent is asked about the class label assigned to her family at the time of the Com-
  28 Detailed information about the CFPS project can be found at www.isss.edu.cn/cfps. The 6 provinces excluded

from sampling are Inner Mongolia, Xinjiang, Tibet, Hainan, Ningxia, and Qinghai.
  29 Rural counties are defined based on the administrative classification of the National Bureau of Statistics of China.




                                                           16
munist Revolution. As the class labels have been passed down through generations since the
Communist Revolution, this allows us to identify the descendants of the pre-revolution elite --
namely, the members of the households of former landlords and rich peasants -- without the
need to link individuals across three generations. If a member of the younger generation does not
know her household class label, we use her father's, since class labels were passed down along
patriarchal lines. Overall, 5.27% of rural respondents are identified as pre-revolution elite, which
is in line with the figure (6%) often suggested by historical accounts. Intentional misreporting
of class labels is unlikely as class background is an important component of family identity, the
stigma attached to "bad" class backgrounds was officially abolished in the late 1970s (Lee, 1991;
Walder and Hu, 2009), and access to education and high-status occupations in the Reform era is
based on merit rather than political criteria (Lu and Treiman, 2008).
      Associating each individual with her family class label allows us to compare members of elite
versus non-elite households across three generations. The first generation is those born before
1940 -- the "grandparents" generation. These individuals grew up prior to the Communist and
Cultural Revolutions. If they were landlords or rich peasants, their land and other agricultural
production assets were expropriated during their adulthood. The second generation is those born
between 1940 and 1965 -- the "parents" generation. They grew up in the midst or immediate
aftermath of the Communist and Cultural Revolutions. If they were from the pre-revolution land-
lords or rich peasants households, they could not receive wealth inheritance and could not receive
formal education, especially at the tertiary level, during the decade of the Cultural Revolution.
The third generation is those born between 1965 and 1990 -- the "children" generation. These
individuals would not be able to receive inheritance from either their parents or grandparents.
Nonetheless, the children generation grew up largely during the post-1978 Reform and Open-
ing era, during which ownership of private assets was reintroduced, universities reopened, and
a market economy was partially established. Our results are robust to reasonable variations in
generation cutoffs.

3.4     Summary statistics
Appendix Table A.1, Panel A, presents summary statistics for counties with complete land owner-
ship data for all five classes (576), counties with incomplete data (296), and counties with no land
ownership data (418) along the following dimensions: geographical characteristics (distance to
the coast, longitude, latitude), economic development (GDP per capita, average nighttime lumi-
nosity, average and median years of education, average educational attainment for cohorts born
before 1950),30 and contemporary housing sizes (median housing area per capita, median amenity-
adjusted housing area per capita, Gini coefficient of amenity-adjusted housing area).
  30 Nighttimeluminosity as a proxy for regional development level has been widely used: see Alesina et al. (2016) as
a recent example and Donaldson and Storeygard (2016) for a review.




                                                         17
      Panel B presents the p-values from three balance t-tests to check for potential sample selec-
tion based on observable features: between the counties with complete data and those with either
incomplete or no data, between the counties with complete and incomplete data, and between
the counties with at least some data and those without any data. Among all the 11 variables that
we examine, counties with complete historical land ownership data differ from other counties
only along median contemporary housing area (both raw and amenity-adjusted) and the aver-
age nighttime luminosity. Importantly, contemporary housing inequality is not associated with
the availability of complete archival records on land ownership inequality prior to the Land Re-
form. Our baseline results focusing on the counties with sufficient data are robust to various
extrapolation exercises where we infer counties with missing data based on nearby counties' land
distribution records (see Section 4 for details).
      In the baseline specification, we exclude counties with less than 80 households in our ran-
dom 0.1% extract of the 2000 Census to reduce measurement error in within-county inequality.
This leads us to drop 166 counties. We show in Section 4 that our baseline results are robust
to alternative sample exclusion criteria. Appendix Table A.2 presents the summary statistics of
contemporary county-level outcomes based on the 2000 Census.
      Finally, in Table 1, Columns 1 and 2, we present the summary statistics of individual-level
outcomes based on the China Family Panel Studies baseline survey. They are organized into four
categories: income; educational performance; labor market sector choices; and political and social
connections.


4     Successful revolutions in the short run
We first examine whether the Land Reform during the Communist Revolution and the subsequent
Cultural Revolution achieved their redistributive and egalitarian goals in the short run.

4.1     Land Reform and land inequality
We begin by comparing the size of land (in acres per capita) owned by households with a "poor
peasants" class label relative to that owned by the landlord households, immediately before and
after the Land Reform. Figure 1 plots the distribution of this ratio across counties, before (dotted
line) and after (solid line) the Land Reform. On the eve of the Land Reform, per capita land hold-
ings in poor peasant households were on average less than 15% of those in the landlord house-
holds. The distribution of the ratio shifted substantially to the right after the Land Reform, cen-
tered just above 1, indicating that poor peasant and landlord households owned a similar amount
of land per capita as a result of the expropriation and redistribution of land, as the Agrarian Reform
Law prescribed. If anything, the poor peasant households owned slightly more land than the land-
lord households after the Land Reform. Note that while the cross-county distribution post-Land



                                                    18
Reform is not entirely concentrated around 1, more than 90% of the counties fall within the range
0.5­1.5.
    We examine the absolute levels of land ownership more closely, by comparing landlords' av-
erage land holdings (total land share divided by total population share of landlords) right before
and after the Land Reform. In Appendix Figure A.7, the dotted line plots the distribution of the
pre-Land Reform average land holding across counties. The distribution peaks at around 6 acres
per capita, and it has a long right tail where landlord households own as much as 25 acres of land
per member of the household. The solid line presents the distribution of the average land holding
across counties after the Land Reform. The dramatic reduction in the area of land owned by the
landlord households is apparent -- they got to keep an equal or slightly lower plot of land than
the rest of the population. Moreover, the entire distribution is compressed: very little cross-county
variation in landlord land ownership remained after the Land Reform. Appendix Figure A.8 plots
the distribution of land gained by the households in hired, poor, and middle peasant categories
after the Land Reform. One can see that the entire distribution lies above 0 -- namely, non-elite
households across all counties in China experienced net land gains, on average, after the Land
Reform. Appendix Figure A.9 shows that the land gains of the poor households after the Land
Reform were larger in more unequal counties prior to the reform.
    Next, we examine whether the Land Reform reduced land asset ownership inequality broadly.
We compare the county-level Gini coefficients in land ownership, constructed as described in
Section 3, before and after the Land Reform. Figure 2, top panel, maps the Gini coefficients across
Chinese counties on the eve of the Land Reform, with darker shades indicating higher inequality.
We find substantial spatial heterogeneity in inequality. Inequality was particularly high in the
Northeast and the South, which is the result of historical and geographic accidents.31 Figure 2,
middle panel, then maps the Gini coefficients immediately after the Land Reform. Compared to
the distribution of inequality just a few years before (top panel), the nearly uniform, light color
throughout China shows that inequality in land ownership was strikingly reduced. Appendix
Figure A.10 plots the distribution of Gini coefficients across counties, before (dotted line) and
after (solid line) the Land Reform. One observes that within half a decade, the Land Reform
not only sharply reduced the Gini coefficient from on average 0.5 to 0.1, but also substantially
compressed its distribution, reducing cross-county variance in land inequality. Correspondingly,
Appendix Figure A.11 plots the pre-Land Reform Gini coefficients (x-axis) against the post-Land
  31 Northeastern  provinces were closed to Han Chinese settlers until 1860; early movers enjoyed easy access to land,
while late movers worked as tenants, creating high inequality in land ownership (Gottschang, 1987; Kung and Li,
2011). Higher inequality in the South than in the North is the result of both historical and geographical differences.
Historically, more remote southern provinces were less subject to the Ming and Qing imperial governments' attempts to
reduce land concentration, and civil servants had to cooperate with powerful landed gentry to collect taxes (Bernhardt,
1992). Geographically, the South is much more fertile than the North, and production surpluses were high enough
to make land rental agreements economically attractive to both landlords and tenants (Kung et al., 2012). High land
inequality in sparsely populated Western counties is less easily interpretable because of missing data -- see Appendix
Figure A.6 for maps without imputations.



                                                          19
Reform Gini coefficients, which allows us to examine the changes in land ownership Gini within
county. Each dot on Appendix Figure A.11 represents a county, and these dots largely fall along
the 45-degree line. In other words, counties that were more unequal in terms of land ownership
experienced a larger reduction in Gini coefficients after the Land Reform, which is consistent with
the results that the Land Reform effectively made all counties throughout China similarly equal
in land ownership.
    The residual inequality after the Land Reform as shown in Appendix Figure A.10 and even
the increase in Gini coefficient in some counties as shown in Appendix Figure A.11 are not due
to the limited implementation of land asset equalization. In fact, they are primarily driven by
the fact that some counties aggressively deprived landlords of their land, and the poor peasants
ended up with slightly more land per capita than landlords. Among 285 counties with complete
pre-Reform and post-Reform land distribution statistics, poor peasants own more land per capita
than the landlords after the Land Reform in 192 (or 67% of) counties.32
    The subsequent collectivization movement starting in 1956 further compressed the distribution
of asset ownership. The collectivization effort centralized land ownership and rights for agricul-
tural production at the commune level, and this arrangement remained intact until the Household
Responsibility System was introduced in 1979, marking the beginning of the Reform and Opening
era. As private ownership of most productive assets and land became illegal following the collec-
tivization, we can understand our post-Land Reform measure of inequality as an upper bound on
the level of land inequality between the 1950s and the introduction of market-oriented reforms.
Formal wealth transmission and inheritance was thus not a viable channel that could contribute
to intergenerational transmission and persistence over that period.
    Thus, the Land Reform during the Communist Revolution was successful at eradicating in-
equality in land asset ownership across China in two ways: it homogenized land ownership not
only within counties -- the pre-revolution elite's land assets were largely wiped out and redis-
tributed to the poor, -- but also across counties -- the distribution of land ownership inequality is
compressed throughout the country. The remarkable success of the Communist Revolution and
its Land Reform in confiscating the wealth of the elite and eliminating wealth inequality should
not be taken for granted. Many countries attempted land reforms in recent history, but most failed
to achieve wealth confiscation and eradication of wealth inequality even in the short run. Notable
examples are the Brazilian Land Reform of the 1930s (Robles and Veltmeyer, 2015), the Chilean
Land Reform during the 1960s and 1970s (Bellisario, 2007), the 1960 Indonesian Land Reform
(Montgomery and Sugito, 1980; Bazzi et al., 2020), and more recently the Land Reform in Zim-
babwe in the early 2000s (Mkodzongi and Lawrence, 2019). In fact, wealth confiscation is one of
the most politically challenging tasks to achieve, especially when the wealthy are entrenched with
  32 An alternative explanation for rising inequality is heterogeneous land quality. This is more likely to be the case for
mountainous areas, such as Shangluo Prefecture, Shaanxi Province, which stands out at the center of the middle panel
of Figure 2.



                                                            20
political power and are able to evade or even revolt. Many factors may have contributed to the
success of Chinese Land Reform in the 1950s, such as the strong state capacity and use of violence
and coercion during the implementation process.

4.2    Cultural Revolution and education inequality
Next, we examine whether education disruption during the Cultural Revolution affected inequal-
ity in educational attainment among cohorts that would have attended secondary or tertiary edu-
cation at that time.33 We first document the gap in educational attainment between pre-revolution
elite and non-elite individuals for the cohorts not affected by the Cultural Revolution. Figure 3
presents, for each birth cohort, the difference between the share of individuals from pre-revolution
elite households who completed at least secondary education (roughly by age 19) and that for in-
dividuals from the non-elite households. For most of the cohorts born between 1930 and 1947,
which are not directly affected by the Cultural Revolution as they would have graduated from
"senior middle school" (the Chinese equivalent of high school) before the disruption of higher ed-
ucation began, we can see that individuals from elite households are about 10 percentage points
more likely to have completed at least secondary school education. This is an extremely large dif-
ference given the low level of average educational attainment among these cohorts -- less than 10
percent of individuals from rural China completed junior secondary school for most of these early
cohorts.
      The advantage in educational attainment among members of the elite households sharply de-
creased starting from the 1947 cohort, as marked by the left edge of the shaded rectangle in Fig-
ure 3. Regular education programs of universities and many high schools halted, and meritocratic
admissions -- into the few education programs still operating during the Cultural Revolution
-- were abolished. Junior secondary school (reduced from three to two years) was transformed
to accommodate children's participation in farm work and household chores, e.g., by allowing
for lower attendance, shorter school days, and even bringing younger siblings to class (Parish and
Whyte, 1978; Pepper, 1978). The positive gap between the share of individuals from pre-revolution
elite households who completed secondary or above education and that of individuals from the
non-elite households rapidly shrank among the cohorts directly affected by the decade of the Cul-
tural Revolution. In fact, among the cohorts born after 1955, who would be finishing primary
school after the onset of the Cultural Revolution, the pre-revolution elite are worse off in terms
of educational attainment than their counterparts in non-elite households. This is due to two rea-
sons: first, expansion of basic education disproportionately benefited individuals from non-elite
households during this period; and second, the pre-revolution elite experienced unfavorable treat-
ment in access to formal education, as people with landlord or rich peasant class labels were often
  33 The education system in China before the Cultural Revolution consisted of six years of primary education (starting
at age 6 or 7) and six years of secondary education (or "middle school," split into "junior" and "senior"). During the
Cultural Revolution, primary and secondary schools were both reduced to five years (Pepper, 1978).


                                                          21
barred from entering schools.34
      Combined with the previous evidence on physical assets, these results show that the two fac-
tors highlighted by economists as central to production activities, namely, physical capital and
formal human capital (via schooling), could not be passed down through the Communist and
Cultural Revolutions.

4.3     The life of the "parents"
Finally, we examine the outcomes of the "parents" generation, beyond asset inheritance (which
was nonexistent) and educational attainment. Table 1, Columns 3 and 4 compare individuals
in the parents generation from elite households with their peers from non-elite households. We
control for cohort and county of residence fixed effects, hence exploring only within cohort within
county differences across elite and non-elite descendants. Column 5 presents the overall mean in
the corresponding variables among the parents generation as a whole.
      Panel A presents income measured in 2010. We find that the individuals of the parents genera-
tion from pre-revolution elite households earn a significantly lower labor income than their peers
without an elite background. The annual labor income gap between individuals from elite and
non-elite households is approximately 18% of the average income in the parents generation. Panel
B replicates results on educational attainment as shown in the previous subsection. The parents
generation of the pre-revolution elite no longer enjoy an advantage in attaining formal education,
and if anything, they become less likely to complete secondary or tertiary education than their
peers from non-elite households. Interestingly, there are no significant differences between the
parents generation of the elite and non-elite households in their math skills, tested in a standard-
ized test in 2010. That suggests that despite the lack of formal schooling, elite households may
supplement other informal forms of human capital accumulation such as home schools. Panel C
further examines labor market choices. Consistent with the fact that pre-revolution elite individ-
uals from the parents generation were largely excluded from public sector jobs, we find that the
parents generation of the pre-revolution elite are more likely to be self-employed, less likely to
work in the public sector such as state-owned enterprises, and more likely to hold a low-prestige
occupation.
      Although it is challenging to get a comprehensive and systematic measure of how the parents
generation of the pre-revolution elite fared during and in the immediate aftermath of the revolu-
tions, one can get a glimpse of their experiences during the Great Chinese Famine (1959­1961).
The Famine was one of the worst peacetime disasters in modern history, largely caused by mis-
allocation of food (Meng et al., 2015). We find that individuals among the parents generation of
the pre-revolution elite were more likely to experience hunger during the Famine (Table 1, Panel
  34 Formal   education during the Cultural Revolution specifically discriminated against the "Black Fives," a new cat-
egory coined during that decade. The "Black Fives" included: landlords, rich peasants, counter-revolutionaries, anti-
socialists, and rightists.


                                                          22
D), despite the fact that their parents were landlords or rich peasants with ample access to agri-
cultural products merely a decade before the Famine. They were also significantly less likely to
be members of the Communist Party, an indicator of formal political connections and broad social
status after the revolutions, especially in rural China, and a key prerequisite for access to state
redistributive resources (Bian, 2002). While the pre-revolution elite among the grandparents gen-
eration enjoyed a substantial advantage and likely significant local power, the parents generation
did not -- anyone with tangible political and social connections, hence with preferential access to
scarce resources (such as food during the Communist Revolution and the collectivization period)
would have taken advantage of their connections to minimize the impact of the Famine on herself
and her family.
      Taken together, these results show that among the parents generation, members of the pre-
revolution elite households no longer exhibited an "elite premium" in most of the dimensions
that we can measure.


5     The life of the "children"
The Land Reform (during the Communist Revolution) and the Cultural Revolution were remark-
ably successful in the short run -- essentially eradicating inequality in land ownership and edu-
cational attainment, and directly affecting the lives of the parents generation. In this section, we
examine whether the revolutions had a persistent impact. We first focus on the county as a whole
in 2000, and then we zoom in on individual outcomes among the children generation.

5.1     County-level persistence
In order to examine the persistence (or lack thereof) in inequality at the aggregate level, we ask
whether contemporary inequality (measured with our housing proxy) in a given county is associ-
ated with land ownership inequality prior to the Communist Revolution.
      The results in Section 4 show that the land ownership inequality within counties soon after the
Land Reform was no longer associated with the land inequality just prior to the Reform. In other
words, the Land Reform "leveled the playing field." If (real estate) inequality in 2000 -- i.e., after
the Reform and Opening era starting in 1978 had reintroduced private asset accumulation -- re-
mains not associated with the land inequality prior to the Land Reform, this suggests that the Land
Reform has had long-term effects on inequality across counties. If there is a systematic association
between pre-Land Reform land inequality in late 1940s and real estate inequality in 2000, then it
is evidence of either a resurgence or a reversal of the pre-revolution inequality patterns. Note that
within-county inequality in the 1950s is calculated based on land assets, and that in 2000 is cal-
culated based on primary housing sizes. While different bases of the inequality measures could
mechanically affect the overall level of inequality due to measurement, such differences would
not necessarily affect the level of inequality relative to other counties in the country. Urbanization

                                                  23
could affect the association between land assets and housing size, and we explicitly examine the
role of urbanization in the section below.
    Figure 2, bottom panel, maps the real estate housing Gini coefficients in 2000 across counties.
Relative to the land ownership inequality just after the Land Reform (middle panel), inequality
had begun to re-emerge throughout China by 2000. Moreover, regions that were more unequal
prior to the Land Reform (top panel), such as the northeastern provinces, became relatively more
equal in 2000; we can also note that inequality seems less spatially correlated in 2000, which may
be partly due to the removal of historical determinants of land inequality prior to the Land Re-
form. In Table 2, we regress the real estate housing Gini coefficients in 2000 at the county level
on the corresponding land ownership Gini coefficients just prior to the Land Reform. We in-
clude province fixed effects throughout. Column 1 presents the baseline coefficient estimates.
We observe a strong and sizable negative relationship between the pre-Land Reform inequality
and contemporary inequality (measured in 2000). In other words, the Land Reform and Cultural
Revolution were successful in the long run at the county level: past inequalities were not only
suppressed; the Land Reform reversed the pattern across China and made historically more un-
equal places relatively more equal today. Note that since this analysis is conducted at the county
level, the reversal we document does not suggest that counties more unequal prior to the Land
Reform become more equal in 2000 in absolute terms, but rather, they become more equal relative
to other counties.
    This reversal pattern is robust to taking into account of a variety of factors that could affect
inequality. In fact, time invariant factors that would be associated with inequality within county
(e.g., geographic or structural reasons that make a county inherently more unequal than others)
could not drive this reversal, unless the revolutions triggered a different set of regional charac-
teristics to reshape inequality. Table 2, Columns 2­5 test the robustness of the reversal finding.
Column 2 controls for the contemporary county development level proxied by nighttime lumi-
nosity in 2000; Column 3 controls for the historical county development level, proxied by average
educational attainment level in 1950; Column 4 controls for a variety of geographic attributes that
may be associated with either development or within-county inequality, such as land ruggedness
and distance to resources;35 and finally, Column 5 controls for county-level access to external and
internal markets.36 The negative relationship that we document in Column 1 remains largely un-
changed. It is also robust to excluding coastal regions where rich households may have been more
likely to emigrate prior to the revolutions37 in order to evade confiscation (Column 6) -- such
  35 The geographical controls include distances (km) to the shore, fast-speed road network, and major rivers, as well
as the means and standard deviations of elevation and slope.
  36 External (resp., internal) market access is defined as the weighted sum of the populations (from the 1953 Census)

in coastal (resp., non-coastal) counties. As is standard in the economic geography literature since Harris (1954), the
weights are the inverse of the exponential of distance, measured in km. Coastal counties are defined as counties in
provinces with access to the sea; the results are robust to defining coastal counties more narrowly as counties with
direct sea access.
  37 See Lin (2018) and Yap (2018) for a breakdown by province of origin of immigrants from the mainland in the




                                                         24
emigration of the wealthy could generate a reversal in inequality. Moreover, this negative rela-
tionship is robust to different weights on the amenities or excluding them all together (Appendix
Table A.3), to alternative sampling criteria (Appendix Table A.4), and to extrapolating missing ob-
servations for county inequality (Appendix Table A.5).38 Finally, urbanization may induce house-
holds at the top of the income and wealth distribution to move to urban apartments that have
smaller sizes than rural houses, and lead us to underestimate contemporary inequality and hence
overestimate the inequality reversal over time. However, we find that the reversal in county-level
inequality is remarkably robust to controlling for the urbanization rate in 2000 (proxied by the
share of population in a given locality who hold an urban household registration, or hukou), as
shown in Appendix Table A.6.
    Much of the movement toward equality comes from the compression of the difference between
the above-median and median households. Figure 4 decomposes the inequality reversal over
time by different parts of the distribution.39 We estimate the correlation coefficients between the
pre-Land Reform land Gini coefficient and the corresponding county's 2000 housing inequality.
Instead of the overall Gini coefficient of 2000 housing inequality, we construct a separate inequality
measure for each decile as the ratio between the X th and 50th percentiles of the housing size in
2000 in a given county, where X ranges from 10 to 90. We trace out X along the x-axis, and the
corresponding correlation coefficient estimates on the y-axis. We reverse the ratios if X < 50, so
that one can interpret negative coefficients across the entire spectrum of X as indicating a reversal
between historical and contemporary inequality. The estimated coefficients for percentiles below
the median are in general indistinguishable from zero, suggesting that the reversal in equality did
not occur among the lower half of the distribution in terms of housing size. This does not indicate
a resurgence of historical inequality either -- coefficient estimates close to zero suggest that the
reshuffling of historical inequality is fairly persistent among below-median households. However,
one begins to observe an increasingly negative coefficient as X increases beyond 50.
    In Appendix Table A.8, we further investigate the underpinnings of the reversal in county-
level inequality. We interact the pre-revolution land Gini coefficient with various time-invariant
county characteristics that we expect, based on the literature, to have affected income and wealth
distributions differently before and after the Mao era. This heterogeneity analysis shows that the
reversal pattern is observed in counties that have better access to international markets and in
counties that received massive industrial investments during the 1950s (Heblich et al., 2019). It
is particularly prevalent in the first set of counties, which were the primary beneficiaries of the
export-driven economic growth that took place after the Reform and Opening, and likely saw a
Taiwanese 1956 Population Census.
  38 The imputation strategy used in Table A.5 consists of replacing missing values with the prefecture average (or

the province average if no county in a prefecture has valid inequality data). The results are robust to an alternative
imputation strategy, where we replace missing values with the average within a 2×2-degree rectangle centered in the
county with the missing inequality data.
  39 These results are presented in regression form in Appendix Table A.7; the pattern that we document here is robust

to various alternative sampling criteria, as shown in Appendix Figure A.12.


                                                         25
bigger rise in the middle and upper middle classes.
   Within-county education inequality exhibits a different pattern. We find that rather than a
reversal as we showed for assets, educational inequality within county bounced back among the
generation of individuals who attended school after the end of the Communist and Cultural Revo-
lutions. In Table 4, we examine the relationship between pre-revolution inequality and subsequent
inequality in educational attainment within a given county. In the baseline specification, we mea-
sure county-level education inequality as the difference in years of education between the top 25th
percentile and the bottom 25th percentile in the county. We construct such a measure for each of
the three generations of interest -- the grandparents, parents, and children, shown in Panels A,
B, and C, respectively. The pre-revolution inequality in land is positively associated with inequal-
ity in educational attainment among the grandparents generation, who would have completed
most if not all of their schooling prior to the start of the Communist Revolution. In other words,
county-level inequality prior to the revolution is unidimensional -- places that were more un-
equal in terms of land ownership tend to be also more unequal in terms of educational attainment.
The positive association between historical inequality and educational attainment inequality then
disappears among the parents generation and re-emerges among the children generation. This
suggests that while formal education was severely disrupted among the parents' generation, the
attitudes that value education and the accompanying informal human capital accumulation may
have persisted.
   Finally, the Communist and Cultural Revolutions may have had a persistent impact by alter-
ing preferences. We investigate whether the revolutions affected the overall preference toward
inequality and redistribution in a given county. Specifically, we examine the county-level average
answer to the following survey question related to redistribution and inequality, as elicited in the
CFPS in 2010:


         To what extent do you agree with the following statement:
         For the economy to thrive, one needs to enlarge income inequality in the population.

         1 = extremely disagree
         5 = extremely agree


   In Appendix Table A.9, we look at the relationship between pre-revolution land ownership
inequality (measured by the Gini coefficient) and the contemporary average attitude toward in-
equality in the corresponding county. One sees that counties that were more unequal prior to the
Land Reform display substantially lower tolerance toward inequality. This association is robust
even controlling for cohort and income at the time of the survey, as shown in Columns 2 and 3. In
other words, the Communist Revolution and the Cultural Revolution appear to have generated a
lasting impact across Chinese rural counties -- rural counties that were more unequal prior to the


                                                  26
revolutions have become collectively less tolerant of inequality.

5.2     Children generation of the pre-revolution elite
We now investigate the persistence of inequality at the individual level, comparing the outcomes
of people with and without an elite background among the third, "children" generation.40

Income and labor market outcomes

We first compare contemporary labor income in the children generation for individuals with and
without an elite background.
      Table 1, Panel A, Columns 6­7 present the results from the regression of total annual labor
income on an indicator of whether one's grandparents were pre-revolution landlords or rich peas-
ants. The specification controls for cohort fixed effects and county of residence fixed effects, ab-
sorbing cross-sectional differences in wage and labor market conditions across counties. We re-
strict the sample to individuals living in rural locations born between 1966 and 1990, namely, the
children generation. We have 9,844 survey respondents in this group. Income is measured in 2010,
thus it keeps the macroeconomic conditions at the time of measurement fixed for all subjects, but
it does not capture the life cycle variation in an individual's income trajectory.
      "Children" from pre-revolution elite households earn on average RMB 1,912 more per year in
labor income in 2010 than their counterparts from non-elite households. Relative to the average
wage, this amounts to an annual income gap of approximately 16%. In other words, on the one
hand, we observe a reversal and compression in inequality across counties: counties that were
more unequal prior to the Land Reform become relatively more equal and compressed in assets
distribution. On the other hand, within county inequality in contemporary China is at least partly,
and perhaps surprisingly, still due to the divergent socioeconomic outcomes between the pre-
revolution elite and non-elite households in the children generation.41
      Such an annual income gap is substantial in magnitude. A first benchmark is the gender in-
come gap in China. Based on the same national survey data, Heshmati and Su (2017) find a gender
income gap of 21%. The elite grandparents premium is thus more than four fifths of the gender
gap in China. A second benchmark is the rural-urban income gap within China. In 2010, the
time when income among the children generation was measured, an average urban hukou holder
earned a 61% higher income than their peers with rural hukou status. Thus, the magnitude of the
elite premium that we identify is about a third of the rural-urban gap one observes in China. A
  40 Note that county-level reversal in inequality does not necessarily imply that the individuals among the children
generation of the pre-revolution elite are worse off than their peers from non-elite households. We discuss the link
between county- and individual-level patterns below.
  41 Appendix Figure A.13 illustrates how seemingly opposite patterns at the county and individual levels could co-

exist. The reversal of within county inequality captures the relative distribution of inequality patterns across counties
throughout China. The pattern characterizing the pre-revolution elite over time largely occurs within counties.




                                                           27
third benchmark is the racial income gap in the United States. Based on the American Commu-
nity Survey data used in Bayer and Charles (2018), we find that the annual earnings gap between
black and white males was 18% of average earnings in 2007 and 24% in 2014. This suggests that
the income gap between the descendants of landlords and peasants in China amounts to at least
70% of the racial gap in the United States.42
    Yet another way to benchmark the income gap is to calculate the transition probability -- the
chance that one stays in the top decile in terms of income if one's grandparents were in the top
decile. A three-generation transition matrix is rarely estimated in other contexts due to data limi-
tations; we thus extrapolate from the two-generation transition matrix, assuming the same transi-
tion probability between grandparents and parents as between parents and children.43 Appendix
A describes the detailed procedure of recovering the transition matrix from regression coefficients.
Since the pre-revolution landlord elite were approximately in the top decile of the population, our
estimated income gap implies that their grandchildren had a 14.5% chance of staying in the top
decile. This is even higher than the persistence rate of top decile in the U.S. -- 14.1% (Chetty
et al., 2014), and much higher than that in Canada -- 11.1% (Corak and Heisz, 1998). The large
annual income gap is particularly striking, given the similarity among the parents of these indi-
viduals as a result of the Communist and Cultural Revolutions. Thus, the two major revolutions
with the explicit goals of eliminating class privileges and removing inequality did not manage to
increase social mobility substantially above what is observed in these two exemplifying capitalist
economies, with no revolutions.
    The children generation of the pre-revolution elite are more pro-market and entrepreneurial, as
reflected by their employment sectors. Table 1, Panel C, presents the results of a regression of vari-
ous employment statuses on the elite household indicator. Employment status is measured by: (i)
an indicator for self-employment (e.g., small enterprise owner, entrepreneurs); (ii) an indicator for
public sector employment (equal to 1 if employed by a state-owned enterprise and 0 otherwise);
and (iii) the ISEI score of the particular job, which ranks occupation categories so as to maximize
the role of occupation as an intervening variable between education and income (Ganzeboom et
al., 1992).44 We find that individuals of the children generation with a pre-revolution elite back-
   42 A large number of contributions in sociology have highlighted the persistent effect on economic outcomes of be-

longing to a household with a revolutionary cadre or martyr (e.g. Rosen, 1982; Unger, 1982; Andreas, 2002; Treiman
and Walder, 2019). We can compare our pre-revolution elite premium to this "de facto Party patronage" (Treiman and
Walder, 2019), using as a proxy a dummy equal to one for anybody in a household with at least one Chinese Communist
Party member in the grandparents or parents generation (about 6% of the children generation fall into that category).
We find that the pre-revolution elite effect is about 70% of the "revolutionary" elite effect (RMB 2,219.6, significant at
the 1% level).
   43 This implicitly assumes that the transition from the 1st to the 2nd generation is i.i.d with respect to the transition

from the 2nd to the 3rd generation, which could over-estimate the transition probability if there exists persistence within
the household.
   44 We observe substantial intergenerational occupation upgrading from agriculture to non-agricultural sectors among

those from the elite households. Appendix Table A.10 shows that the children generation from pre-revolution elite
households are about 60% more likely to hold non-agricultural occupation than their peers from non-elite households,
if their parents worked in the agricultural sector.


                                                            28
ground are about 5% more likely to be self-employed and in general hold occupations that have
significantly higher occupational status as measured by the ISEI score.45 Moreover, we observe
that the children generation from elite households are slightly less likely to be employed in the
public sector, though the difference is not statistically significant.
    In Table 3, we decompose the identified income gap into between and within public vs. pri-
vate sector differences. Column 1 replicates the baseline specification, showing an average annual
income gap of RMB 1,911.5. This specification already takes into account the average income
differences across counties, as county fixed effects are included. Column 2 additionally controls
for public and private sector fixed effects, taking out the cross-sector income differences across
China. The elite versus non-elite income gap remains largely unchanged, which implies that the
primary sources of the income gap are within sector rather than between. In Column 3, we con-
trol for province-specific public-private income gaps to account for the provincial heterogeneity
in cross-sectoral income differences. Finally, in Column 4, we control for a migrant indicator vari-
able, where migrants are defined as those who currently reside in counties different from their
birth counties. The estimated difference in the income gap between elite and non-elite children
remains largely unchanged throughout Columns 1 to 4, at 16­17%. Thus, even if we take into
account regional differences in sectoral performance and the differential labor market conditions
experienced by migrant workers, the gap in labor market performance between elite and non-elite
children remains, suggesting that it is primarily due to income differences within employment sec-
tors.
    Finally, we examine whether the income gap among the children generation of elite and non-
elite backgrounds systematically differs across cohorts. Figure 5 traces the income gap (a positive
number indicating higher income among elite household members compared to their peers from
non-elite households) for birth cohorts starting in 1930. The income gap between the descendants
of elite and non-elite households steadily increases as the cohorts become younger, in particular
among those born after the 1960s, who entered the labor market in the Reform and Opening era
(from 1978 onwards). This pattern suggests that the higher the proportion of one's professional
career spent in the Reform and Opening era, when market forces began to function again, the big-
ger the role played by pre-revolution family background in predicting contemporary income and
labor market performance. Household characteristics that could be relevant for the market emerge
and help individuals accumulate higher gains from the labor market, as soon as the institutional
and socioeconomic environment begins to (re)align with these characteristics.
  45 This relates to recent evidence that parental background is key in explaining business ownership in China, the
children of entrepreneurs being more likely to become entrepreneurs themselves (Jia et al., 2020). To the extent that
self-employed small business in rural China often requires access to capital via social network and informal lending
(e.g. Zhang and Loubere, 2013), this also suggests that individuals among the children generation of the pre-revolution
elite have stronger social ties and are able to excel at network-intensive career paths. We investigate the importance of
social networks for the children generation of pre-revolution elite households at the end of Section 5.




                                                           29
Educational attainment

The right section of Figure 3 traces the difference in the proportion of individuals who have com-
pleted at least secondary education between individuals from pre-revolution elite households and
those from non-elite households, up to the cohort born in 1990. The figure exhibits a U-shape pat-
tern. As we document in the previous section, the Cultural Revolution deprived the elite and
their descendants of education opportunities, especially for those who entered schooling age at
the beginning of the Cultural Revolution. For the cohorts directly affected by the Cultural Revolu-
tion, the parents generation of the pre-revolution elite experienced a sharp decline in their relative
access to secondary and tertiary education. In contrast, among the cohorts that began secondary
and tertiary education after the normalization of education (i.e., those born after 1961), the propor-
tion of individuals from pre-revolution elite households who completed at least secondary school
immediately bounces back and remains much higher than that of their counterparts in non-elite
households. In other words, among the children generation, those from pre-revolution elite fam-
ilies completed significantly more years of schooling, despite the lack of differences among the
parents generation.
   We then analyze this pattern more rigorously in regressions, where we exploit across house-
holds, within county, and within cohort variation. As shown in Table 1, Panel B, individuals from
pre-revolution elite households complete on average 0.75 years (or 11%) more schooling in the
children generation. They are much more likely to complete secondary school and higher edu-
cation than their counterparts from non-elite households. The increased schooling also reflects
differences in tangible human capital accumulation, as measured by math skills in a standard-
ized test implemented in a 2010 CFPS module. "Children" from pre-revolution elite households
performed significantly and substantially better in math than their peers from non-elite house-
holds. Given that just one generation ago, the pre-revolution elite did not enjoy any advantage
in -- if anything, were discriminated against in their access to -- formal schooling, the rapid and
systematic rebound of the children generation is particularly striking.

Values and attitudes

We now examine values and attitudes across several dimensions that have been broadly identified
as productive cultural traits and attitudes. We focus on the following survey questions from the
CFPS, answers to which are generally predictive of income and wealth (Alesina and Giuliano,
2015):


              1   How important is being rich to you?
                  (1 = not important at all; 5 = extremely important)
              2   Do you agree that for the economy to thrive, one needs to enlarge income
                  inequality in the population?


                                                   30
                     (1 = do not agree at all; 5 = completely agree)
                 3   Do you agree that fair competition is essential to harmonious interper-
                     sonal relationships in the society?
                     (1 = do not agree at all; 5 = completely agree)
                 4   Do you agree that the most important factor that determines someone's
                     success is how hard she works?
                     (1 = do not agree at all; 5 = completely agree)


    In Table 5, Columns 1 and 4­6, we examine whether in the children generation individuals
from the pre-revolution elite hold different attitudes along these dimensions, compared with their
peers from non-elite households. Similar to the previous specifications, we control for birth cohort
and county of residence fixed effects. Compared with their counterparts from non-elite house-
holds, individuals with an elite background are significantly more likely to: (i) believe that hard
work is critical to success; (ii) consider being rich as an important aspect of life; (iii) believe that
inequality is desirable in the society in order to incentivize growth; and (iv) consider competition
essential to maintain social cohesion.
    The differences in these attitudes are consistent with actual differences in behavior between
the pre-revolution elite and the non-elite. We investigate the hours spent on work during week-
days and the hours spent on leisure on weekends, self-reported in the CFPS. In Table 5, Columns
2 and 3, we present estimates from regressing these measures of time allocation between work
and leisure on whether the children generation is from pre-revolution elite or non-elite house-
holds (again controlling for birth cohort and county of residence fixed effects). Indeed, behavior
is consistent with beliefs: individuals in the children generation with an elite background spend
significantly more hours working on weekdays and fewer hours on leisure (hence more hours at
work) on weekends, in line with their expressed work ethics. This difference holds even account-
ing for province, county, and public-private sector fixed effects. The difference in hours worked
is substantial -- around 10% longer work hours on workdays, amounting to 235 more hours at
work (and hence less leisure) each year.
    Co-residence with the parents generation is an important factor to account for the attitudinal
differences between the pre-revolution elite and non-elite among the children generation. Co-
residence with parents is (partly) endogenous: perhaps children who choose to co-live with their
parents share similar values with them to begin with, which would bias the estimate of cultural
transmission upward. However, we also investigate co-residence with parents (or lack thereof)
depending on whether the parents died prematurely, which can be considered exogenous.46 In
Table 6, we examine the extent to which the pattern of elite differences varies with the co-residence
  46 The vast majority of the cases of co-residence with parents that we observe are with biological parents, as the
divorce rate in China is relatively low -- less than 2 per 1,000 inhabitants at the time of the 2010 CFPS. Nonetheless,
one may co-reside with extended family members, especially when not residing with parents, and we do not directly
observe such behavior.


                                                          31
between the parents and children generations. Column 1 first replicates the baseline specification
of the previous results on elite vs. non-elite differences in work ethics. Column 2 focuses on the
sub-group of individuals in the children generation who co-live with their parents; Column 3 fo-
cuses on those who do not co-live with their parents despite their parents being still alive; and
finally, Column 4 focuses on the sub-group whose parents are no longer alive. One can see that
the sub-group of individuals in the children generation who co-live with their parents exhibits
the largest elite vs. non-elite attitudinal differences, and the gap essentially vanishes among those
whose parents have already passed away. While co-residence with parents could be driven by the
alignment of fundamental attitudes between the two generations, the inability to co-reside due
to the parents' premature death makes such sorting less of a concern. Overall, the evidence here
is consistent with the interpretation that vertical transmission, of which co-residence and spend-
ing a significant amount of time together are a pre-requisite, plays an important role. Moreover,
similar differences in attitudes are observed even among individuals who were still adolescents
in 2010, who have not yet engaged in the labor market and experienced actual income differences
themselves.47 In other words, the attitudinal differences observed between the members of pre-
revolution elite and non-elite households are likely to have emerged as a result of intrahousehold
transmission, rather than merely reflecting labor market outcome differences.
    Values need not be explicitly expressed within families to be transmitted to children. In fact,
expression of pro-market and pro-work ethics attitudes was strongly suppressed and stigmatized
during the Cultural Revolution, as they were incompatible with the Communist agenda. Ap-
pendix Table A.11, Panel B, presents the differences in expressed attitudes on work ethics and
work hours between members of elite and non-elite households, in the parents generation (Panel
A replicates those for the children generation, as shown in previous tables). Interestingly, while
the children and parents generations exhibit a very similar pattern in actual hours worked --
much higher for members of pre-revolution elite households in both generations, -- we do not
observe such a difference in self-reported work-related attitudes among individuals in the parents
generation. If we were to infer from actual behavior private convictions regarding work ethics
and pro-market attitude, then these "private" values, attitudes, and convictions may not have
changed among the parents generation during the Cultural Revolution and were passed down to
the children generation. The picture is rather different when it comes to willingness to express
pro-market and pro-work ethics. The stigma attached to these beliefs during the revolutions may
have made the parents generation reticent, an effect that persists to this day. Nonetheless, what is
remarkable is that despite such a stigmatization, "private" values, attitudes, and convictions may
remain unchanged and their transmission across generations is resilient. Transmission of stigma-
tized private values and attitudes would particularly require close interactions and substantial
  47 Respondents  born between 1991 and 1995 are 42% more likely to state that hard work is important for success if
their ancestors were landlords or rich peasants before the revolution; this effect is statistically significant at the 1% level
(number of observations = 1,099).



                                                              32
time spent together between the generations, which is consistent with the co-residence patterns
that we examined above.
   Finally, we examine to what extent differences in attitudes and educational attainments could
account for the large income gaps that we document between the children generation of elite and
non-elite households. In Table 3, Columns 5­7, we compare the annual labor income between
individuals in the children generation of the pre-revolution elite and their peers from non-elite
households. In addition to the baseline controls of birth cohort and county of residence fixed ef-
fects (shown in Column 1), we control for educational attainment (Column 5), the cultural traits
and attitudes we examined above (Column 6), and both sets of variables (Column 7). The elite vs.
non-elite income gap, RMB 1,912/year in the baseline specification, is dramatically reduced when
educational attainment (Column 5) or values (Column 6) are controlled for: although the grand-
children of the pre-revolution elite still earn more than their peers without an elite background,
the effect is no longer statistically significant at conventional levels and drops by 85% and 75%, re-
spectively. Once differences in cultural traits, attitudes, and educational attainment are taken into
account (Column 7), the elite effect virtually disappears: it is reduced by 98% (to RMB 45/year).
One ought to be cautious in interpreting results from this exercise, as the covariance structure of
the regressors could affect the coefficient estimates, but the pattern suggests that the transmission
of a particular set of values and attitudes such as work ethics and educational attainment is an
important channel through which the income advantage of the pre-revolution elite emerges again
in the children generation.

Family networks

We last examine a complementary source of persistence: the elite households' social network, in
particular, that is based on the nuclear and extended families. We find that the rebound of in-
come among the children generation is almost exclusively concentrated among those who reside
in villages that have significant clan presence (see Appendix Table A.12), the backbone of the
family-based social network structure that sustains cooperation and public goods provision in ru-
ral China (Greif and Tabellini, 2017). Individuals in the children generation of the pre-revolution
elites are more likely to co-reside with their parents than their peers in non-elite households, and
as a result, forming households with more generations. In addition, members of pre-revolution
elite households are substantially more likely to: (i) visit relatives during the annual Spring Fes-
tival, the most important occasion for family gathering and reunion throughout China (see Ap-
pendix Table A.13); and (ii) provide their relatives and extended family members with, or receive
from them, financial help (see Appendix Table A.14). Interestingly, we do not observe substantial
differences in financial transfers exchanged with non-relatives, consistent with the fact that the
social networks are largely coextensive with the extended family and strong ties are more usu-
ally leveraged than weak ties in China (Bian, 1997). Taken together, these patterns suggest that
while the Land Reform and Cultural Revolution eradicated the elite class's physical assets and

                                                 33
opportunities to accumulate formal human capital -- making the family networks of the parents
generation of elite households less economically valuable, -- to the extent that the revolutions did
not induce mass killing or emigration, the basic social fabrics within elite families (both nuclear
and extended ones) survived. Such family-based networks may contribute to the persistence of
the pre-revolution elite.


6     Discussion

6.1     Pre-revolution elites: landlords vs. rich peasants
While the revolutions divided the Chinese rural population into two distinct groups (pre-revolution
elite and non-elite), different sub-groups may emerge as the new post-revolution upper and upper-
middle classes. Specifically, one may be concerned that, although Chinese landlords resembled
well-off farmers rather than rentiers (see Section 2.1), our results might be exclusively driven
by landlord households; this would indeed invalidate our interpretation of the rebound of elite
households as evidence of the transmission of work ethics.
      We examine whether the post-revolution rebound of elite advantage is primarily driven by the
descendants of landlords (who were, if anything, more likely to be rentiers) rather than those of
rich peasants (more likely to be a working elite). In Appendix Table A.15, we show that, compared
to their peers without an elite background, individuals whose grandparents belonged to the pre-
revolution elite earn significantly higher incomes, whether they originate from landlord or rich
peasant households. The income gap among the children generation between the descendants
of landlords and members of non-elite households is not statistically significantly different from
that between the descendants of rich peasants and non-elite households. This corroborates the
evidence presented in Section 5 showing the role of work ethics in the long-run rebound of the
pre-revolution elite.

6.2     Inequality prior to the revolutions: other measures
The main analysis that we present in the paper takes land inequality in the late 1940s, just before
the Land Reform, as the starting point. To gauge whether land inequality on the eve of the Land
Reform reflects the medium-run distribution of land in rural China, we complement our baseline
analysis with a data source on land distribution that is independent from the County Gazetteers.
Specifically, we measure the land ownership distribution in the 1930s, the earliest period for which
data on land distribution across Chinese counties exist. The source is Land Utilization in China: A
Study of 16,786 Farmers in 168 Localities, and 38,256 Farm Families in Twenty Two Provinces in China,
1929­1933, compiled by John L. Buck in 1937. Buck, the head of the Department of Agricultural
Economics at the University of Nanking, sent his students to different villages across China to
survey land utilization. We aggregate these reports from villages to the county level, which cov-


                                                 34
ers 142 counties. The counties are not representative of China, but these reports are the most
comprehensive data available on China's agricultural sector prior to 1949.
      We first examine whether the land distribution in the 1930s is predictive of that in the late
1940s just before the Land Reform. Overall, 52 counties can be matched to the pre-Land Reform
Gazetteer data. As shown in Appendix Table A.16, Panel A, the share of land area owned by
landlords in the 1930s is positively, significantly, and robustly correlated with the corresponding
measures in the late 1940s. In other words, the land distribution on the eve of the Land Reform
reflects an agricultural landscape in China that had prevailed for at least several decades, and
potentially for even longer periods.
      We then examine whether the pattern of reversal in county-level land inequality in 2000 is
robust to focusing on a longer time horizon -- from the 1930s to 2000. We match 123 counties in the
1930s reports to the 2000 Census. In Appendix Table A.16, Panel B, we predict real estate inequality
in 2000 with average land rent in the 1930s. The average rent in the early 1930s is significantly
negatively correlated with housing inequality measured in 2000. This, again, suggests that the
Land Reform and Communist Revolution is a shock to China's land distribution, which has been
otherwise fairly slow-moving.

6.3     Alternative channels of persistence
Intergenerational value transmission may not be the only reason for persistence. There could be
others. First, the pre-revolution elite's comeback could simply reflect the failure of the Commu-
nist and Cultural Revolutions to thoroughly deprive elite households of their wealth and access
to higher education. During the Cultural Revolution the elite were completely barred from post-
secondary education, since a "good" class label was a pre-requisite for admission into any school,
and it was extremely dangerous to forge one. Hidden wealth, on the other hand, is by definition
difficult to measure and could potentially be relevant. Wealth could be hidden if the Land Re-
form did not take away all the land from the landlord and rich peasant households beyond the
subsistence level, and these families could leave behind other agricultural productive assets. This
is unlikely not only because of the evidence we present in Section 4, but also due to the collec-
tivization movement in 1952­1957 that completely eliminated private property rights (both usage
and transfer rights) to any land and production assets soon after the Land Reform. To the extent
that one could try to hide wealth and assets from being confiscated, it is primarily in the form of
slaughtering cattle for one-off private consumption, and the estimated scale of such a behavior is
rather low (Chen and Lan, 2017). A more plausible channel of avoiding confiscation during the
two Revolutions was to transfer wealth overseas, mainly to Hong Kong and Taiwan. This typi-
cally involved individuals physically migrating along with their assets, since private savings and
overseas transfers were shut off until the late Reform and Opening period. While we think this
could capture the behavior of the top wealthy families in major urban centers, in particular Shang-
hai, this was very rare amongst the rural elite. Nevertheless, members of the elite households may

                                                 35
                               e relatives after overseas transfers are resumed.48 However, we do
                         ´ migr´
receive remittances from e
not find evidence that the magnitude of such remittances is substantial among the rural house-
holds we study, and we find no differential access to remittances in pre-revolution elite house-
holds.49 Finally, a small fraction of the urban elite received a portion of their pre-revolution real
estate properties back in the early 1990s. Again, no confiscated assets were returned in rural ar-
eas, and hence this is unlikely to drive the persistence among the rural elite that we document. A
systematic examination of the records in the County Gazetteers suggests that while the ownership
of the (previously confiscated) agricultural production assets such as semi-mechanized farming
tools have been re-allocated from the collectives to households since 1981, they were not returned
to their original owners if those assets were taken during the Land Reform. Agricultural land and
tools were instead typically allocated through lotteries or auctioned off (Unger, 1985).
    Second, the resurgence of the pre-revolution elite may be driven by differential policies that fa-
vor this group. Any such policies, if they exist, would have to be recent because the pre-revolution
elite were in fact discriminated against in most public policies throughout the revolution period
and even during the first decade of the Reform and Opening era. Our reading of contempo-
rary Chinese policies suggests that there were no systematic policies that explicitly and favor-
ably targeted pre-revolution elite. One subtle form of such favorable policies could be that the
pre-revolution elite have an easier time obtaining business licenses, although in those cases one
cannot determine whether it is coming from the demand side (e.g., local authorities prefer to
grant licenses to individuals from pre-revolution elite households, knowing that they cannot ac-
cess public sector jobs) or the supply side (e.g., the pre-revolution elite possess better know-how
to navigate the bureaucratic structure). The latter would be consistent with our broad definition
of cultural traits and characteristics that could be passed down from one generation to the next.
    Third, one may be concerned that the pattern of persistence among the pre-revolution elite is
driven by selective violence against the elite during the Land Reform and Cultural Revolution.
The systematic killing of landlords and rich peasants, although well documented (e.g., Teiwes,
1987), was limited in scale as most of the pre-revolution elite survived the revolutions. To the ex-
tent that killing could result in selective survival, and violence could lead to selective suppression
of the pre-revolution elite's advantages, attitudes, etc., our baseline results on intergenerational
persistence can be driven by such selection mechanisms. Selective killing and violence can oper-
ate in two (ex-ante ambiguous) directions. If killing and violence were more intense in historically
unequal places, systematically targeting those wealthy and capitalism-aligned individuals or re-
gions, then such a selection would generate a downward bias in our estimates of intergenerational
  48 Rural  elite households may also have been more likely to have urban relatives, who could have supported them
after the urban economy had picked up in the Reform era.
  49 Based on our calculation using CFPS data, as of 2010, about 12% of rural residents among the children generation

have received transfers from relatives not co-residing with them. Not all of these transfers are remittances, let alone
from overseas. Compared to those from non-elite households, individuals from pre-revolution elite households are in
fact slightly less likely to receive such transfers, and conditional on receiving the transfer, the amount is also slightly
lower.


                                                            36
persistence. If instead, killing and violence were more intense in historically less unequal places
and more successful among individuals with fewer resources and a lower capacity to resist, or
among those unable to ensure that their descendants perform well, then such a selection could
generate a pattern of persistence and upwardly bias the estimates on intergenerational persis-
tence. We examine the relationship between pre-revolution local inequality (such as the landlord
share of the population or land ownership Gini coefficients) and the intensity of violence (both
cases of killings and cases of persecutions) reported in the corresponding counties. Statistics on
mass killings during the Cultural Revolution are compiled from Walder and Su (2003), and we
collected data on persecution cases during the Land Reform from the County Gazetteers.50 We
examine the violence during the Land Reform and the Cultural Revolution separately, and the
results are presented in Appendix Tables A.17 and A.18, respectively. Violence was not associated
with regional inequality prior to the revolutions. More importantly, the overall level of violence,
albeit not zero, was too low to drive the persistence pattern that we document.
    Fourth, the pattern of pre-revolution elite individuals working harder and valuing wealth
more in the children generation could be explained by their willingness to exact revenge and
rectify the persecutions experienced by the previous generations of their households. A simi-
lar hypothesis is that the persecution of the grandparents and parents generations established or
made salient an elite group identity, which would be critical in fostering a set of work ethics and
other "productive" values and attitudes. The direct test of this hypothesis requires observing at-
titudes and values among the grandparents generation, prior to the revolutions. We are unable to
implement this due to data limitations. However, we provide two elements inconsistent with the
persecution-induced resentment hypothesis. First, resentment and revenge motivations should
be stronger in households whose members suffered deaths during the revolutions. However, we
do not observe differences in work ethics between the elite and non-elite in the children genera-
tion depending on whether their parents were still alive by 2010 (Table 6, Column 4). Of course,
not all the perished individuals in the parents generation passed away due to persecutions dur-
ing the revolutions. But to the extent that some of them did, we do not observe that such deaths
correspond to larger differences in cultural traits and attitudes between the elite and non-elite. Sec-
ond, persecution-induced revenge and resentment would be weaker among those in the children
generation who do not know their class label, since the potential family persecution experiences
during the revolutions would be much less salient without the explicit knowledge on one's class
label.51 We do not observe such a pattern -- if anything, those among the children generation
  50 We  extract the violence numbers from the text description of the Land Reform. We only find 67 counties (out of
876 counties in total) that document the violence quantitatively. For other counties, gazetteers do not record violence
during the Land Reform. The violence data include number of deaths, the population being struggled (douzheng), and
the number of people labeled as anti-revolutionary (fangeming). Columns 1­3 in Table A.17 report the estimates with
the full sample. Columns 4 and 5 are based on the 67 counties with quantitative violence data. Cultural Revolution
violence data was collected and shared by Andrew Walder.
  51 As the children generation is no longer required to know their own class labels since the Agrarian Reform Law was

repealed in 1987, the decision to transmit such knowledge rests almost entirely upon households, and hence is likely



                                                          37
of the pre-revolution elite who do not explicitly know their class labels are more likely to exhibit
stronger work ethics, as well as pro-market and pro-wealth attitudes.
    Fifth, the stark rebound of the pre-revolution elite in the children generation could be affected
by selective migration. In our analysis based on the CFPS data, we indeed cannot observe income
for individuals who left their counties of origin and established new households at destination.
Such emigration would lead to a bias in our estimate of the elite income premium if migrants
were negatively selected in terms of income. On the other hand, positive selection would imply
that the income gap is a lower bound. Appendix Table A.19 suggests that selective migration in
the children generation based on the pre-revolution elite status is negligible, but CFPS data do not
cover split-off households outside the county. In Appendix Table A.20, we rely on census data to
explore the selection of rural emigrants (both separate individuals and entire households), using
education as a proxy for earnings potential.52 We find that in 2000, college-educated individuals
with an agricultural hukou were 8.36% more likely to live in another county than their county
of registration. Results are similar when we consider migration of entire households.53 Positive
selection on education is also clear in 2005, after the big surge in rural-urban migration. These
results suggest that our estimate of the elite premium in the children generation is likely to be a
lower bound.
    Finally, one could attribute part of the persistence and rebound to innate traits and charac-
teristics. This could include genetics, personalities broadly defined, intelligence, and emotional
intelligence. We do not have direct measures in any of these dimensions, and hence we cannot
rule in or rule out the possibility that these characteristics contribute to the persistence.


7    Conclusion
This paper investigates the extent to which efforts to eradicate inequality in wealth and education
can shut off intergenerational transmission of socioeconomic status. The Communist and Cultural
Revolutions in China were among the most radical social transformations in recent human history.
The redistribution of wealth, in particular of land, was massive, and we show that the immediate
goal of achieving extreme redistribution and homogenization of the population was achieved.
The Cultural Revolution also closed the educational gap in the generation that grew up during
the Cultural Revolution, effectively interrupting the transmission of educational achievements
across generations.
    However, three decades after the introduction of economic reforms in the 1980s, the descen-
dants of the former elite earn a 16­17% higher annual income than those of the former non-elite,
endogenously chosen by the grandparents and parents generations.
  52 To reduce endogeneity concerns, the sample is restricted to non-migrants over 25 and migrants who had migrated

after 25 and were thus likely to have completed their studies at the time of migration.
  53 We consider that the whole household migrated if all members are registered in another county than the county of

residence.



                                                         38
such as poor peasants. Individuals whose grandparents belonged to the pre-revolution elite sys-
tematically bounced back, despite the cards being stacked against them and their parents. They
could not inherit land and other assets from their grandparents, their parents could not attend
secondary school or university due to the Cultural Revolution, their parents were unwilling to
express previously stigmatized pro-market attitudes in surveys, and they reside in counties that
have become more equal and more hostile toward inequality today. One channel we emphasize
is the transmission of values across generations. The grandchildren of former landlords are more
likely to express pro-market and individualistic values, such as approving of competition as an
economic driving force, and willing to exert more effort at work and investing in higher educa-
tion. In fact, the vertical transmission of values and attitudes -- "informal human capital" -- is
extremely resilient: even stigmatizing public expression of values may not be sufficient, since the
transmission in the private environment could occur regardless.54
    Intergenerational value transmission could hinder social mobility. Imagine that rich parents
who have become wealthy because of hard work transmit to their children the values that made
them rich to begin with, such as delayed gratification, saving for productive investments, a propen-
sity to acquire human capital through education, and work ethics that emphasize effort. As a
result, the children of rich parents may have an advantage since they have the necessary "cul-
tural tools" to acquire income and wealth, above and beyond other advantages such as bequests.
Poor and uneducated parents may transmit the opposite set of values, and their children could
remain stuck in poverty. Thus, holding constant all other factors interfering with social mobility,
intergenerational transmission of values could be an important force that reduces it. Moreover,
value transmission within households may be largely immune to policy interventions that aim to
level the playing field, making it an even more powerful source of persistence across generations.
Indeed, the transmission of values and socioeconomic status within the family seems to have
survived extraordinarily broad and deep institutional and political changes, with an exceptional
resilience.




   54 The closure of schools (and especially universities) could actually strengthen vertical transmission. For example,

not spending a substantial amount of time with schoolmates may make exposure to the values and attitudes held by
parents more salient and distinguishable; not moving to a different city to attend university may also make one more
likely to spend time with parents and other household members.


                                                          39
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Tarek A Hassan, and James A Robinson, "Social Structure and Development:
  A Legacy of the Holocaust in Russia," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, July 2011, 126 (2),
 895­946.

Ager, Philipp, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson, "The Intergenerational Effects of a
 Large Wealth Shock: White Southerners After the Civil War," NBER Working Paper, March 2019,
 pp. 1­65.

Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano, "Ch.4 - Family Ties," in Philippe Aghion and Steven N
  Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Volumne 2, Elsevier Masson SAS, 2014, pp. 177­215.

   and   , "Culture and Institutions," Journal of Economic Literature, December 2015, 53 (4), 898­
  944.

  , Sebastian Hohmann, Stelios Michalopoulos, and Elias Papaioannou, "Intergenerational Mo-
  bility in Africa," Working Paper, February 2019, pp. 1­48.

  , Stefanie Stantcheva, and Edoardo Teso, "Intergenerational Mobility and Preferences for Re-
  distribution," American Economic Review, February 2018, 108 (2), 521­554.

  , Stelios Michalopoulos, and Elias Papaioannou, "Ethnic Inequality," Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, April 2016, 124 (2), 428­488.

Andreas, Joel, "Battling Over Political and Cultural Power during the Chinese Cultural Revolu-
 tion," Theory and Society, 2002, 31, 463­519.

  , Rise of the Red Engineers: The Cultural Revolution and the Origins of China's New Class, Stanford,
  CA: Stanford University Press, 2009.

Andrieu, Jacques, "Mais que se sont donc dit Mao et Malraux ? Aux sources du mao¨
                                                                                isme occi-
 dental [in French]," Perspectives Chinoises, 1996, 37, 50­63.

Asher, Sam, Paul Novosad, and Charlie Rafkin, "Intergenerational Mobility in India: Estimates
  from New Methods and Administrative Data," Working Paper, August 2019, pp. 1­39.

Bautista, Maria Angelica, Felipe Gonzalez, Luis R Martinez, Pablo Munoz, and Mounu Prem,
  "Chile's Missing Students: Dictatorship, Higher Education and Social Mobility," Working Paper,
  May 2020, pp. 1­90.

Bayer, Patrick and Kerwin Kofi Charles, "Divergent Paths: A New Perspective on Earnings Dif-
  ferences Between Black and White Men Since 1940," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August
  2018, 133, 1459­1501.

Bazzi, Samuel, Gabriel Koehler-Derrick, and Benjamin Marx, "The Institutional Foundations of
  Religious Politics: Evidence from Indonesia," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2020, 135 (2).

Becker, Sascha O, Irena Grosfeld, Pauline Grosjean, Nico Voigtlander, and Ekaterina Zhu-
  ravskaya, "Forced Migration and Human Capital: Evidence from Post-WWII Population Trans-
  fers," American Economic Review, May 2020, 110 (5), 1430­1463.

                                                 40
Bellisario, Antonio, "The Chilean Agrarian Transformation: Agrarian Reform and Capitalist `Par-
  tial' Counter-Agrarian Reform, 1964­1980," Journal of Agrarian Change, 2007, 7.

Bernhardt, Kathryn, Rents, Taxes, and Peasant Resistance: The Lower Yangzi Region, 1840­1950, Stan-
  ford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1992.

Bernstein, Thomas P., Up to the Mountains and Down to the Villages: The Transfer of Youth from Urban
  to Rural China, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1977.

Bian, Yanjie, "Bringing strong ties back in: indirect ties, network bridges, and job searches in
  China," American Sociological Review, 1997, 63, 266­285.

  , "Chinese Social Stratification and Social Mobility," Annual Review of Sociology, August 2002, 28,
  91­116.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier, "The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics
  of Preferences," Journal of Economic Theory, 2001, 97 (2), 298­319.

Boserup, Simon Halphen, Wojciech Kopczuk, and Claus Thustrup Kreiner, "Stability and per-
  sistence of intergenerational wealth formation: Evidence from Danish wealth records of three
  generations," Working Paper, October 2014, pp. 1­52.

Brown, Jeremy, "Moving Targets: Changing Class Labels in Rural Hebei and Henan 1960­1979,"
  in Jeremy Brown and Matthew Johnson, eds., Maoism at the Grassroots: Everyday Life in China's
  Era of High Socialism, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015.

Buck, John Lossing, Land utilization in China, a study of 16,786 farms in 168 localities, and 38,256 farm
  families in twenty-two provinces in China, 1929­1933, Shanghai: Commercial Press, 1937.

Chen, Shuo and Xiaohuan Lan, "There Will Be Killing: Collectivization and Death of Draft Ani-
 mals," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, October 2017, 9 (4), 58­77.

Chen, Ting, James Kai-Sing Kung, and Chicheng Ma, "Long Live Keju! The Persistent Effects of
 China's Imperial Examination System," The Economic Journal, forthcoming.

Chen, Yuyu and David Y. Yang, "Historical Traumas and the Roots of Political Distrust: Political
 Inference from the Great Chinese Famine," Working Paper, 2019.

  , Suresh Naidu, Tinghua Yu, and Noam Yuchtman, "Intergenerational mobility and institu-
  tional change in 20th century China," Explorations in Economic History, October 2015, 58 (C),
  44­73.

  , Wang Hui, and David Y. Yang, "Salience of History and the Preference for Redistribution,"
  Working Paper, July 2017, pp. 1­51.

Cheng, Tiejun and Mark Selden, "The Origins and Social Consequences of China's Hukou Sys-
 tem," China Quarterly, 1994, 139, 644­668.

Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren, "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mo-
 bility I: Childhood Exposure Effects," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2018, 133 (3),
 1107­1162.


                                                   41
  and , "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility II: County-Level Esti-
  mates," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2018, 133 (3), 1163­1228.

  , , Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez, "Where is the land of Opportunity? The Geography
  of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, December
  2014, 129 (4), 1553­1623.

Corak, Miles and Andrew Heisz, "The Intergenerational Earnings and Income Mobility of Cana-
  dian Men: Evidence from Longitudinal Income Tax Data," Working Paper, October 1998, pp. 1­
  37.

                 elys and Shi Li, "Inequality Persistence and Revolution: What can we learn
De la Rupelle, Ma¨
 from the Long March in China?," Working Paper, Paris School of Economics 2012.

Deng, Zhong and Donald J. Treiman, "The Impact of the Cultural Revolution on Trends in Edu-
 cational Attainment in the People's Republic of China," American Journal of Sociology, 1997, 103,
 391­428.

Dikotter,
   ¨      Frank, The Cultural Revolution: A People's History, 1962­1976, Bloomsbury Publishing,
  May 2016.

Dohmen, Thomas, Benjamin Enke, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, "Patience
 and Comparative Development," Working Paper, May 2018, pp. 1­65.

Donaldson, Dave and Adam Storeygard, "The View from Above: Applications of Satellite Data
 in Economics," Journal of Economic Perspectives, November 2016, 30 (4), 171­198.

Dong, Zhikai and Jiang Wu, Industry Cornerstone of New China [in Chinese], Guangzhou: Guang-
 dong Economy Publishing House, 2004.

Fei, Xiaotong, Gary G Hamilton, and Zheng Wang, From the Soil, the Foundations of Chinese Society
  A Translation of Fei Xiaotong's Xiangtu Zhongguo, with an Introduction and Epilogue, Univ of
  California Press, 1992.
                                     ¨
Figlio, David, Paola Giuliano, Umut Ozek, and Paola Sapienza, "Long-Term Orientation and
  Educational Performance," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, November 2019, 11 (4),
  272­309.

Friedman, Edward, Paul G. Pickowicz, and Mark Selden with Kay Ann Johnson, Chinese Village,
  Socialist State, New Haven & London: Yale University Press, 1991.
                 ¨
Galor, Oded and Omer    ¨
                       Ozak  , "The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference," American Economic
 Review, October 2016, 106 (10), 3064­3103.

Ganzeboom, Harry B G, Paul M De Graaf, and Donald J Treiman, "A standard international
 socio-economic index of occupational status," Social Science Research, March 1992, 21 (1), 1­56.

Gold, T. B., "After comradeship: personal relations in China since the Cultural Revolution," China
 Quarterly, 1985, 104, 657­675.

Gottschang, Thomas R., "Economic change, disasters, and migration: The historical case of
 Manchuria," Economic Development and Cultural Change, 1987, 35, 461­490.

                                                42
Greif, Avner and Guido Tabellini, "The clan and the corporation: Sustaining cooperation in
 China and Europe," Journal of Comparative Economics, February 2017, 45, 1­35.

Hanley, Eric and Donald J. Treiman, "Did the Transformation to Post-Communism in Eastern
 Europe Restore Pre-Communist Property Relations?," European Sociological Review, July 2004,
 20, 237­252.

Harris, C. D., "The market as a factor in the localization of industry in the United States," Annals
 of the Association of American Geographers, 1954, 44, 315­348.

Heblich, Stephan, Marlon Seror, Hao Xu, and Yanos Zylberberg, "Industrial clusters in the long
 run: evidence from Million-Rouble plants in China," CESifo Working Paper Series 7682, CESifo
 Group Munich 2019.

Heshmati, Almas and Biwei Su, "Analysis of Gender Wage Differential in China's Urban Labor
 Market," The Singapore Economic Review, April 2017, 62 (02), 423­445.

Hinton, William, Fanshen: A Documentary of Revolution in a Chinese Village, New York: Vintage
  Books, 1966.

Huang, Philip C. C., The Peasant Economy and Social Change in North China, Stanford, CA: Stanford
 University Press, 1985.

  , "Rural Class Struggle in the Chinese Revolution: Representational and Objective Realities from
  the Land Reform to the Cultural Revolution," Modern China, January 1995, 21 (1), 105­143.

Jia, Ruixue, Xiaohuan Lan, and Gerard Padro ´ i Miquel, "Doing Business in China: Parental
   Background and Government Intervention as Determinants of Entrepreneurship," May 2020.

Kraus, Richard Curt, Class Conflict in Chinese Socialism, New York City, NY: Columbia University
  Press, 1981.

Kung, James Kai-Sing, Xiaogang Wu, and Yuxiao Wu, "Inequality of land tenure and revolu-
 tionary outcome: An economic analysis of China's land reform of 1946­1952," Explorations in
 Economic History, October 2012, 49 (4), 482­497.

Lardy, Nicholas R, "Economic recovery and the 1st Five-Year Plan," in "The Cambridge History
  of China," Cambridge University Press, March 2008, pp. 144­183.

Lee, Hong Yung, From Revolutionary Cadres to Party Technocrats in Socialist China, Berkeley and Los
  Angeles, CA: University of California Press, 1991.

Lin, Tung-Fa, "Emigration and Immigration in Taiwan between the early post-War period and the
  1950s [in Chinese]," Newsletter of Taiwan Studies, 2018, 103, 4­7.

Lippit, Victor D, Land reform and economic development in China a study of institutional change and
  development finance, M E Sharpe Inc, 1974.

Liu, Chang, Peasants and Revolution in Rural China: Rural political change in the North China plain and
  the Yangzi delta, 1850­1949, London and New York: Routledge, 2007.



                                                  43
Long, Jason and Joseph Ferrie, "Grandfathers Matter(ed): Occupational Mobility Across Three
  Generations in the US and Britain, 1850­1911," The Economic Journal, June 2018, 128 (612), F422­
  F445.
Lu, Yao and Donald J. Treiman, "The Effect of Sibship Size on Educational Attainment in China:
  Cohort Variations," American Sociological Review, 2008, 73, 813­834.
MacFarquhar, Roderick and Michael Schoenhals, Mao's Last Revolution, Harvard University
 Press, 2006.
Meng, Xin, Nancy Qian, and Pierre Yared, "The Institutional Causes of China's Great Famine,
 1959-1961," The Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (4), 1­71.
Mkodzongi, Grasian and Peter Lawrence, "The fast-track land reform and agrarian change in
 Zimbabwe," Review of African Political Economy, 2019, 46 (159).
Montgomery, Roger and Toto Sugito, "Changes in the Structure of Farms and Farming in Indone-
 sia between Censuses, 1963­1973: The Issues of Inequality and Near-Landlessness," Journal of
 Southeast Asian Studies, 1980, 11.
Parish, William L., "Destratification in China," in James L. Watson, ed., Class and social stratification
  in post-revolution China, Cambridge University Press, 1984.
  and Martin King Whyte, Village and Family in Contemporary China, Chicago, IL: University of
  Chicago Press, 1978.
Pepper, Suzanne, "Education and Revolution: The "Chinese Model"," Asian Survey, September
  1978, 18, 847­890.
Perkins, Dwight H, Agricultural Development in China, 1368-1968, AldineTransaction, August 2013.
Peterson, Glen, "The Uneven Development of the International Refugee Regime in Postwar Asia:
  Evidence from China, Hong Kong and Indonesia," Journal of Refugee Studies, 2012, 25, 326­343.
Piketty, Thomas, Li Yang, and Gabriel Zucman, "Capital Accumulation, Private Property, and
  Rising Inequality in China, 1978­2015," American Economic Review, July 2019, 109 (7), 2469­2496.
Robles, Wilder and Henry Veltmeyer, The politics of agrarian reform in Brazil: the landless rural
 workers movement, New York, NY: Palgrave MacMillan, 2015.
Roland, Gerard and David Y. Yang, "China's Lost Generation: Changes in Beliefs and their Inter-
  generational Transmission," Working Paper, August 2017, pp. 1­41.
Roll, C. R., "The distribution of rural incomes in China: a comparison of the 1930s and the 1950s,"
  Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Economics, Harvard, 1974.
Rosen, Stanley, Red Guard Factionalism and the Cultural Revolution in Guangzhou (Canton), Boulder,
  CO: Westview Press, 1982.
Schurmann, Franz, Ideology and Organization in Communist China, Univ of California Press, 1971.
Shirk, Susan L., Competitive Comrades: Career Incentives and Student Strategies in China, Berkeley
  and Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press, 1982.

                                                   44
Shiue, Carol, "An Analysis with Five Linked Generations in China, 1300 ­ 1900," 2018.

sing Kung, James Kai and Nan Li, "Commercialization as exogenous shocks: The effect of the
  soybean trade and migration in Manchurian villages, 1895­1934," Explorations in Economic His-
  tory, 2011, 48, 568­589.

Szel´       an, Socialist Entrepreneurs, The University of Wisconsin Press, 1988.
    enyi, Iv´

Teiwes, Frederick C, "Ch.2 - Establishment and Sonsolidation of the New Regime," in Roderick
  MacFarquhar and John K. Fairbank, eds., The Cambridge History of China Volume 15: The People's
  Republic, Part 2: Revolutions within the Chinese Revolution, 1966­1982, Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press, 1987.

Treiman, Donald J. and Andrew G. Walder, "The impact of class labels on life chances in China,"
  American Journal of Sociology, 2019, 124, 1125­1163.

Unger, Jonathan, Education under Mao: Class and Competition in Canton Schools, 1960­1980, New
 York City, NY: Columbia University Press, 1982.

  , "The class system in rural China: a case study," in James Watson, ed., Class and Social Stratifi-
  cation in Post-revolution China, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984, pp. 121­141.

  , "The Decollectivization of the Chinese Countryside: A Survey of Twenty-Eight Villages," Pa-
  cific Affairs, 1985, 58, 585­606.

Wagner, Maria Luise, "The sexenio (1946­52)," in Rex A. Hudson and Dennis M. Hanratty, eds.,
 Bolivia: a country study, Library of Congress Federal Research Division, 1989.

Walder, Andrew G., Communist Neo-Traditionalism: Work and Authority in Chinese Industry, Berke-
 ley, CA: University of California Press, 1986.

   and Songhua Hu, "Revolution, Reform, and Status Inheritance: Urban China, 1949­1996,"
  American Journal of Sociology, 2009, 114, 1395­1427.

  and Yang Su, "The Cultural Revolution in the countryside: Scope, timing, and human impact,"
  China Quarterly, 2003, 173, 82­107.

Wang, Youqin, "Student attacks against teachers: The revolution of 1966," Issues and Studies, 2001,
 37, 29­79.

Wemheuer, Felix, A Social History of Maoist China Conflict and Change, 1949­1976, Cambridge,
 United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press, 2019.

Whyte, Martin K., "Bureaucracy and Modernization in China: The Maoist Critique," American
 Sociological Review, 1973, 38, 149­163.

Wong, John, "Chinese land reform in retrospect," University of Wisconsin - Madison 1973.

  , Land Reform in the People's Republic of China: Institutional Transformation in Agriculture, New
  York: Praeger Publishers, 1973.



                                                 45
Xie, Yu and Chunni Zhang, "The long-term impact of the Communist Revolution on social strat-
  ification in contemporary China," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
  States of America, September 2019, 116 (39), 19392­19397.

Yang, M. M. H., Gifts, Favors, and Banquets: The Art of Social Relationship in China, Ithaca, NY:
  Cornell University Press, 1994.

Yap, Ko-Hua, "Mainland Chinese in Taiwan: number, origins, and distribution [in Chinese],"
  Newsletter of Taiwan Studies, 2018, 103, 15­17.

Zhang, Heather X. and Nicholas Loubere, "Rural finance, development and livelihoods in
  China," Working Paper, June 2013, pp. 1­29.

Zhou, Xueguang, The State and Life Chances in Urban China, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univer-
  sity Press, 2004.




                                               46
Figures and tables




                     47
                                                                                        2
                8




                                                                                                            1.5
                        6




                                                                                          Post-Reform Density
       Pre-Reform Density




                                                                                                   1
              4




                                                                                        .5
                2
                0




                                                                                        0
                            0       1            2              3               4
                                Land Ownership Ratio (Poor Peasant/ Landlord)

                                  Before Land Reform              After Land Reform

  Figure 1: This figure plots the ratio of land ownership per poor peasant to the land ownership per
landlord before and after the Land Reform. The dashed line is the probability density function of the
     pre-Reform ratio. The solid line is the probability density function of the post-Reform ratio.




                                                       48
  Figure 2: This figure displays Gini coefficients across Chinese counties. Darker color indicates higher
   within-county inequality. Top panel: Gini coefficients in land ownership prior to the Land Reform;
   counties with missing observations are imputed using prefecture averages (province averages if all
counties in a prefecture have missing data); provinces49 with no data are shown in gray. Middle panel: Gini
  coefficients in land ownership just after the Land Reform; same imputation strategy for counties with
    missing values. Gini coefficients without imputation are shown in Figure A.6. Bottom panel: Gini
                                    coefficients in housing size in 2000.
                                                             .2
             Elite class's advantange in secondary+ education
           -.05         0        .05       .1      .15




                                                                  1930   1940   1950       1960       1970   1980   1990
                                                                                       Birth cohort


Figure 3: This figure plots the elite class's advantage in educational attainment -- the average difference in
 the probability in completing at least secondary education between the elite class (defined as individuals
   from landlord or rich peasant households) and the non-elite class. The shaded area indicates the birth
 cohorts whose education could be potentially affected by the Cultural Revolution, i.e., those who would
  have completed or entered secondary school (age 12­18) between the start of the Cultural Revolution in
                              1966 and the normalization of education in 1972.




                                                                                        50
                 0
                 -.1-.2
           Coefficient
           -.3   -.4
                 -.5




                          10th*   20th*   30th*    40th*     50th     60th    70th     80th    90th
                                                           Percentile

                                           Coefficient             90% Confidence Interval



  Figure 4: This figure plots coefficients from regressing the ratio between the X th and 50th percentiles of
 amenity-adjusted housing area distribution on the pre-Reform land ownership Gini. We reverse the ratios
if X < 50 (indicated by  ), so that one can interpret negative coefficients across the entire spectrum of X as
indicating a reversal between historical and contemporary inequality. Sample: counties with more than 80
households in the our random 0.1% extract of the 2000 Census. The corresponding coefficients are reported
in Appendix Table A.7, Panel A. Regression coefficients are also available with imputed Gini coefficients in
  Panel B. Results based on alternative samples are also reported in Table A.7 and plotted in Figure A.12.




                                                           51
                                                    10000
          Elite class's advantange in 2010 income (RMB)
           -5000            0           5000




                                                            1930   1940   1950          1960   1970   1980
                                                                             Birth cohort


Figure 5: This figure plots the elite class's advantage in contemporary income -- the average difference in
2010 income between the elite class (defined as individuals from landlord or rich peasant households) and
  the non-elite class. The shaded area indicates the birth cohorts belonging to the "parents" generation.




                                                                              52
                                      Table 1: Parents and children generations of the pre-revolution elite

                                                  Both generations           Parents generation                 Children generation
                                                                         Elite class diff.      Overall     Elite class diff.     Overall
                                                  Mean        Std        Coef.      Std. err.   Mean       Coef.      Std. err.    Mean
                                                    (1)       (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)

      Panel A: income
       Annual labor income                        8,809.0   24,048.0   -1,105.4**   (474.7)     6,148.0   1,911.5**    (854.7)    11,628.0
      Panel B: educational performance
       Years of education completed               5.547      4.670      0.156       (0.168)      4.419    0.748***     (0.190)     6.743
       Completed at least junior high school      0.139      0.346     -0.026**     (0.011)      0.102    0.041**      (0.018)     0.178
       Math skills tested in 2010                 2.129      1.022      0.001       (0.035)      1.880    0.162***     (0.045)     2.393




53
      Panel C: labor market sector choices
       Self-employed                              0.120     0.325        0.033*     (0.017)      0.084    0.046**      (0.022)     0.151
       Employed in public sector                  0.042     0.200       -0.013*     (0.008)      0.030    -0.016       (0.010)     0.052
       Career prestige score (ISEI)               30.410    12.970       -0.212     (0.534)      28.06    1.471**      (0.730)     32.44

      Panel D: political and social connections
       Communist Party member                     0.074      0.261     -0.055***    (0.010)      0.094     0.012       (0.011)     0.052
       Experienced hunger during famine           0.131      0.338      0.033*      (0.018)      0.228        -           -          -
       Co-living with parents                     0.118      0.323      0.015**     (0.006)      0.010    0.214***     (0.019)     0.233
       Visit friends during holidays              3.711      6.932       0.257      (0.273)      3.330     0.564*      (0.317)     4.115
     Notes: Columns 3 and 6 (4 and 7) present regression coefficients (standard errors) of estimated differences between members
     of the elite and non-elite households for the parents and children generations, respectively, controlling for cohort fixed effects
     and residence county fixed effects. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample: parents (1940­1965 birth cohorts; N = 10,430)
     and children generations (1966­1990 birth cohorts; N = 9,844). Note that Panel C only contains employed individuals (parents
     generation: N = 5,220; children generation: N = 6,022).
                    Table 2: Inequality in land properties before and after revolutions

                                                             Gini coefficient in 2000
                                                    (Amenity-adjusted housing area per capita)
                                          (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

  Pre-revolution land Gini             -0.026***   -0.025***   -0.025***   -0.024***   -0.025***   -0.021***
                                        (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.008)

   # observations                        410         410         410        410         410          284
   Control for province FEs              Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
   Control for 2000 night light level    No          Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
   Control for 1950 education level      No          No          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
   Control for geographic attributes     No          No          No         Yes         Yes          Yes
   Control for market access             No          No          No         No          Yes          Yes
   Regions                               All         All         All        All         All      Non-coastal
Notes: This table reports the relation between the pre-reform land Gini and the 2000 Gini of the amenity-
adjusted housing area per capita. All specifications include province fixed effects. The geographical at-
tributes (Columns 4­6) include distances (km) to the shore, fast-speed road network, and major rivers, as
well as the means and standard deviations of elevation and slope. Market access (Columns 5 and 6) include
both external and internal market access: external (resp., internal) market access is defined as the weighted
sum of the populations (from the 1953 Census) in coastal (resp., non-coastal) counties; as is standard in the
economic geography literature since Harris (1954), the weights are the inverse of the exponential of distance,
measured in km; coastal counties are defined as counties in provinces with access to the sea. Standard er-
rors are reported in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample: counties with more than 80
households in the our random 0.1% extract of the 2000 Census.




                                                     54
                            Table 3: Decomposing income differences

                                                  Total annual labor income
                             (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)

  Elite class             1,911.5**   2,006.2**    1,973.6**   1,932.8**    290.1     471.7      45.0
                           (854.7)     (850.3)      (853.6)     (853.0)    (855.1)   (844.7)   (832.4)

   County FE                   Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
   Cohort FE                   Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
   Sector FE                   No         Yes        No          No       No       No       No
   Province×Sector FE          No         No         Yes         No       No       No       No
   Migrants FE                 No         No         No          Yes      No       No       No
   Control for education       No         No         No          No       Yes      No       Yes
   Control for values          No         No         No          No       No       Yes      Yes
Notes: All specifications include cohort fixed effects and county fixed effects. Column 2 addi-
tionally includes sector fixed effects; Column 3 includes province×sector fixed effects; Column 4
includes a migrant indicator variable, defining migrants as individuals whose current county of
residence is different from their birth place; Column 5 controls for years of education; Column 6
controls for all available values and work ethics variables; and Column 7 combines the controls of
Columns 5 and 6. Columns 5­7 additionally control for whether the respondent is co-living with
her parents. The mean of the dependent variable is RMB 11,628 (std. dev. 28,716). *** p < 0.01, **
p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample: 1966­1990 birth cohorts; number of observations = 9,844.




                                                  55
                                   Table 4: Education inequality

                                        Education inequality: Top quartile minus bottom quartile
                                         (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)

                                                      Panel A: Grandparents generation
 Pre-revolution land Gini               0.536     0.245      0.222     0.457     0.262    0.0539
                                       (0.415)   (0.387)    (0.327)   (0.416)   (0.337)   (0.424)
                                                         Panel B: Parents generation
 Pre-revolution land Gini              -0.317    -0.331     -0.305    -0.249    -0.411    -0.675
                                       (0.432)   (0.435)    (0.365)   (0.444)   (0.375)   (0.434)
                                                         Panel C: Children generation
 Pre-revolution land Gini              0.595*     0.476      0.483    0.642*     0.456    0.0593
                                       (0.341)   (0.337)    (0.331)   (0.350)   (0.338)   (0.416)
   # observations                        410      410       410       410      410           284
   Control for province FEs              Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes           Yes
   Control for 2000 night light level    No       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes           Yes
   Control for 1950 education level      No       No        Yes       Yes      Yes           Yes
   Control for geographic attributes     No       No        No        Yes      Yes           Yes
   Control for market access             No       No        No        No       Yes           Yes
   Regions                               All      All       All       All       All    Non-coastal
Notes: The dependent variable is the gap in average educational attainment between the most
educated 25 percent and least educated 25 percent. Panel A reports results for the grandparents
generation, Panel B for the parents generation, and Panel C for the children generation. *** p < 0.01,
** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample: counties with more than 80 households in the our random 0.1%
extract of the 2000 Census.




                                                 56
                                 Table 5: Values of the children generation of the pre-revolution elite

                                               Work ethics                                          Pro-market values
                         Hard work is         Hours worked       Hours on leisure      Important to     Inequality    Competition
                       critical to success   during workdays     during weekends       become rich     is desirable   is desirable
                               (1)                  (2)                  (3)                (4)             (5)            (6)

       Elite class          0.076***             0.595***             -0.808***            0.092           0.068         0.081**
                             (0.028)              (0.186)              (0.145)            (0.057)         (0.064)        (0.035)

        DV mean                3.911                5.916                 13.13             3.645            2.949        3.792
        DV std. dev.           0.629                4.196                 3.331             1.189            1.014        0.732
     Notes: The dependent variables capture three dimensions of work ethics: view that hard work is critical to success, hours
     worked during workdays, and hours spent on leisure during weekends, as well as pro-market values: importance to
     become rich, belief that inequality is desirable, and belief that competition is desirable for society. The independent variable
     is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the grandfather's class label is landlord or rich peasant, and 0 otherwise. *** p < 0.01, **
     p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample: 1966­1990 birth cohorts; number of observations = 9,844. The average number of observations
     is 9,460, as a different number of respondents declined to answer a specific question.
57
            Table 6: Co-residence and vertical transmission of values

                                  Hard work is critical to success
                                   Parents alive     Parents alive      Parents
                        All        and co-living   and not co-living    not alive
                        (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)

  Elite class         0.076***        0.134***           0.045            0.017
                       (0.028)         (0.043)          (0.060)          (0.055)

   # observations       9,844           2,291             3,680           3,873
   DV mean              3.911           3.924             3.891           3.922
   DV std. dev.         0.629           0.649             0.628           0.617
Notes: All columns control for cohort fixed effects and county fixed effects. Col-
umn 1 includes all respondents in the children generation; Column 2 restricts the
sample to individuals residing with their parents at the time of the survey; Col-
umn 3 focuses on children whose parents are still alive but with whom they do
not reside; and Column 5 uses only those in the children generation whose par-
ents are no longer alive. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample: 1966­1990
birth cohorts.




                                       58
ONLINE APPENDIX (NOT FOR PUBLICATION)




                 A.1
Figure A.1: Measuring land during the Land Reform.




                       A.2
Figure A.2: Students chanting revolutionary slogans at Peking University during the Cultural Revolution.




                                                  A.3
Figure A.3: Sample of County Gazetteer's record on land distribution before and after the Land Reform.




                                                 A.4
Figure A.4: Sample of County Gazetteer's record on land distribution before and after the Land Reform.




                                                 A.5
Figure A.5: This figure gives a graphical illustration of the Gini coefficient calculation.




                                           A.6
Figure A.6: This figure displays Gini coefficients across Chinese counties immediately before and after the
     Land Reform, without imputing for missing values. Darker color indicates higher within-county
   inequality; counties with missing information are shown in gray. Top panel: Gini coefficients of land
 ownership prior to the Land Reform (only counties with non-missing observations). Bottom panel: Gini
 coefficients of land ownership just after the Land Reform (only counties with non-missing observations).




                                                   A.7
                                                                                          2.5
                  .15




                                                                                          2
                                                                                          Post-Reform Density
         Pre-Reform Density
                       .1




                                                                                               1      1.5
         .05




                                                                                          .5
                  0




                                                                                          0
                              0           10                   20                    30
                                     Landlord Land Ownership per Capita

                                  Before Land Reform             After Land Reform



Figure A.7: This figure plots the number of acres of land owned per landlord household member before
   and after the Land Reform. The dashed line is the probability density function of pre-Reform land
     ownership. The solid line is the probability density function of post-Reform land ownership.




                                                    A.8
               2.5
               2 1.5
           Density
               1
               .5
               0




                       0            .2              .4                 .6                .8
                                             Percentage Land Gain


Figure A.8: This figure plots the probability density function of the average percentage land gain (% arable
 land in the county) for every 1 percent of the peasant population (in the hired, poor, and middle peasant
                             categories) after the Land Reform across counties.




                                                    A.9
                     .8       .6
         Percentage Land Gain
            .2       .4
                     0
                     -.2




                                   .2   .4            .6                 .8                 1
                                               Pre-reform Gini


Figure A.9: This figure plots the pre-Reform Gini and the average percentage land gain (% arable land in
    the county) for every 1 percent of the peasant population (in the hired, poor, and middle peasant
                     categories) after the Land Reform. The red line is the fitted line.




                                                 A.10
                                                                                             10
                    2




                                                                                             8
                           1.5




                                                                                             Post-Reform Density
          Pre-Reform Density




                                                                                                          6
                  1




                                                                                                  4
                    .5




                                                                                             2
                    0




                                                                                             0
                                 0   .2          .4            .6          .8            1
                                                 Gini Coefficient

                                     Before Land Reform             After Land Reform



 Figure A.10: This figure plots the Gini coefficient of land ownership before and after the Land Reform.
The dashed line is the probability density function of the pre-Reform Gini coefficient. The solid line is the
                     probability density function of the post-Reform Gini coefficient.




                                                      A.11
                          1
          Reduction in Gini After Reform
           -.5          0 -1         .5




                                           0   .2        .4           .6          .8            1
                                                    Pre-Reform Gini Coefficient


Figure A.11: This figure plots the Gini coefficient before the Land Reform against the Gini coefficient after
the Land Reform. Blue (red) dots represent counties that have landlords owning more (less) land after the
                               Land Reform than poor peasants, on average.




                                                           A.12
                    0   -.1
            Coefficient
             -.2    -.3
                    -.4




                              10th*   20th*   30th*    40th*     50th     60th    70th     80th   90th
                                                               Percentile

                                               Coefficient             90% Confidence Interval
                    0
                    -.1
              Coefficient
            -.3      -.2
                    -.4
                    -.5




                              10th*   20th*   30th*    40th*     50th     60th    70th     80th   90th
                                                               Percentile

                                               Coefficient             90% Confidence Interval



Figure A.12: These two figures plot the coefficients as in Figure 4 but with different samples. Top panel:
Coefficients are estimated from counties with more than 50 households in our micro-sample of the 2000
   Census. Bottom panel: The figure is based on counties with more than 100 households reported.




                                                               A.13
Figure A.13: This figure illustrates graphically how individual-level persistence and county-level reversal
                                             can be reconciled.




                                                  A.14
                                                Table A.1: County level summary statistics and balance table

        Panel A: Summary Statistics
                                            Sample 1: Counties with sufficient data    Sample 2: Counties with insufficient data    Sample 3: Counties with no data
        Variable                              Mean         SD            Obs.           Mean         SD              Obs.            Mean         SD          Obs.

        Distance to Shore                     5.203      4.943            576            5.472     3.986              296             5.570     4.884         418
        Longitude                            112.419      6.968           576           112.56      6.650             296           111.628     8.818         418
        Latitude                              31.21      4.966            576           32.958     5.815              296            33.184     7.202         418
        2000 GDP per capita                 5279.456    4171.236          531          4665.502   3309.318            269           4655.372   3279.397       379
        2000 Avg. Night lights                2.707      5.306            576            3.274     6.629              296             2.970     6.479         418
        2000 Avg. Years of Edu.               6.926      0.908            576            7.051     0.986              296             6.964     1.209         418
        2000 Median Years of Edu.              6.979      0.975           576            7.083      1.040             296             6.955     1.396         418
        2000 Avg. Y. of Edu. (b. <1950)       4.344       1.195           576            4.438      1.332             296             4.348     1.519         418
        2000 Median Housing Area              24.266      7.339           576           21.628      5.482             296            21.239     5.495         418
        2000 Median Adj. Housing Area         30.163     10.200           576           26.526      7.248             296            26.123     7.697         418
        2000 Housing Gini                     0.324      0.029            576            0.315     0.028              296             0.306     0.030         418
        Panel B: Balanced Test




A.15
                                                Sample 1 = Sample 2 + Sample 3                    Sample 1 = Sample 2               Sample 1 + Sample 2 = Sample 3
                                              Diff.        SE           p-value          Diff.        SE            p-value           Diff.       SE        p-value

         Distance to Shore                     0.030      0.093            0.750          0.055       0.079           0.483            0.07      0.084         0.404
         Longitude                            -0.044      0.122            0.718          0.053       0.102           0.605            0.132     0.109         0.224
         Latitude                             -0.125      0.094            0.182         -0.053       0.079           0.498            0.038     0.084         0.653
         2000 GDP per capita                 -61.583     249.495           0.805        126.573      193.903          0.514          254.603    207.672        0.220
         2000 Avg. Night lights               -0.979      0.354            0.006         -0.582       0.327           0.075           -0.078     0.349         0.823
         2000 Avg. Years of Edu.              -0.092      0.058            0.113          0.006       0.052           0.901            0.092     0.056         0.101
         2000 Median Years of Edu.            -0.049      0.059            0.408          0.061       0.055           0.268            0.127     0.058         0.030
         2000 Avg. Y. of Edu.                 -0.012      0.079            0.876          0.089       0.068           0.187            0.151     0.072         0.037
         2000 Median Housing Area               0.8       0.398            0.045          0.903       0.308           0.003            0.589     0.329         0.074
         2000 Median Adj. Housing Area         0.927      0.543            0.088          1.124       0.422           0.008            0.821     0.451         0.069
         2000 Housing Gini                    -0.001      0.003            0.858          0.002       0.003           0.493            0.004     0.003         0.165
       Notes: This table checks potential county selection bias due to partial unavailability of inequality data. Panel A reports summary statistics for three samples:
       Counties with complete data (Sample 1), Counties with incomplete data (Sample 2), and Counties with no data (Sample 3). Panel B executes three balance
       tests: Sample 1 = Sample 2, Sample 1 = Sample 2 + Sample 3, Sample 1 + Sample 2 = Sample 3. 2000 Avg. Y. of Edu. (b. <1950) refers to the average educational
       attainment for cohorts born before 1950. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
                        Table A.2: Summary statistics -- 2000 Population Census

  Panel A: Education and real estate
                                            Mean        S.D.    Median    25th Percentile   75th Percentile
                                             (1)        (2)       (3)            (4)              (5)
  Years of Education                        7.134       3.380    6.000         6.000             9.000
  Years of Education (born before 1950)     4.512       1.146    4.500         3.836            5.065
  Housing Area per capita                  26.302      19.122   21.333        15.000            32.000
  Amenity Adjustment Factor                 0.240       0.150    0.200         0.200            0.300
  Amenity-adjusted Housing Area            33.312      25.963   26.400        17.600            40.320

  Panel B: Migration
                                            Non-migrant              Other county,              Other
                                           or Same County            Same Province             Province
  Migration by birth place                         90.38%                4.93%                  4.69%
  Migration by place of registration               94.12%                2.46%                  3.42%
  Migration in 1995­2000                           95.11%                1.99%                  2.90%
Notes: Panel A summarizes the distribution (mean, standard deviation, median, 25th percentile, and 75th
percentile) of five key variables from the 2000 Population Census in the 410 counties with more than
80 households and valid pre-reform Gini data (number of observations = 285,605): years of education,
years of education of the population born before 1950, housing area per capita (in m2 ), amenity adjust-
ment factor, and amenity-adjusted housing area (see text for details). Panel B summarizes migration by
birth place, migration by place of household registration (hukou), and migration between 1995 and 2000
among agricultural hukou holders in the full Census sample (number of observations = 881,416). The pop-
ulation is classified into three categories: non-migrants or migrants who moved within their birth county
(resp. their county of registration, or their county of residence in 1995), migrants who crossed a county
boundary but still reside in their birth province (resp. their province of registration, or their province of
residence in 1995), and migrants living in a different province than the one their were born in (resp., their
province of registration, or their province of residence in 1995). Sample: random 0.1% extract of the 2000
Population Census.




                                                     A.16
      Table A.3: Robustness: county-level inequality persistence with different amenity adjustments

 Panel A: Gini of Unadjusted Housing Area
                                            Gini (Amenity-adjusted Housing Area per capita)
                               (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)

 Gini                       -0.047***    -0.035***   -0.044***   -0.044***   -0.044***   -0.043***   -0.037**
                             (0.013)      (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.015)
 2000 GDP per capita                    -0.0066***
                                         (0.0019)
 2000 Avg. Night lights                              -0.80***     -0.62***                 -0.52**      -0.57
                                                      (0.21)       (0.22)                   (0.23)     (0.37)
 Avg. Edu. (b. <1950)                                            -0.0029**               -0.0026**    -0.0018
                                                                  (0.0013)                (0.0013)   (0.0017)
 # observations               410          371         410         410         410         410         284
 Panel B: Equal-weighted Amenity
                                            Gini (Amenity-adjusted Housing Area per capita)
                               (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)

 Gini                       -0.036***    -0.036***   -0.036***   -0.036***   -0.033***   -0.034***   -0.037**
                             (0.012)      (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.015)
 2000 GDP per capita                    -0.0066***
                                         (0.0019)
 2000 Avg. Nightlight                                -0.80***     -0.62***                 -0.52**      -0.57
                                                      (0.21)       (0.22)                   (0.23)     (0.37)
 Avg. Edu. (b. <1950)                                            -0.0029**               -0.0026**    -0.0018
                                                                  (0.0013)                (0.0013)   (0.0017)
 # observations               410          371         410         410         410         410         284
 Panel C: PCA-weighted Amenity
                                            Gini (Amenity-adjusted Housing Area per capita)
                               (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)

 Gini                       -0.031***    -0.032***   -0.031***   -0.031***   -0.029**    -0.029**    -0.037**
                             (0.011)      (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.015)
 2000 GDP per capita                    -0.0080***
                                         (0.0018)
 2000 Avg. Nightlight                                -0.95***     -0.79***               -0.68***       -0.57
                                                      (0.20)       (0.21)                 (0.22)       (0.37)
 Avg. Edu. (b. <1950)                                            -0.0027**               -0.0024*     -0.0018
                                                                  (0.0012)               (0.0013)    (0.0017)
   # observations               410        371         410        410          410         410        284
   Geographical Features        No         No          No         No           Yes         Yes        Yes
   Province FE                  Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes
   Regions                      All        All         All        All          All         All    Non-coastal
Notes: This table reports different adjustments for housing amenities. We consider six indicator variables from
the 2000 Census: 1. multistory house, 2. independent kitchen, 3. fuel or gas access, 4. tap water access, 5. hot
bath, and 6. in-unit restroom. Total amenity inflator is assumed to be 0.6. Panel A reports the housing Gini
coefficient calculated with the raw housing area per capita (in m2 ). Panel B adjusts the housing area for all
factors equally. Panel C adjusts the housing area with the following PCA loadings for the six different factors:
19.1%, 10.4%, 21.4%, 18.4%, 20.4%, and 10.3%, respectively. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
                                                     A.17
         Table A.4: Robustness: county-level inequality persistence with different sampling criteria

 Panel A: Household > 50
                                           Gini (Amenity-adjusted Housing Area per capita)
                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)

  Gini                        -0.016      -0.017     -0.017      -0.018      -0.013      -0.014      -0.020
                             (0.011)     (0.012)    (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.013)
  2000 GDP per capita                   -0.00035
                                        (0.0037)
  2000 Avg. Night lights                            -0.481*     -0.574**                 -0.440      -0.573*
                                                    (0.252)      (0.254)                 (0.275)     (0.323)
  Avg. Edu. (b. <1950)                                          0.0045**                0.0052**    0.0062**
                                                                (0.0019)                (0.0020)    (0.0025)
 # observations                502        460         502         502         502         502          359
 Panel B: Household > 80
                                           Gini (Amenity-adjusted Housing Area per capita)
                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)

  Gini                      -0.036***   -0.036***   -0.036***   -0.036***   -0.033***   -0.034***   -0.037**
                             (0.012)     (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.015)
  2000 GDP per capita                    0.0011
                                        (0.0037)
  2000 Avg. Night lights                             0.046        0.014                   0.243       0.778
                                                    (0.375)      (0.401)                 (0.417)     (0.685)
  Avg. Edu. (b. <1950)                                          0.00053                  0.0011     -0.00084
                                                                (0.0023)                (0.0024)    (0.0032)
 # observations                410        371         410         410         410         410          284
 Panel B: Household > 100
                                           Gini (Amenity-adjusted Housing Area per capita)
                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)

  Gini                      -0.036***   -0.036**    -0.036***   -0.036***   -0.034**    -0.034**    -0.046***
                             (0.013)     (0.014)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.017)
  2000 GDP per capita                    0.0013
                                        (0.0040)
  2000 Avg. Night lights                             0.020       0.0095                   0.419       0.391
                                                    (0.440)      (0.471)                 (0.488)     (0.825)
  Avg. Edu. (b. <1950)                                          0.00016                 0.00023     -0.00060
                                                                (0.0025)                (0.0026)    (0.0037)
  # observations              348         309        348        348         348        348            237
  Geographical Features       No          No         No         No          Yes        Yes            Yes
  Province FE                 Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes
  Regions                     All         All        All        All         All        All       Non-coastal
Notes: Panels A, B, and C report estimations with county samples including more than 50, 80, and 100 house-
holds, respectively (the benchmark in Table 2 is more than 80 households). *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                    A.18
        Table A.5: Robustness: county-level inequality persistence with imputed Gini coefficients

 Panel A: Household > 50
                                              Gini (Amenity-adjusted Housing Area per capita)
                               (1)         (2)              (3)       (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)

 Imputed Gini                -0.013*     -0.017**       -0.012      -0.011       -0.011       -0.010        -0.013
                            (0.0076)    (0.0085)       (0.0076)    (0.0075)     (0.0076)     (0.0075)      (0.011)
 2000 GDP per capita                    0.0059***
                                        (0.0020)
 2000 Avg. Nightlight                                   0.102        0.074                     0.110        -0.012
                                                       (0.100)      (0.099)                   (0.102)      (0.221)
 Avg. Edu. (b. <1950)                                              0.0046***                 0.0048***    0.0055***
                                                                   (0.00061)                 (0.00065)    (0.0015)
 # observations               2193        1518           2193        2193         2193         2193          982
 Panel B: Household > 80
                                              Gini (Amenity-adjusted Housing Area per capita)
                               (1)         (2)              (3)       (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)

 Imputed Gini               -0.026***    -0.028***     -0.026***   -0.024***    -0.025***    -0.023***     -0.032**
                            (0.0082)     (0.0090)      (0.0082)    (0.0080)     (0.0081)     (0.0080)       (0.012)
 2000 GDP per capita                    0.00712***
                                          (0.0020)
 2000 Avg. Nightlight                                  0.214*        0.212*                    0.227*       0.445
                                                       (0.127)      (0.124)                   (0.128)      (0.296)
 Avg. Edu. (b. <1950)                                              0.0057***                 0.0059***    0.0032*
                                                                   (0.00068)                 (0.00071)    (0.0018)
 # observations               1708        1189           1708        1708         1708         1708          752
 Panel C: Household > 100
                                              Gini (Amenity-adjusted Housing Area per capita)
                               (1)         (2)              (3)       (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)

 Imputed Gini              -0.0256***   -0.0271***    -0.0252***   -0.0247***   -0.0252***   -0.0245***   -0.0388***
                            (0.0089)     (0.0097)      (0.0089)     (0.0087)    (0.00890)     (0.0087)      (0.016)
 2000 GDP per capita                     0.0059***
                                         (0.0022)
 2000 Avg. Nightlight                                  0.299**      0.285**                   0.359**       0.426
                                                       (0.148)      (0.145)                   (0.149)      (0.383)
 Avg. Edu. (b. <1950)                                              0.0059***                 0.0061***     0.0028
                                                                   (0.00074)                 (0.00077)    (0.0021)
   # observations               1384        962          1384         1384        1384        1384          605
   Geographical Features          No         No           No           No          Yes         Yes          Yes
   Province FE                    Yes       Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
   Regions                        All        All          All          All         All         All     Non-coastal
Notes: Imputed Gini replaces missing county-level values with the prefecture average (or province average when
all counties in a prefecture have missing data). Panels A, B, and C report estimations with county samples including
more than 50, 80, and 100 households, respectively (the benchmark in Table 2 is more than 80 households). ***
p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.


                                                     A.19
          Table A.6: Robustness: county-level inequality persistence with urbanization control

 Panel A: Full specification of Table 2
                                              Gini (Amenity-adjusted Housing Area per capita)
                                (1)            (2)             (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)

  Gini                       -0.036***      -0.036***     -0.036***   -0.036***   -0.033***   -0.034***   -0.037**
                              (0.012)         (0.013)      (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.015)
 2000 GDP per capita                          0.0011
                                             (0.0037)
 2000 Avg. Nightlight                                      0.046        0.014                   0.243       0.778
                                                          (0.375)      (0.401)                 (0.417)     (0.685)
 Avg. Edu. (b. <1950)                                                 0.00053                  0.0011     -0.00084
                                                                      (0.0023)                (0.0024)    (0.0032)
 # observations                 410           371              410      410         410         410         284
 Panel B: Raw Gini with urbanization rate control
                                         Gini (Amenity-adjusted Housing Area per capita)
                                (1)            (2)             (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)

 Gini                        -0.037***      -0.036***     -0.037***   -0.037***   -0.034***   -0.034***   -0.037**
                              (0.012)         (0.013)      (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.015)
 Urban Hukou Percentage        0.012           0.037        0.014       0.014       0.021       0.015       0.015
                              (0.021)         (0.036)      (0.024)     (0.026)     (0.022)     (0.026)     (0.039)
 2000 GDP per capita                          -0.0015
                                             (0.0045)
 2000 Avg. Nightlight                                      -0.065       -0.066                  0.153       0.602
                                                          (0.421)      (0.428)                 (0.445)     (0.820)
 Avg. Edu. (b. <1950)                                                 0.000021                0.00056      -0.0011
                                                                      (0.0025)                (0.0026)    (0.0033)
 # observations                 410           371              410      410         410         410         284
 Panel C: Imputed Gini urbanization rate control
                                         Gini (Amenity-adjusted Housing Area per capita)
                                (1)            (2)             (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)

 Imputed Gini                 -0.053**      -0.072**      -0.055**    -0.055**      -0.043     -0.046*    -0.046***
                               (0.025)       (0.028)       (0.025)     (0.025)     (0.026)     (0.027)     (0.017)
 Urban Hukou Percentage       0.034***       0.0069       0.034***    0.018***    0.034***     0.017**      0.025
                              (0.0040)       (0.013)      (0.0040)    (0.0067)    (0.0042)    (0.0068)    (0.0195)
 2000 GDP per capita                       0.00661***
                                            (0.0023)
 2000 Avg. Nightlight                                     0.226*        0.219*                  0.228*      0.340
                                                          (0.124)      (0.124)                 (0.128)     (0.307)
 Avg. Edu. (b. <1950)                                                 0.0032***               0.0037***    0.0023
                                                                      (0.0011)                (0.0012)    (0.0020)
  # observations                1708       1189        1708        1708         1708       1708        752
Notes: This table provides robustness with urbanization rate control. The urbanization rate is defined as the
percentage of the county population with urban household registration, or hukou. Panel A reports the full
specification of Table 2, Panel B introduces the urbanization control, and Panel C reports results using the
imputed Gini. Columns are defined as in Table A.5. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample: counties with
more than 80 households in the our random 0.1% extract of the 2000 Census.
                                                        A.20
                                                     Table A.7: Breakdown of inequality into deciles

                                                      Panel A: Counties with actual Gini Coefficients
                         Amenity-adjusted Gini      10th /50th   20th /50th   30th /50th   40th /50th   60th /50th   70th /50th   80th /50th   90th /50th

                                    (1)                (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)

                                                                  Counties with more than 50 households
        Gini                       -0.016            -0.0015       0.013       0.0011       -0.0059       -0.015     -0.069**     -0.142***    -0.216**
                                  (0.011)            (0.018)      (0.017)      (0.016)      (0.012)      (0.016)      (0.031)      (0.048)      (0.087)
                                                                  Counties with more than 80 households
        Gini                     -0.036***            -0.010      -0.0066       -0.004      -0.0055     -0.045***    -0.137***    -0.245***    -0.372***
                                  (0.012)            (0.020)      (0.019)      (0.017)      (0.013)      (0.017)      (0.032)      (0.052)      (0.095)
                                                                  Counties with more than 100 households
        Gini                     -0.036***           0.0045      -0.00095      -0.0015      -0.0064       -0.030     -0.117***    -0.215***    -0.321***
                                  (0.013)            (0.022)      (0.020)      (0.019)      (0.014)      (0.019)      (0.034)      (0.056)      (0.104)
                                                     Panel B: Counties with imputed Gini Coefficients




A.21
                         Amenity-adjusted Gini      10th /50th   20th /50th   30th /50th   40th /50th   60th /50th   70th /50th   80th /50th   90th /50th

                                    (1)                (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)

                                                                  Counties with more than 50 households
        Imputed Gini              -0.013*             -0.013      0.0018        -0.011      -0.0084      -0.036*     -0.042**     -0.105***    -0.175***
                                 (0.0076)            (0.014)      (0.013)      (0.011)     (0.0083)      (0.021)      (0.020)      (0.031)      (0.058)
                                                                  Counties with more than 80 households
        Imputed Gini             -0.026***            -0.024      -0.016       -0.022*      -0.014      -0.049**     -0.085***    -0.177***    -0.271***
                                  (0.0082)           (0.016)      (0.014)      (0.011)     (0.0086)      (0.020)      (0.021)      (0.033)      (0.061)
                                                                  Counties with more than 100 households
        Imputed Gini             -0.026***              -0.010     -0.016     -0.021     -0.015*     -0.048**    -0.069***      -0.15***     -0.22***
                                  (0.0089)             (0.017)    (0.015)    (0.012)    (0.0091)      (0.023)     (0.023)       (0.036)       (0.067)
       Notes: Panel A reports the coefficients used in Figure 4 and Appendix Figure A.12. Panel B reports a parallel set of coefficients with imputed
       Gini coefficients. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample: Panel A -- Actual Gini Sample; number of observations for counties with
       > 50 households: 502, > 80: 410, > 100: 348; Panel B -- Imputed Gini; number of observations for counties with > 50 households: 2193,
       > 80: 1708, > 100: 1384.
                  Table A.8: Reversal of inequality at county level ­ heterogeneous effects

                                                                   Gini coefficient in 2000
                                                          (Amenity-adjusted housing area per capita)
                                                (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)

  Pre-revolution land Gini                   -0.0004     -0.0350***     -0.0216**   -0.0341***   -0.0309***   -0.0247**
                                             (0.0111)     (0.0129)       (0.0096)    (0.0097)     (0.0088)     (0.0112)
    × External market access                -0.0359***
                                             (0.0134)
    × Internal market access                                  0.0149
                                                             (0.0148)
    × Distance to "156" factories                                        -0.0050
                                                                        (0.0127)
    × Distance to 1948 railways                                                      0.0170
                                                                                    (0.0128)
    × Distance to Ming courier stations                                                           0.0149
                                                                                                 (0.0119)
    × Nb. of imperial exam. graduates                                                                          0.0008
                                                                                                              (0.0127)

   # observations                               410         410           410         410        410            410
   Control for province FEs                     Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes
   Control for 2000 night light level           Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes
   Control for 1950 education level             Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes
   Control for geographic attributes            Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes
   Regions                                      All         All           All         All        All            All
Notes: This table analyzes heterogeneity in the relation between the pre-Reform land Gini and 2000 Gini of the
amenity-adjusted housing area per capita. In each regression, we interact the pre-Land Reform Gini coefficient
with one of six dimensions of heterogeneity: (i) external market access, (ii) internal market access, (iii) distance to
the "156 Programme" factories built under Soviet cooperation in the 1950s (see Heblich et al., 2019), (iv) distance
to railways before the revolutions, measured in 1948, (v) distance to Ming dynasty (1368­1644) courier stations,
and (vi) total number of imperial examination graduates (jinshi) during the Qing dynasty (1644­1911), normalized
by population in 1953. External (resp., internal) market access is defined as the weighted sum of the populations
(from the 1953 Census) in coastal (resp., non-coastal) counties; as is standard in the economic geography literature
since Harris (1954), the weights are the inverse of the exponential of distance, measured in km; coastal counties are
defined as counties in provinces with access to the sea. In each regression, the heterogeneity variable is a dummy
equal to 1 if the county's value is above the median and 0 otherwise. All specifications include the province fixed
effects. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample: counties with
more than 80 households in the our random 0.1% extract of the 2000 Census.




                                                      A.22
        Table A.9: Preference toward inequality

                         Preference toward inequality
                           (1)         (2)         (3)

  Pre-revolution Gini   -0.657***   -0.617***   -0.620***
                         (0.156)     (0.158)     (0.157)

  DV mean                 3.025      3.025        3.025
  DV std. dev.            0.974      0.974        0.974
  Cohort FE                No         Yes          Yes
  Income control           No         No           Yes
Notes: This table shows the correlation between the
county-level Gini coefficients in land ownership prior to
the Land Reform and today's preference toward inequal-
ity. All regressions include province fixed effects. ***
p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample: all birth co-
horts; number of observations = 4,612.




                         A.23
         Table A.10: Agricultural vs. non-agricultural occupation

                                     Non-agricultural occupation
                            (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)

                                  Panel A: Both Parents in Agriculture
 Elite class             0.626**     0.690**   0.741***   0.641**   0.626*
                         (0.301)     (0.267)    (0.258)   (0.315)   (0.314)

                         Panel B: At Least One Parent in Non-agriculture
 Elite class             -0.0575     -0.0560   -0.0520    -0.0581   -0.0635
                         (0.048)     (0.048)   (0.047)    (0.048)   (0.049)

   County FE                Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
   Cohort FE                Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
   Sector FE                No        Yes       No         No        No
   Province×Sector FE       No         No       Yes        No        No
   Migrants FE              No         No       No         Yes       No
   Years of education       No         No       No         No        Yes
Notes: Occupation is defined as the job currently held in 2012 or the last
job reported in the CFPS survey. Our sample only includes children with
valid occupations reported by both their father and mother. 146 respon-
dents in the children generation reside in households with both their father
and mother working in an agricultural occupation (reported in Panel A),
and 300 reside in households with at least one parent working in the non-
agricultural sector (reported in Panel B). All specifications include cohort
fixed effects and county fixed effects. Column 2 additionally includes sec-
tor fixed effects; Column 3 includes province×sector fixed effects; Column
4 includes a migrant indicator variable, defining migrants as individuals
whose current county of residence is different from their birth place; and
Column 5 controls for years of education and variables capturing attitudes
and work behavior. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample: 1966­1990
birth cohorts.




                                     A.24
  Table A.11: Attitudes and behaviors: parents vs. children

                                 Stated attitudes   Behaviors
                                       (1)             (2)

 Panel A: children generation
  Elite class                        0.076***        0.595***
                                     (0.028)         (0.186)

 Panel B: parents generation
  Elite class                         0.021          0.685***
                                     (0.024)         (0.154)
Notes: The dependent variables capture work ethics in terms
of stated attitudes (whether hard work is critical to success;
Column 1) and behaviors (hours worked during workdays;
Column 2). The independent variable is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if the grandparents' class label is landlord or rich
peasant, and 0 otherwise. Panel A reports results for the chil-
dren generation. Panel B reports results for the parents gener-
ation. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample: children
generation (1966­1990 birth cohorts; number of observations =
9,844) and parents generation (1940­1965 birth cohorts; num-
ber of observations = 10,430).




                            A.25
    Table A.12: Persistence in income differences and presence of local clan networks

                                                   Total annual labor income
                                      (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)

  Elite class                        -126.3      -81.0       -125.5      -234.3     -1,154.8
                                   (1,371.0)   (1,348.3)   (1,331.5)   (1,368.1)   (1,317.2)
  Clan presence                    1,575.4**   1,628.1**   1,601.3**   1,541.8**   1,595.1**
                                    (654.0)     (653.3)     (653.3)     (653.6)      (646.3)
  Clan presence × Elite            3,018.3*    3,089.5*    3,158.6*    3,163.0*      1,606.3
                                   (1,768.3)   (1,753.1)   (1,738.7)   (1,763.7)   (1,700.9)

   County FE                         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes
   Sector FE                         No          Yes         No           No          No
   Province×Sector FE                No          No          Yes          No          No
   Migrants FE                       No          No          No           Yes         No
   Control for educ. and values      No          No          No           No         Yes
Notes: Clan presence is a village-level indicator variable equal to 1 if at least 10% of resi-
dents in the village have the same last name, and 0 otherwise. All specifications include
cohort fixed effects and county fixed effects. Column 2 additionally includes sector fixed
effects; Column 3 includes province×sector fixed effects; Column 4 includes a migrant
indicator variable, defining migrants as individuals whose current county of residence is
different from their birth place; and Column 5 controls for years of education and vari-
ables capturing attitudes and work behavior. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample:
1966­1990 birth cohorts; 7,818 respondents can be matched to valid clan data in the corre-
sponding village of residence.




                                            A.26
Table A.13: Social networks and pre-revolution elite: Spring Festival visits

                                            Spring Festival visits
                                    Total      To relatives   To friends
                                     (1)           (2)               (3)

      Panel A: number of visits
       Elite class                 0.834**       0.384**       0.451**
                                   (0.325)       (0.196)       (0.199)

      Panel B: standardized
       Elite class                 0.071**       0.055**       0.065**
                                   (0.028)       (0.028)       (0.029)

       County FE                      Yes          Yes          Yes
       Cohort FE                      Yes          Yes          Yes
    Notes: Spring Festival visits are defined as the number of fami-
    lies that visited the respondent's household during Chinese New
    Year. Panel A uses the number of visits as dependent variables;
    Panel B uses a standardized dependent variable, so that the coef-
    ficients can be interpreted in percent of a standard deviation. Col-
    umn 1 considers all visits; Column 2 focuses on related families,
    defined as all "blood relations except for lineal descent relatives,
    such as aunts and uncles"; and Column 3 restricts the analysis to
    friend families. All specifications include county fixed effects and
    cohort fixed effects. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample:
    all birth cohorts; number of observations: 21,670.




                                   A.27
Table A.14: Social networks and pre-revolution elite: financial help

                                  Financial help (amount in RMB)
                                   (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)

  Panel A: From relatives
  Elite class                    453.4*    451.2*    470.4*    467.1*
                                 (257.6)   (257.1)   (257.5)   (256.9)

  Panel B: From non-relatives
  Elite class                      1.2       0.6       4.1      3.2
                                 (98.7)    (98.6)    (98.7)    (98.6

  County FE                         Yes     Yes       Yes        Yes
  Cohort FE                         Yes     Yes       Yes        Yes
  Income                             No     Yes        No        Yes
  Other controls                     No      No       Yes        Yes
Notes: Financial help is defined as the amount (received or given)
in RMB exchanged in the past year as financial help and donations.
Panel A uses the total amount exchanged with non-coresident rela-
tives, while Panel B focuses on non-relatives. All specifications in-
clude county fixed effects and cohort fixed effects. Columns 2 and 4
control for the respondent's income. Columns 3 and 4 additionally
control for sector fixed effects, province×sector fixed effects, and an
indicator for migrant status. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.
Sample: all birth cohorts; number of observations: 21,670.




                                A.28
Table A.15: Income difference in the children generation: landlords and rich peasants

                           Annual labor income     Total household income
                                    (1)                       (2)

          Landlords                1587.3                  4577.2***
                                  (1274.6)                 (1704.2)
          Rich peasants           1868.6*                  3273.4**
                                  (1084.3)                 (1603.2)
        Notes: The dependent variable is the annual labor income (Col-
        umn 1) and total household income (Column 2) in 2010, measured
        by CFPS. Total household income includes labor market wage in-
        comes, incomes from own business and other private enterprises,
        pensions, and other transfers, as well as capital income from sav-
        ings and other financial investments. Landlords and rich peasants
        are class labels assigned to the households of the children genera-
        tion prior to the Communist Revolution. The reference category is
        individuals of the children generation from non-elite households.
        *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1. Sample: 1966­1990 birth cohorts;
        number of observations = 9,844.




                                          A.29
                     Table A.16: Land ownership inequality: 1930s vs. 1950s

 Panel A: pre-Land Reform
                                            Share of land area per landlord (pre-Land Reform)
                                           (1)          (2)     (3)       (4)            (5)

  Share of land area per owner (1930)    0.078**    0.074*    0.083**   0.082**        0.075**
                                         (0.037)    (0.040)   (0.039)   (0.039)        (0.036)

  # observations                            50          50      50        50             41
 Panel B: contemporary
                                         Gini in 2000 (Amenity-adjusted housing area per capita)
                                           (1)          (2)     (3)       (4)            (5)

  Average rent (1930)                     -0.040   -0.052**    -0.038    -0.038         -0.048
                                         (0.026)    (0.025)   (0.027)   (0.027)        (0.032)

    # observations                            123      123        123       123            94
    Control for geographic attributes         No       Yes        Yes       Yes            Yes
    Control for region FEs                    No       No         Yes       Yes            Yes
    Control for night light level             No       No         No        Yes            Yes
    Control for 2000 GDP                      No       No         No        No             Yes
Notes: The land ownership data in 1930 is based on Buck's (1937) agricultural survey. Panel A
correlates the share of land area per landlord reported in the gazetteers to the share of land area
per landowner reported in Buck (1937). Panel B correlates the amenity-adjusted housing Gini co-
efficient in 2000 (restricting the sample to counties with at least 20 households in our random 0.1%
extract of the Population Census) to the average rent collected by land owners in 1930. *** p < 0.01,
** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                 A.30
                    Table A.17: Violence during the Land Reform

                                            Any report              Number of victims
                                 Death      Struggle     Violence   Death      Struggle
                                   (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)

  Pre-Reform landlord share      0.0013     -0.0003      0.00056     0.0036     0.0008
                                 (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.0024)   (0.0016)   (0.0027)
  Pre-Reform Gini                 -0.009     -0.070        -0.020     -0.069     0.109
                                 (0.051)    (0.075)       (0.079)    (0.083)    (0.071)

 # observations                   639         639          639        12         23
Notes: The dependent variables capture different types of persecution perpetrated
during the Land Reform (death, struggle sessions, and other violence). Columns 1­
3 regress indicator variables equal to 1 if any persecution of the specified type is
reported in the County Gazetteers, and 0 otherwise, on pre-Land Reform measures
of land inequality; Columns 4 and 5 use as dependent variables the percentage of
victims of the specified persecution type as a share of total population. *** p < 0.01,
** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                           A.31
                      Table A.18: Violence in the 1960s

                                Revolutionary casualties   Violence victims
                                  (1)           (2)          (3)       (4)

  Pre-Reform landlord share      0.037         0.020         0.013    0.008
                                (0.043)       (0.043)      (0.048)   (0.047)
  Pre-Reform Gini                0.009         0.012        -0.063    -0.077
                                (0.045)       (0.044)      (0.050)   (0.049)

    Impute zeros                  No             Yes            No     Yes
   # observations                 519            533           519     533
Notes: The dependent variables capture different types of persecutions perpe-
trated during the Cultural Revolution, using data from Walder and Su (2003).
Columns 1 and 2 regress dummies equal to 1 if any persecution of the speci-
fied type is reported in the County Gazetteers, and 0 otherwise, on pre-Land
Reform measures of land inequality; Columns 3 and 4 use as dependent vari-
able the percentage of victims of the specified persecution type as a share of
total population. Columns 2 and 4 report the regression coefficients after im-
puting missing values as zeros. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                    A.32
Table A.19: Migration in the children generation along pre-revolution elite status

                                            Migration
                             since birth   since age 3    since age 12
                                 (1)           (2)             (3)

               Elite class      -0.027           0.004       0.003
                               (0.017)          (0.005)     (0.007)
             Notes: The dependent variables capture individual-
             level migration: in Column 1 (resp., 2 and 3), it is a
             dummy equal to 1 if the respondent's current county
             of residence is different than the one she was living in
             at birth (resp., at the ages of 3 and 12). Sample: 1966­
             1990 birth cohorts; number of observations: 9,844. ***
             p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                         A.33
                      Table A.20: Migrant selection

                                                      Migration
                                     Individual-level      Household-level
                                           (1)                  (2)

  Panel A: 2000 Population Census
  College-educated                         0.084                  0.059
                                            (0.013)                (0.017)

  Panel B: 2005 Population Survey
  College-educated                         0.090                  0.122
                                            (0.006)                (0.011)
Notes: The dependent variables capture individual- (Column 1) and
household-level migration (Column 2); they are dummy-coded. An indi-
vidual is categorized as a migrant if her county of residence is different
from her county of registration. A household is categorized as a migrant
household if all its members are registered in a different county from the
county of residence. The sample is restricted to agricultural hukou hold-
ers over 25, and we only consider migrants who migrated after 25 (in
Column 2, these sample restrictions apply to the household head). All
regressions include (the household head's, in Column 2) birth year fixed
effects and province of registration fixed effects, and control for sex. Col-
umn 2 additionally controls for household size. Panel A uses micro data
from our random 0.1% extract of the 2000 Population Census (sample
size: 493,743 individuals; 213,972 households). Panel B uses micro data
from a 20% extract of the 1% Population Survey of 2005 (sample size:
1,089,004 individuals; 442,372 households). *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *
p < 0.1.




                                    A.34
Appendix A                  Measures of intergenerational mobility: transition matrix
A.1       Theoretical derivation: the correspondence from transition matrix to regression
          coefficients
For a transitional matrix,

                                                   Young Top X Young Bottom 1-X
                                  Old Top X             a             b
                                Old Bottom 1-X          c             d

We solve b, c, d as functions of a and X first.

                                                       b = 1-a
                                               (1 - a ) X
                                                    c=
                                                1-X
                                                 (1 - a ) X
                                         d = 1-
                                                   1-X
Consider the following two regressions linking the rank of the young generation to the social
status of the old generation. Regression 1: Regress the dummy of being in the top X of the young
generation on the dummy of being in the top X of the old generation.

                                      Dyoung ( Top X ) =  1 Dold ( Top X ) + c +

The coefficient is the expectation of probability difference of entering in the top X rank.

                                                     X             a-X
                                          1 = a -       (1 - a ) =
                                                    1-X            1-X
Regression 2: Regress the rank of young generation on the dummy of being in the top X of the old
generation.
                            Rank young ( TopX ) =  2 Dold ( TopX ) + c +
The coefficient  2 is the expectation of rank difference. The cohort from top X of the old generation:a(1 -
X             1- X   1+ a - X                                     (1- a ) X              (1- a ) X 1- X
2 ) + (1 - a ) 2 =      2     . The cohort from the bottom 1 - X : 1-X × (1 - X
                                                                              2 ) + (1 - 1- X ) 2 =
      X (1- a )
1- X + 1- X
      2           . The coefficient
                                                       X (1- a )
                                                  a-    1- X            a-X
                                            2 =                    =
                                                       2               2(1 - X )

A.2       Empirical implementation
We try to compare our individual-level persistence with the US and Canada. We compute the
three-generation decile by decile transition matrix in the US and Canada. There is no data captur-
ing the persistence from grandparents to grandchildren. Thus, we compute the three-generation
transition matrix from the parent-child transition matrix.
    In the US, we compute the decile by decile parent-child matrix based on the 100 × 100 matrix


                                                           A.35
provided by Chetty et al. (2014).1 Corak and Heisz (1998) report the decile by decile transition
matrix with Canadian income tax data.
    We further assume that the transmission are independent from generation to generation. Thus,
the three-generation matrix M3 would be simply the squared parent-child matrix M2 :

                                                      2
                                                M3 = M2

    We reproduce below the three-generation transmission matrix in the US, estimated by Chetty
et al. (2014):
            Dec.1      Dec.2     Dec.3    Dec.4      Dec.5    Dec.6    Dec.7    Dec.8    Dec.9 Dec.10
     Dec.1 0.1406      0.1191     0.111   0.1055     0.0988   0.0923   0.0871   0.0821   0.0818 0.0815
     Dec.2 0.1264      0.1149    0.1095   0.1054     0.1006   0.0955   0.0911   0.0863   0.0856 0.0847
     Dec.3 0.1172      0.1112    0.1076   0.1047     0.1013   0.0974   0.0938   0.0898   0.0891 0.0880
     Dec.4 0.1094      0.1074    0.1054   0.1036     0.1015   0.0990   0.0964   0.0932   0.0926 0.0916
     Dec.5 0.1022      0.1034    0.1029   0.1022     0.1014   0.1002   0.0988   0.0969   0.0964 0.0956
     Dec.6 0.0953      0.0991    0.1001   0.1005     0.1010   0.1013   0.1012   0.1008   0.1006 0.1001
     Dec.7 0.0882      0.0943    0.0968   0.0985     0.1004   0.1023   0.1038   0.1051   0.1052 0.1053
     Dec.8 0.0806      0.0890    0.0930   0.0961     0.0996   0.1033   0.1066   0.1100   0.1105 0.1111
     Dec.9 0.0738      0.0839    0.0893   0.0936     0.0986   0.1041   0.1092   0.1148   0.1157 0.1169
     Dec.10 0.0663     0.0776    0.0843   0.0900     0.0967   0.1044   0.1120   0.1209   0.1226 0.1252

   We reproduce below the three-generation transmission matrix in Canada, estimated by Corak
and Heisz (1998):
              Dec.1    Dec.2     Dec.3    Dec.4      Dec.5    Dec.6    Dec.7    Dec.8    Dec.9 Dec.10
     Dec.1    0.1117   0.1059    0.1031   0.1003     0.0989   0.0972   0.0963   0.0963   0.0964 0.0967
     Dec.2    0.1083   0.1045    0.1025   0.1004     0.0994   0.0979   0.0971   0.0970   0.0968 0.0968
     Dec.3    0.1055   0.1035    0.1023   0.1008     0.1000   0.0986    0.098   0.0978   0.0973 0.0970
     Dec.4    0.1032   0.1023    0.1017   0.1009     0.1004   0.0995   0.0991   0.0989   0.0985 0.0982
     Dec.5    0.1007   0.1009    0.1009   0.1006     0.1004   0.0998   0.0995   0.0994   0.0988 0.0985
     Dec.6    0.0988   0.0999    0.1004   0.1006     0.1008   0.1006   0.1005   0.1004   0.0999 0.0998
     Dec.7    0.0960   0.0983    0.0995   0.1005     0.1011   0.1013   0.1016   0.1015   0.1011 0.1009
     Dec.8    0.0939   0.0967    0.0985   0.1001     0.1011   0.1018   0.1024   0.1025   0.1023 0.1024
     Dec.9    0.0911   0.0945    0.0967   0.0991     0.1006   0.1021   0.1034   0.1036   0.1041 0.1045
     Dec.10   0.0916   0.0941     0.096   0.0984     0.1001    0.102   0.1038   0.1042   0.1056 0.1069

   In the context of rural China and the pre-revolution elite, X = 10%, aCanada,X =10 = 0.1117 and
aUS,X =10% = 0.1406. In the US data, we also compute X = 5

                                                       0.01117
                                   1,Canada,X =10% =           = 0.0124
                                                          0.9
                                                       0.01117
                                   2,Canada,X =10%   =         = 0.0062
                                                          1.8
   1 The 100 by 100 transition matrix can be downloaded from the data library of Opportunity Insights.   See:
https://opportunityinsights.org/data/




                                                     A.36
               0.01406
 1,US,X =10% =         = 0.0156
                  0.9
               0.01406
 2,US,X =10% =         = 0.0078
                  1.8
               0.0810
 1,US,X =5% =         = 0.0853
                0.95
               0.0117
 2,US,X =5% =         = 0.0426
                 1.9




             A.37
