                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          MITIGATING DISASTER RISKS IN THE AGE OF CLIMATE CHANGE

                                        Harrison Hong
                                         Neng Wang
                                        Jinqiang Yang

                                      Working Paper 27066
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27066


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          April 2020, Revised November 2020




We thank Patrick Bolton, Julian Koelbel, Jeffrey Kubik, Markus Leippold, Bernard Salanié, Tano
Santos, Rob Stambaugh, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Laura Veldkamp, and seminar participants at
Columbia University, Imperial College London, INQUIRE, SHOF-ECGI Sustainability
Conference, and University of Zurich for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Harrison Hong, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Mitigating Disaster Risks in the Age of Climate Change
Harrison Hong, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 27066
April 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. E21,E22,E23,G12,G28,G52,H23,H41

                                         ABSTRACT

Emissions control cannot address the consequences of global warming for weather disasters until
decades later. We model regional-level mitigation, which reduces aggregate disaster risks to
capital stock in the interim. Unexpected disaster arrivals increase belief regarding the adverse
consequences of global warming and mitigation spending. Competitive markets underprovide
such spending because of externalities. Capital taxes to fund mitigation restores first-best. We
calibrate our model for seawalls that protect against Atlantic hurricanes. The optimal annual
seawall tax is 1.3% of housing stock value. Welfare is 25% higher and coastal property prices are
only 5% lower in the first-best compared to the competitive equilibrium because mitigation
reduces aggregate risks.

Harrison Hong                                   Jinqiang Yang
Department of Economics                         Shanghai University of Finance
Columbia University                             and Economics
1022 International Affairs Building             Guoding Rd. 777
Mail Code 3308                                  Shanghai, 200433
420 West 118th Street                           China
New York, NY 10027                              yang.jinqiang@mail.sufe.edu.cn
and NBER
hh2679@columbia.edu

Neng Wang
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nw2128@columbia.edu
1         Introduction
Global costs of weather-related disasters have increased sharply in recent decades (see, e.g.,
Bouwer et al. (2007)). While this trend increase is partly due to economic growth and expo-
sure of physical capital (Pielke et al. (2008), Bouwer (2011), Jongman et al. (2012)), recent
climate research is increasingly confident in linking climate change to more frequent or severe
natural disasters (National Academy of Sciences (2016)). For instance, climate models point
to increased frequency and damage from hurricanes that make landfall (Grinsted, Ditlevsen,
and Christensen (2019), Kossin et.al. (2020)). Similarly, the wildfires in the Western US
states are also linked to climate change (Abatzoglou and Williams (2016)). Emissions control
and carbon taxes, which have been the main focus of research using integrated assessment
models (Nordhaus (2017)), will only impact such losses decades down the road to the extent
they are even implemented globally.
        At the same time, willingness to pay to avoid weather disasters are likely to be large
given household risk preferences and permanence of such shocks (Pindyck and Wang (2013)).
Hence, mitigation of natural disaster risks at the regional level, be it seawalls or land-use
regulation, may need to play a major role going forward. But it has thus far been relatively
under-emphasized both in climate change research and practice (Bouwer et al. (2007)).
Among key questions are what determines mitigation, how valuable is it for social welfare,
and what are the tax and asset pricing implications?
        To answer these questions, we start by introducing costly mitigation into a continuous-
time stochastic general-equilibrium model with disasters along the lines emphasized by Ri-
etz (1988), Barro (2006), and Weitzman (2009). Disaster arrivals follow a Poisson process.
Damages conditional on arrival are modeled as downward jumps in the capital stock.1 The
percentage losses of capital stock due to jump arrivals follow a Pareto distribution and are
i.i.d. across arrivals (Gabaix, 2009). But spending today that comes at the cost of consump-
tion and/or investment mitigates the fat-tailedness of damages in the sense of first-order
    1
    For instance, the literature on weather disasters points to persistent declines in growth and productivity
due to destruction of physical capital (Dell, Jones and Olken (2014)). Of course, weather disasters are related
to extreme temperature and precipitation (Auffhammer, Hsiang, Schlenker, and Sobel (2013)).


                                                      1
stochastic dominance. Mitigation in our model is qualitatively in line with existing work
on the value of protective investments like seawalls or locating assets away from hurricane
or wildfire paths (Kousky et al. (2006), Schumacher and Strobl (2011), Hallegate (2017)).
Our model of disasters and mitigation technology contribute to the literature in a number
of dimensions as we detail below, particularly when it comes to quantitative calculations.
       A defining aspect of costly mitigation in the age of climate change is that it depends on
households learning about the consequences of global warming for disasters based on past
arrivals. Each new disaster brings additional evidence that will result in belief updating
regarding the consequences. This aspect is important for not only normative calculations
since mitigation strategies as we will show crucially depend on perceived risks. For instance,
scientific consensus on the impact of global warming on the frequency of hurricanes changed
markedly in 2005, when a record number of hurricanes including Katrina made landfall
(Emanuel (2005)). It also has positive predictions since recent weather disasters have moved
public opinion on the consequences of climate change (see, e.g., Yale Climate Opinion Maps
(2020)).
       Hence, our model features households learning from natural disaster arrivals about whether
Poisson arrival rates are high or low (i.e., what we refer to as a bad versus good state). The
bad state corresponds to more frequent arrival rates due to global warming, while the good
state corresponds to no or mild effects of climate change. Unexpected arrival of a disaster
leads to a jump in belief in the bad state (i.e. perceived risk). Absent any arrivals, this belief
drifts down toward the good state (i.e., no news is good news when it comes to no arrival
of disasters). Such a model is consistent with uncertainty regarding hurricane arrival rates
(Nordhaus (2010)) that will be resolved over time and the importance of modeling uncer-
tainty of climate models more generally (Barnett, Brock and Hansen (2020)). An important
feature of our learning model is that "bad" news leads to abrupt and discontinuous change
of belief, as a disaster arrival is a discrete event also serving as a discrete signal.2
   2
    Our model generates time-varying disaster arrival rates via learning. Learning (Colin-Dufresne, Jo-
hannes, and Lochstoer (2016)) and disasters with time-varying arrival rates (as in Gabaix (2012), Gourio
(2012), and Wachter (2013)) have been shown to be quantitively important to simultaneously explain business
cycles and asset price fluctuations.


                                                    2
    Output is determined by an AK growth function augmented with capital adjustment
costs.3 Output can include housing services and capital stock is composed of both physical
and housing capital. Households are endowed with the widely-used non-expected utility
proposed by Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990), which separates risk aversion from
the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. Recent work in the context of valuing emissions
curtailment points to the importance of using such risk preferences in generating a high social
cost of carbon.4 It will similarly play an important role in generating a high willingness-to-
pay for mitigation that depends on perceived risks. There are convex adjustment costs to
capital that make capital stock illiquid and hence give rise to rents for installed capital and
the value of capital (Tobin's average q ) fluctuates as households' beliefs about the disaster
likelihood change over time.
    Despite the novelty of introducing both belief updating and mitigation technology, our
model is tractable. The planner's solution is characterized by an endogenously derived non-
linear ordinary differential equation for the value function (the certainty equivalent wealth)
together with first-order conditions for investment and mitigation spending that depend on
household belief regarding disaster arrivals. The boundary conditions are given by solutions
when the household belief is permanently in the low or high arrival state.5
    Our model emphasizes mitigation externalities. Because mitigation changes the distri-
bution of damages conditional on arrival, which benefits all firms and households, aggregate
risk mitigation cannot be decentralized due to the positive externalities of mitigation. We
show households and firms optimally choose no mitigation in a competitive equilibrium.
Even though there are complete markets, the competitive economy has an extreme form of
underspending on mitigation and over-investment in capital from the societal perspective
   3
     There are pros and cons of using an AK model for our climate-change analysis. For analyzing weather
disasters such as hurricanes which have been shown to have permanent effects on capital and output (Hsiang
and Jina (2014)), an AK model setup is natural. But an AK setup might miss important features of growth
rate dynamics in other settings (Jones (1995)).
   4
     See, e.g., Jensen and Traeger (2014), Hambel, Kraft and Schwartz (2018), Cai and Lontzek (2019),
Daniel, Litterman and Wagner (2019), and Barnett, Brock and Hansen (2020) for recent contributions.
   5
     The solutions for the two special cases (at the boundaries) generalize the model in Pindyck and Wang
(2013), which originally examined the general-equilibrium effects of disasters in a continuous-time production
model with Poisson arrivals of disasters, by allowing for mitigation.



                                                      3
since firms do not internalize the benefits of aggregate risk mitigation.
   Taxing capital effectively lowers the firm's marginal product of capital thereby addressing
its over-investment motive, which in turn lowers the firm's average q in equilibrium. By
using the tax proceeds and fully reimbursing the firm for its mitigation spending, the first-
best solution can be achieved while still maintaining a balanced budget. This is similar to
optimal Pigouvian taxes to address negative externalities of carbon emissions for climate
change (Golosov, Hassler, Krusell and Tsyvinski (2014)).
   Our model can be applied to different weather disasters. We use it here to value mitigation
to reduce the risks to housing capital stock of more frequent hurricanes in the US Atlantic
region due to global warming. Mitigation proposals typically include erecting seawalls (and
improving drainage) to guard against storm surges and excess precipitation that come with
hurricanes that hit landfall. The dangers of rising-sea levels such as flooding or beach erosion
are also likely to happen during a storm (Kirezci et al. (2020)). While our planner's solution
can be applied to even localities, such as New York City that can afford to fund its seawall, the
high fixed costs of these measures likely require coordination of local and federal authorities
over a larger area -- which we take to be the Atlantic region.
   Historically, Atlantic states are exposed to between one to two major landfall hurricanes
per year, which we take as the good state. We calibrate the power law governing losses to
target a historical conditional loss of around 0.40% of Atlantic coastal property (Nordhaus
(2010)). The bad state would correspond to 10 hurricanes that make landfall each year.
Perceived risk is then captured by the belief that households assign to the likelihood that
hurricanes might be more frequent in the future than in historical samples.
   We focus our discussions below on household preferences with elasticity of intertemporal
substitution of 1.1, i.e. larger than one so as to be consistent with following the literature on
long-run risks (Bansal and Yaron (2004)). Otherwise, the other parameter values--including
risk aversion and the rate of time preferences, productivity, and asset market return and
volatility--are set to target various moments regarding housing stock returns. Holding fixed
these parameters, we introduce a mitigation technology such that society would spend zero
in the good state.

                                               4
       Our calibration has implications for three sets of questions in the literature. The first set
of questions is on the costs and benefits of mitigating tropical storms. Existing estimates
are based on reduced-form regressions of tropical storms on GDP and the counterfactual of
mitigation is with respect to controlling CO2 emissions to reduce temperatures which would
impact hurricane intensities (Nordhaus (2010)). Using such an approach, the present value
of tropical cyclone damage globally absent mitigation is estimated to be 10 trillion dollars
(Hsiang and Jina (2014)). In contrast, our approach calibrates a structural model of disasters
and growth and considers mitigation in the form of seawalls as opposed to CO2 emissions
per se.
       In the competitive equilibrium without mitigation, society would experience a substantial
welfare loss as pessimism rises. For moderately pessimistic beliefs of  = 0.5 and absent
mitigation, the welfare loss measured in terms of certainty equivalent wealth is nearly 40%
of the level households enjoy when  = 0. Welfare loss is highly non-linear in perceived
risks. This non-linearity arises from risk preferences and disasters and is fundamental to
an accurate cost and benefit analysis. Investment in the competitive equilibrium is not
substantially impacted since there is no mitigation and Tobin's q does not decline much as
a result.
       In the social planner's solution, mitigation spending as a fraction of capital stock even at
moderately pessimistic beliefs (i.e.  = 0.5) reaches 1.3% compared to extremely pessimistic
beliefs in the bad state, when it is only 1.65%. With the optimal use of mitigation technology,
the welfare loss (compared to  = 0) is only 20% as opposed to 40% in the competitive
equilibrium. The difference of 25% =1-(1-40%)/(1-20%) is then the value of mitigation
technology.6 Investment is lower as a result, falling from 2.9% when  = 0 to 2.5% when
 = 0.5. Similarly, Tobin's q drops from 2 to 1.863 as we move from  = 0 to  = 0.5,
i.e. Tobin's average q for housing capital stock would be around 7% lower. We demonstrate
that our calibration can be used to assess the costs and benefits of various seawall proposals
   6
     The caveat to these calculations is that traditional willingness-to-pay calculations to avoid disasters as
in our model is sensitive to modeling of multiple disasters and when disasters affect both consumption and
loss of life (Martin and Pindyck (2015)).




                                                      5
around the world, including the $690 billion project for Atlantic coastal property.
       The second set of questions have to do with hurricane or disaster damage functions. Con-
nected to the improved welfare from mitigation is that the conditional damage of a hurricane
is far lower and the expected growth rate is higher. Without mitigation and with moderately
pessimistic beliefs in the bad state, expected growth rate is close to zero. In contrast, it is
around 1.65% with mitigation. Our model's implication is consistent with empirical work
in the literature: countries that mitigate experience less damage per disaster arrival (see,
e.g., Kahn (2005)). While existing work focuses on cross-country variation in mitigation,
our model generates new time-series predictions. For instance, damages conditional on ar-
rival are higher when an economy has few prior arrivals and long inter-arrival times since
perceived risks and mitigation spending or preparedness are low as a result.
       The third set of questions is on the quantitative implications of our model for tax policy
and housing prices. A growing literature attempts to measure the impact of hurricanes and
sea-level rise on coastal property prices. The results have been mixed -- with literally no
effects (Murfin and Spiegel (2020)) to modest negative price effects (Bernstein, Gustafon
and Lewis (2019)). Miscalibrated beliefs of the risks are thought to perhaps play a role (see,
e.g. Baldauf, Garlappi and Yannelis (2020), Bakkensen and Barrage (2017)).7 But as far
as we know there have been no model to assess what price effects one would expect in the
first place using a general equilibrium model holding fixed any given level of belief regarding
risks. Our model provides a framework to assess how much of a price effect one expects and
the role of beliefs.
       Recall the 1.3% figure for mitigation spending as a fraction of capital stock at moderate
beliefs of  = 0.5. This would then be the optimal tax rate for housing capital stock to fund
the mitigation spending. This tax on housing capital stock were it implemented would result
in 5% lower home prices or Tobin's average q. In other words, due to mitigation externalities,
Atlantic coastal property is around 5% higher in the competitive equilibrium than the first-
   7
    Recent empirical work on weather disasters and climate risks also include the direct physical risks for
firm cashflows such droughts (Hong, Li and Xu (2019)). See Hong, Karolyi, and Scheinkman (2020) for a
review of recent findings.




                                                    6
best outcome. Despite the significant 1.3% tax on capital, the impact on home prices is
modest because there are benefits to mitigation that protects housing capital. To see this
clearly, we perform a decomposition to show that price effects would be significantly worse
absent the aggregate risk reducing benefits of mitigation. Recent concerns expressed by
regulators regarding such taxes on capital stock (Carney (2015)) neglects these substantial
benefits.


2     Model
There is a continuum of firms with a unit measure. Time is continuous and the horizon is
infinite. We will analyze both the social planner's and competitive equilibrium solutions.
All firms have the same production and capital accumulation technology. Additionally, they
face the same shocks. First, we present and then solve the planner's problem.

2.1    Production, Capital Dynamics, and Disasters

Aggregate Production and Resource Constraint. Let K denote the aggregate capital
stock, which is the sole factor of production. Aggregate output, Y , is given by

                                         Yt = AKt ,                                       (1)

where A > 0 is a constant that defines productivity. K can include both physical and
housing capital, while output Y can be a consumption good or housing services. This is a
version of the AK model but importantly augmented with capital adjustment costs as we
show later.
    In each period, aggregate output is spent in one of the three possible ways--consumption,
investment, and mitigation. Let Ct , It , and Xt denote consumption, investment, and miti-
gation spending, respectively.
    Following the q theory of investment (Hayashi, 1982 and Abel and Eberly, 1994), we
assume that when investing It dt, the firm also incurs capital adjustment costs, which we
denote by t dt. That is, the total cost of investment per unit of time is (It + t ) including


                                              7
both capital purchase and adjustment costs. Therefore, we have the following aggregate
resource constraint:
                                      Yt = Ct + (It + t ) + Xt .                                       (2)

The most natural interpretation of mitigation spending is seawalls or land-use zoning in the
context of the climate change literature.8 We specify the capital adjustment later in this
section.


Investment and Capital Accumulation. The capital stock K evolves as:9

                         dKt = It- dt + Kt- dWt - (1 - Z )Kt- dJt .                                    (3)

The first term in (3) is investment I . The second term captures continuous shocks to capital,
where Wt is a standard Brownian motion and the parameter  is the diffusion volatility (for
the capital stock growth). This diffusion shock is the source of shocks for the standard AK
models in macroeconomics. To emphasize the timing of potential jumps, we use t- to denote
the pre-jump time so that a discrete jump may or may not arrive at t.


Arrival of Disasters. Capital stock is also subject to jump shocks that cause stochastic
permanent losses of the existing capital stock. Examples include hurricanes or wildfires that
destroy both physical and housing capital stock. We capture this effect via the third term,
where Jt is a (pure) jump process with a constant but unknown arrival rate, which we denote
by , to be described shortly.
       When a jump arrives (dJt = 1), it permanently destroys a stochastic fraction (1 - Z )
of the capital stock Kt- , as Z is the recovery fraction. Absent mitigation spending, the
domain for the admissible values of Z is (0, 1). (For example, if a shock destroyed 15 percent
of capital stock, we would have Z = .85.) There is no limit to the number of these jump
shocks.10 If a jump does not arrive at t, i.e., dJt = 0, the third term disappears.
   8
     Mitigation spending Xt effectively reduces output which tightens resources constraints for consumption
and investment: Yt - Xt = Ct + (It + t ).
   9
     This capital accumulation technology has been widely used in macro and finance. For example, see
Barro (2006) and Pindyck and Wang (2013).
  10
     Stochastic fluctuations in the capital stock have been widely used in the growth literature with an AK

                                                    8
   Let (Z ) and  (Z ) denote the cumulative distribution function (cdf) and probability
density function (pdf) for the recovery fraction, Z , conditional on a jump arrival, respectively.
Importantly, the conditional distribution of Z depends on aggregate mitigation spending at
time t-. We discuss how Z depends on Xt- later in this section.
   Next, we discuss how we model the constant but unknown arrival rate of the jump process,
. We suppose that the arrival rate can be either low or high. If the rate is high, it is more
likely that capital stock will be hit by a disaster (i.e., a negative jump shock). If the rate is
low, a disaster is much less likely. We refer to the low-rate and high-rate scenarios as good
state (G) and bad state (B ), respectively, and use G and B to denote the corresponding
jump arrival rate of a jump in the respective state. Naturally, B > G . While the state
is constant over time, the household does not observe the state and therefore has to learn
about the value of  over time to assess the likelihood that the arrival rate is high or low.
We will discuss the household's learning dynamics shortly.
   We use lower-case variables to denote the corresponding upper-case variables divided by
contemporaneous K . For example, ct = Ct /Kt , it = It /Kt , t = t /Kt , and xt = Xt /Kt .


Homogeneity Property. To preserve our model's homogeneity, we make two econom-
ically sensible simplifying assumptions: one about capital adjustment costs and the other
about the mitigation technology.
   First, the capital adjustment cost function, (I, K ), is homogeneous with degree one in
I and K and thus can be written as:

                                       (I, K ) = (i)K ,                                              (4)

where (i) is increasing and convex.11 Because installing capital is costly, installed capital
earns rents in equilibrium so that Tobin's q , the ratio between the value and the replacement
technology, but unlike the existing literature, we examine the economic effects of shocks to capital that
involve discrete (disaster) jumps.
  11
     Homogeneous adjustment cost functions are analytically tractable and have been widely used in the q
theory of investment literature. Hayashi (1982) showed that with homogeneous adjustment costs and perfect
capital markets, marginal and average q are equal.




                                                   9
cost of capital, exceeds one.12
       Next, we specify the benefits of mitigation spending.

2.2       Mitigation Technology and Payoffs

The benefit of mitigation spending in our model derives from reduction of damages due to
disasters. Our specification postulates that the distribution for the recovery fraction Z at t
conditional on a jump arrival depends on the pre-jump mitigation spending Xt- . Otherwise,
capital accumulation remains the same and is given by (3).
       To preserve the homogeneity property, we assume that the distribution of the post-jump
fractional recovery Z changes from (Z ) to (Z ; xt- ) and the corresponding density function
changes from  (Z ) to  (Z ; xt- ). That is, if mitigation spending X doubles, the benefit of
mitigation also doubles. Because making the distribution of Z less damaging is a public
good, the private and societal interests may not line up. We show that welfare theorem does
not hold due to free-rider's incentives.13
       Finally, we complete our model description by introducing the preferences.


Preferences. We use the Duffie and Epstein (1992) continuous-time version of the recur-
sive preferences developed by Epstein and Zin (1989) and Weil (1990), so that a representa-
tive consumer has homothetic recursive preferences given by:
                                                     
                                    Vt = Et             f (Cs , Vs )ds   ,                                  (5)
                                                 t

where f (C, V ) is known as the normalized aggregator given by

                                               C 1- - ((1 -  )V )
                                                            -1
                                          
                           f (C, V ) =                            .                                         (6)
                                       1 -  -1     ((1 -  )V )-1
Here  is the rate of time preference,  the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS), 
the coefficient of relative risk aversion, and we let  = (1 -  -1 )/(1 -  ). Unlike expected
  12
     In Barro (2006), he also analyzes an endogenous AK growth model with disaster risks but without
capital adjustment costs in a discrete-time setting. Therefore, Tobin's average q in his model is always one.
  13
     In this paper, we are interested in a mitigation technology with externalities so as to derive implications
on taxes and asset prices. For completeness, in Appendix B, we consider an alternative specification for
mitigation technology where the welfare theorem holds.

                                                         10
utility, recursive preferences as defined by (5) and (6) disentangle risk aversion from the
EIS. An important feature of these preferences is that the marginal benefit of consumption
is fC = C --1 /[(1 -  )V ]-1 , which depends not only on current consumption but also
(through V ) on the expected trajectory of future consumption.
    If  =  -1 so that  = 1, we have the standard constant-relative-risk-aversion (CRRA)
expected utility, represented by the additively separable aggregator:
                                                C 1-
                                   f (C, V ) =       -  V.                                (7)
                                               1-
This more flexible recursive utility specification is widely used in asset pricing and macroe-
conomics for at least two important reasons: 1) conceptually, risk aversion is very distinct
from the EIS, which this preference is able to capture; 2) quantitative and empirical fit with
various asset pricing facts are infeasible with standard CRRA utility but attainable with this
recursive utility, as shown by Bansal and Yaron (2004) and the large follow-up long-run risk
literature. We show that in our model, the EIS parameter plays an important role as well.


3     Solution
The social planner maximizes the representative household's utility given in (5)-(6) subject
to the production/capital accumulation technology and the aggregate resource constraint
described in Section 2.
    Next, we derive the representative households' or planner's Bayesian learning rule and
then use dynamic programming to solve the optimal policies and value function.


Learning. The household dynamically updates her belief about the arrival rate of disasters.
Let t denote the time-t posterior belief that  = B . That is,

                                    t = P(t = B |Ft ) ,                                   (8)

where Ft is the household's information set up to t. At time t, the expected jump arrival
rate, denoted by t , is given by

                            t = (t ) = B t + G (1 - t ) ,                                 (9)

                                               11
which is a weighted average of B and G . A higher value of t corresponds to a belief that
the economy is more likely in State B which has a high jump arrival rate.
   What makes the household's belief to worsen (increasing  ) is jump arrivals. What makes
the household's belief to revise favorably is no jump arrivals. In this sense, no-jump news is
good news. In expectation, with rational learning, belief change cannot be predicted, which
means belief has to be a martingale.
   Mathematically, the household updates her belief by following the Bayes rule:

                              dt =  (t- ) (dJt - t- dt) ,                                 (10)

where

                           (1 -  )(B - G )    (1 -  )(B - G )
                 ( ) =                     =                  > 0.                        (11)
                                ( )          B  + G (1 -  )

Here, signals come from Jt . Because Et- [dJt ] = t- dt, (10) implies that the household's be-
lief process  is a martingale. When a disaster strikes at t, the household's belief immediately
increases from the pre-jump level t- to t =  J by  (t- ), where

                                                    t- B
                           J = t- +  (t- ) =              > t- .                          (12)
                                                    (t- )

   If there is no arrival over time interval dt, the household becomes more optimistic. Math-
ematically, if dJt = 0, we have dt = µ (t- )dt, where

                    µ ( ) = - ( )( ) =  (1 -  )(G - B ) < 0 .                             (13)

Now suppose that there is no jump during a finite time interval (s, t), i.e., dJv = 0 for
s < v  t. By using (13) to integrate  from s to t conditional on no jump over (s, t), we
obtain the following logistic function:

                                       s e-(B -G )(t-s)
                             t =                              .                           (14)
                                   1 + s (e-(B -G )(t-s) - 1)

   In Figure 1, we plot a simulated path for  starting from 0 = 0.1. It shows that absent
a jump arrival, belief becomes more optimistic, i.e., t decreases deterministically. Once a
jump arrives, the belief worsens, i.e., jumps upward by a discrete amount  ( ).

                                               12
                                        A. jump arrivals dJt
         1.2

          1

         0.8

         0.6

         0.4

         0.2

          0
               0     1        2        3         4             5   6       7        8


                                            B. belief t
          1

         0.8

         0.6

         0.4

         0.2

          0
               0     1        2        3         4             5   6       7        8




Figure 1: This figure simulates a path for jump arrival times in Panel A and plots the
corresponding belief updating process in Panel B starting with 0 = 0.1. The belief decreases
deterministically in the absence of jumps but discretely increases upward upon a jump arrival.



Dynamic Programming. Let V (K,  ) denote the value function. The Hamilton-Jacobi-
Bellman (HJB) equation for the planner's allocation problem is:

                                                           1
           0 = max f (C, V ) + IVK (K,  ) + µ ( )V (K,  ) +  2 K 2 VKK (K,  )
               C, I, x                                     2
                                       J
                       +( )E V ZK,  - V (K,  ) ,                                            (15)

where the expected change of belief in the absence of jumps, µ ( ), is negative and given in
(13), the expected arrival rate of a jump, ( ), is given in (9), the post-jump belief  J is
given in (12) as a function of the pre-jump belief  , and the expectation E[ · ] is with respect
to the pdf  (Z ; x) for the recovery fraction Z for a given level of scaled mitigation x.
   The first term on the right side of (15) is the household's normalized aggregator; the
second term captures how investment I affects V (K,  ); the third term reflects how belief
updating (in the absence of jumps) impacts V (K,  ); and the fourth term captures the effect
of capital-stock diffusion shocks on V (K,  ). It is worth noting that as the signals in our

                                               13
learning model are discrete (jump arrivals), there is no diffusion volatility induced quadratic
variation term involving V in the HJB equation (15).


Direct versus Learning Effects. Finally, the last term (appearing on the second line) of
(15) captures the effect of jumps on the expected change in V (K,  ). This term captures rich
economic forces and warrants additional explanations. When a jump arrives at t (dJt = 1),
capital stock falls from Kt- at time t- to Kt = ZKt- at t, which also causes the household
to become more pessimistic. As a result, her belief increases from the pre-jump level of t-
to the post-jump level of t =  J , as given by (12). Therefore, the expected change of the
value function conditional on a jump arrival is given by E V ZKt- ,  J - V (Kt- , t- ) .
To take into account that the jump arrival is uncertain, we multiply this term by the jump
arrival intensity at t-, (t- ), to obtain the last term in (15).
   It is important to note that a jump triggers two effects on the value function. First, there
is an direct effect: (1 - Z ) fraction of the capital stock is permanently destroyed, which lowers
the value function from V (Kt- , t- ) to V (ZKt- , t- ). Second, there is a learning effect: the
household's belief worsens to t =  J = t- B /(t- ) > t- , which further lowers the value
function from V (ZKt- , t- ) to V (ZKt- ,  J ). These two effects reinforce each other over
time leading to potentially significant losses to the household.
   The household optimally chooses consumption C , investment I , and mitigation X at all
time to maximize her utility by setting the sum of all the five terms on the right side of (15)
to zero, as implied by the standard argument underpinning the HJB equation generalized
to the setting with recursive utility (see Duffie and Epstein, 1992). Because of the resource
constraint, it is sufficient for us to focus on I and x as control variables.


First-Order Conditions for Investment and Mitigation. The first-order condition
(FOC) for investment I is

                           (1 + I (I, K ))fC (C, V ) = VK (K,  ) .                           (16)

The right side of (16) is the marginal (utility) benefit of investment. The left side of (16)
is the marginal cost of investment, which is given by the product of marginal benefit of

                                               14
consumption fC (C, V ) and the marginal cost of investing (1 + I (I, K )), the latter of which
includes the marginal adjustment cost I (I, K ).
      The intuition for (16) is as follows. To increase the capital stock by one unit, which
generates a marginal utility benefit of VK , the household needs to give up (1 + I (I, K ))
units of her consumption in order to purchase one unit of capital and then install it into the
firm making it productive. Therefore, the marginal cost of increasing capital stock by one unit
is (1 + I (I, K )) units of marginal benefit of consumption fC . Unlike in standard expected-
utility models, fC (C, V ) depends on not just consumption C but also the continuation utility
V , which reflects the non-separability of preferences.
      The FOC with respect to mitigation is
                                               1
                                   1                (Z ; x)                   B
                    fC (C, V ) =     ( )                    V      ZK,               dZ ,                    (17)
                                   K       0        x                         ( )

if the solution is strictly positive, x > 0. Otherwise, x = 0 as mitigation cannot be negative.
The planner optimally chooses X to equate the marginal cost of mitigation, which is the
forgone marginal (utility) benefit of consumption fC (C, V ) given in the left side of (17), with
the marginal benefit of mitigation given in the right side of (17).14 By doing mitigation x
per unit of capital, the planner changes the pdf  (Z ; x) for the fractional capital recovery,
Z , from  (Z ; 0) to  (Z ; x). We provide detailed discussions about the stochastic dominance
properties of  (Z ; x) and the economic tradeoff shortly.


Using Homogeneity Property to Simplify Solution. We show that the value function
V (K,  ) is homogeneous with degree (1 -  ) in K and thus we can write V (K,  ) as follows:

                                                    1
                                   V (K,  ) =         (b( )K )1- ,                                           (18)
                                                   1-

where b( ) is the function determined as part of the solution.
      Using the FOCs (16) and (17) and substituting the value function V (K,  ) given in
(18) together with the implied policy rules into the HJB equation (15), and simplifying the
 14                                                        1     2  (Z,x)          B
      The second-order condition (SOC) is given by ( )     0       x2     V    ZK,  ( )   dZ < 0, which we verify.




                                                      15
equations, we obtain the following three-equation ODE system for b( ), i( ), and x( ):
                                                    1-
                                    b( )                                      2         b ( )
            0 =                                              - 1 + i( ) -       + µ ( )
                   1 -  -1      (1 +  (i( )))                                2          b( )
                                                                      
                                          1-
                                    J
                        ( )  b 
                    +                          E(Z 1- ) - 1 ,                                    (19)
                        1-    b( )
                                                                               -/(1- )
         b( ) = [A - i( ) - (i( )) - x( )]1/(1-) [(1 +  (i( )))]                         ,       (20)
                                                        1-
                   ( )(1 +  (i( )))       b J                     1
                                                                       (Z ; x( )) 1-
            1 =                                                                  Z   dZ .        (21)
                        1-                 b( )               0          x

   Next, we provide the boundary conditions at  = 0 and  = 1 and discuss the intuition.
As we show, the model at the two boundaries map to the model in Pindyck and Wang
(2013), but generalized to allow for mitigation spending. When  = 0, the economy is
permanently in state G. Therefore there is no learning and the solution boils down to
solving the three unknowns, b(0), investment i(0), and mitigation spending x(0), via the
following three-equation system:
                                         1-
                              b(0)
                           (1+ (i(0)))
                                              -1                       2    G
                  0 =                               + i(0) -             +    E(Z 1- ) - 1 ,     (22)
                                1 -  -1                               2    1-
                                                                                   -/(1- )
              b(0) = [A - i(0) - (i(0)) - x(0)]1/(1-) [(1 +  (i(0)))]                        ,   (23)
                              1
           1           G         (Z ; x(0)) 1-
                   =                       Z       dZ .                                          (24)
       1 +  (i(0))   1- 0           x
When  = 0, investment-capital ratio i(0), scaled mitigation spending x(0), and consumption-
capital ratio c(0) are all constant at all time.
   By applying essentially the same analysis to the other boundary at  = 1, i.e., when the
state is B , we solve for the three unknowns, b(1), i(1), and x(1), via (A.3)-(A.5), another
three-equation system in Appendix A.
   The economy is on a growth path with constant investment opportunity when  = 0 or
 = 1. None of these results hold obviously in our general model when 0 <  < 1.
   We summarize our model's solution in the following proposition.

Proposition 1 The planner's solution is given by the triplet, b( ), i( ), and x( ), where
0    1, via the three-equation ODE system, (19)-(21) in the interior region 0 <  < 1,

                                                   16
together with the boundary conditions (22)-(24) for  = 0 and (A.3)-(A.5) for  = 1.

See Appendix A for the proof.


Expected Fractional Loss, Growth Rate, and Mitigation Technology. We further
assume as in Barro (2006) and Pindyck and Wang (2013) that the cdf of Z is given by the
following power function defined over (0, 1 ):

                                      (Z ; x) = Z  (x) ,                                       (25)

where  (x) is the exponent function that depends on scaled mitigation x. To ensure that
our model is well defined, we require  (x) >  - 1.
   Conditional on a jump arrival, the expected fractional capital loss is given by

                                                          1
                                ( ) = 1 - E(Z ) =                 .                            (26)
                                                       (x( )) + 1

The larger the value of  ( · ), the smaller the expected fractional loss E(1 - Z ). To capture
the benefit of mitigation, we assume that  (x) is increasing in x,  (x) > 0. The benefit
of mitigation is to increase the capital stock recovery (upon the arrival of a disaster) in the
sense of first-order stochastic dominance, i.e., (Z ; x1 )  (Z ; x2 ) for Z < 1 if x1 > x2 .
   Let gt denote the expected growth rate including the jump effect. The homogeneity
property implies that gt = g (t ), where

                                                              ( )
                      g ( ) = i( ) - ( ) ( ) = i( ) -                  .                       (27)
                                                            (x( )) + 1

As we show soon, while mitigation x( ) may crowd out investment i( ), it enhances long-run
growth g ( ) by reducing the expected loss due to jumps.
   For our quantitative analysis, we use the following linear specification for  (x):

                                        (x) = 0 + 1 x ,                                        (28)

with 0  max{ - 1, 0} and 1 > 0. The coefficient 0 is the exponent for recovery Z in
the absence of mitigation. The coefficient 1 is a key parameter in our model and measures
the efficiency of the mitigation technology.

                                                 17
Planner's Value Function with No Mitigation Technology. To better connect to
the competitive market equilibrium solution, it is useful to summarize the planner's solution
when there is no mitigation technology available, i.e., x = 0. By using the same argument
as we have for the general case, we know that the planner's value function, V (K,  ), is
homogeneous with degree (1 -  ) in K :

                                           1             1-
                             V (K,  ) =      b( )K            ,                            (29)
                                          1-

where b( ) is a measure of welfare (proportional to the certainty equivalent wealth). By
substituting x( ) = 0 into the solution for the general case and removing (17), the FOC for
x, we obtain the solution for b( ) together with the optimal investment-capital ratio i( ).
    In summary, b( ) and i( ) jointly solve (19)-(20) together with the boundary conditions
(22)-(23) and (A.3)-(A.4) with the restriction of no mitigation spending, x( ) = 0.


4     Competitive Equilibrium and Market Failure
We analyze the decentralized market-equilibrium solution (Appendix B provides details.)
Importantly, we show that the market mechanism does not implement the planner's solution
in Section 3. This is because aggregate risk mitigation suffers from a free-riding problem as
neither households nor firms have incentives to mitigate aggregate risk.

4.1    Market Structure and Problem Formulation

Consider a decentralized competitive equilibrium with (dynamically) complete markets.
That is, the following securities can be traded at each point in time: (i) a risk-free as-
set, (ii) the aggregate asset market (a claim on the value of capital of the representative
firm), and (iii) insurance claims for disaster with every possible recovery fraction Z .


Disaster Risk Insurance (DIS). We define DIS as follows: a DIS for the survival fraction
in the interval (Z, Z + dZ ) is a swap contract in which the buyer makes insurance payments
p(Z ; x )dZ , where x is the aggregate (scaled) mitigation spending, to the seller and in
exchange receives a lump-sum payoff if and only if a shock with survival fraction in (Z, Z +dZ )

                                              18
occurs. That is, the buyer stops paying the seller if and only if the defined disaster event
occurs and then collects one unit of the consumption good as a payoff from the seller. The
DIS contracts, e.g., the insurance premium payment p(Z ; x ), are priced at actuarially fairly
so that investors earn zero profits. p(Z ; x ) depends on not only Z but also x . This is
because the aggregate mitigation spending x changes the distribution for (Z ).
       Let Xc,t  0 and Xf,t  0 denote the mitigation spending at t by households and firms,
respectively. Let Ht denote the household's wealth allocated to the market portfolio at t.
For disaster with recovery fraction in (Z, Z + dZ ), t (Z )Wt dt gives the total demand for the
DIS over time period (t, t + dt). Let Wt denote the representative household's wealth.
       We define the recursive competitive equilibrium as follows: (1) The representative house-
hold chooses consumption C , allocation to the asset market H , various DIS claims  (Z ), and
mitigation spending Xc to maximize utility as given by (5)-(6). (2) The representative firm
(operating the same technology as the one that the social planner does in Section 2) chooses
investment I and mitigation spending Xf to maximize its market value, which is the present
discounted value of future cash flows. Private agents take the equilibrium prices of all goods
and financial assets including the risk-free rate r( ) and the stock-market price process as
given. (3) All markets clear.
       Next we solve for the resource allocation in the decentralized market setting.
       It is useful to differentiate variables at the micro and macro levels. We use superscript  to
                                                       
denote the equilibrium variables. For example, Xc and Xf denote the equilibrium mitigation
spending by households and firms, and x                                         
                                       c = Xc /K and xf = Xf /K . Let x = xc + xf .

       The representative firm solves the following value maximization problem:15
                                         
                                            Ms
                         max E                 (AKs - Is - s - Xf,s ) ds ,                                 (30)
                         I, Xf       0      M0

where M is the equilibrium stochastic discount factor that the firm takes as given. Let
Qt denote the solution for (30), the firm's market value. Using (30) and the homogeneity
  15
     Financial markets are perfectly competitive and complete. While the firm can hold financial positions
(e.g., DIS contracts), these financial hedging transactions generate zero NPV for the firm. Therefore, financial
hedging policies are indeterminate, essentially a version of the Modigliani-Miller result. The firm can thus
ignore financial contracts without loss of generality.


                                                      19
property, e.g., Q(Kt , t ) = q (t )Kt , we obtain the following HJB equation:

 0 = max A - i - (i) - xf - (r( ) - i( ))q ( ) + µ ( )q ( )
      i, xf
                                                      1-                      -               1
                         2                  u ( J )               q  ( J )
                -  + ( )                                                                          Z -  (Z ; x )dZ - 1    q ( )
                                             u ( )                 q  ( )                 0
                                            1-                    -                       1
                              u ( J )             q  ( J )              q ( J )
                + ( )                                                                         Z 1-  (Z ; x )dZ - 1 q ( ) . (31)
                               u ( )               q  ( )                q ( )        0


The FOC for investment implied by (31) is

                                              q ( ) = 1 +  (i( )) ,                                                              (32)

which equates the marginal q to the marginal cost of investing 1 +  (i).
   Let Jt = J (Wt , t ) denote the household's value function. We show that

                                                            1
                                        J (W,  ) =            (u( )W )1- ,                                                       (33)
                                                           1-

where u( ) is to be determined. The household solves the following problem:
                             1-
                  u( )
                   
                                  -                        1
                                                                                                  (µQ ( ) - r( ))h - c - xc
 0 = max                              + r( ) -                  (Z )p(Z ; x )dZ +
     c,h,,xc       1 -  -1                             0                                                      w
                                        2                                1-           1               1-
                         u ( )                                 u( J )                         wJ
               + µ ( )        -   + ( )                                                                     (Z ; x )dZ - 1 , (34)
                         u( )   2                               u( )              0           w

where µQ ( ) is given in (B.26).
   The consumption FOC implied by (34) yields the following consumption rule:

                                              c( ) =  u( )1- w .                                                                 (35)

Consumption is linear in W with a marginal propensity to consume that depends on  .
Neither households nor firms have incentives to spend on mitigation:

                                                      xc = xf = 0 .                                                              (36)

This is because the benefit of mitigation spending is thinning the fat tail for the disaster
damage by increasing the  (x) function. As no individual agent influences the distribution

                                                                20
(Z ) for the recovery fraction, Z , at the margin, they have no incentives to spend on
mitigation spending. In essence, mitigating disaster damages is providing a public good. As
a result, market equilibrium features no aggregate mitigation spending: x = x     
                                                                             c + xf = 0.

       We thus cannot use the planner's solution given in Section 3 to infer the equilibrium
resource allocation and prices as the welfare theorem does not hold in our model.16 Instead,
our market-equilibrium solution is equivalent to the planner's solution when the planner has
no access to the mitigation technology. We summarize the competitive-market solution in
the following proposition.

Proposition 2 There is no mitigation in competitive equilibrium. The competitive equilib-
rium solution corresponds to the social planner's solution only when there is no mitigation
technology (i.e. 1 = 0): J (Wt , t ) = V (Kt , t ), where Wt = q (t )Kt .


5        Capital Taxation, Mitigation Subsidies, and Welfare
         in First-Best versus Competitive Equilibrium
In this section, we first resurrect the planner's first-best solution in Section 3 by using optimal
capital taxation and subsidies and then propose a metric to measure the welfare gains of
mitigation spending.


Capital Taxes and Mitigation Subsidies Restore First-Best. The government im-
poses a time-varying proportional tax on each firm's capital stock (or equivalently sales as
Y = AK at the firm level) and then fully subsidizes the firm's mitigation spending at market
price. Let  denote the tax rate on an individual firm's capital stock K . By setting t = xt ,
where xt is the socially optimal mitigation spending obtained in Section 3 and implement-
ing 100% reimbursement of all the firm's mitigation spending, we show that the planner's
solution is attained in the competitive market equilibrium.
  16
     In contrast, the planner's solution in Pindyck and Wang (2013) can be achieved via market decentral-
ization, as there is no mitigation spending and hence welfare theorem holds in their model.




                                                   21
   Given the government taxation and subsidy policy, each firm solves the following problem:
                          
                             Mt
            max E               (AKt - It - t - Xf,t - t Kt ) + p0,s Xf,t dt ,                                 (37)
            I, Xf     0      M0

where p0,t is the time-0 value of the government subsidy to the firm for a unit of its mitigation
spending at time t for each sample path (e.g., state). The firm makes a tax payment t Kt =
xt Kt and receives a subsidy p0,t for each unit of mitigation spending. Because markets are
complete, we know that in equilibrium p0,t = Mt /M0 holds. Therefore, the firm breaks even
with probability one for any level of mitigation spending that it chooses, as the firm is fully
reimbursed for every unit of spending it incurs on mitigation. One solution is for firms to
choose the socially optimal level of mitigation spending, Xt , prescribed by the planner's
problem. As we show, this is the level of X that is consistent with equilibrium market
clearing.
   The firm's HJB equation is then

 0 = max (A -  ( )) - i - (i) - (r( ) - i( ))q ( ) + µ ( )q ( )
        i
                                              1-                 -           1
                                    u ( J )           q  ( J )
             -  2 + ( )                                                          Z -  (Z ; x )dZ - 1   q ( )
                                     u ( )             q  ( )            0
                                    1-                -                  1
                          u ( J )         q  ( J )        q ( J )
             + ( )                                                           Z 1-  (Z ; x )dZ - 1 q ( ) . (38)
                           u ( )           q  ( )          q ( )     0


Intuitively, capital taxation effectively lowers the firm's productivity from A to A - t =
A - x(t ), which in turns decreases its investment it . The firm's investment FOC is still
given by (32). Since taxes lower the firm's productivity, which in turn lowers Tobin's average
q , the firm also lowers investment. Hence, taxation fixes the firm's over-investment. The
household optimization is essentially the same as that discussed in Section 4. For brevity,
we leave the details out.
   The next proposition summarizes the key results.

Proposition 3 In a competitive (and complete) market economy, household consumption
and corporate investment attain the first-best solution as the planner does in Section 3,
provided that the government chooses the capital taxation (by setting the rate to the planner's

                                                     22
chosen xt for all firms) and then subsidies 100% of all private mitigation spending. The
government balances its budget period by period.

       Alternatively, the government taxes all firms' capital stocks also at the rate t (chosen
by the planner's) and spend all the proceeds collected from firms to mitigate aggregate risk
by itself, i.e., by choosing Xt = t Kt , where t = xt = x(t ). In response to taxation, a firm
voluntarily lowers its investment from its competitive-market level (absent any government
intervention) to the first-best investment level as the firm perceives that its productivity
is lowered from A to A - t . As both investment and mitigation spending are now at the
first-best levels, we attain the first-best outcome as in the planner's problem.17


Measuring the Welfare Gain of Mitigation Spending. How much are we worse off if
the economy is completely laissez faire? To answer this question, we introduce the following
willingness to pay (WTP) metric as in Pindyck and Wang (2013).
       Let  denote the fraction of capital stock that the society is willing to pay to go from
the competitive market economy with no mitigation spending to an economy where the
government either chooses the optimal regulation or directly the optimal level of mitigation
spending, as discussed in Section 5. To make the society indifferent between the two options,
the following condition has to hold:

                                   V ((1 -  ( ))K,  ) = V (K,  ) .                                    (39)

The left side of (39) is the value function under optimal government mitigation mandate or
spending in an otherwise market economy with a lower level of capital stock (as a  fraction of
K is deducted) and the right side is the value function in a completely laissez-faire economy
given in (29).
       By substituting the value functions given in (18) and (29) into the household's indifference
condition (39), we obtain the following equation for  ( ):
                                                      b( )
                                         ( ) = 1 -         >0.                                        (40)
                                                      b( )
  17
     In Internet Appendix A, we verify that together with household optimization and market clearing, the
first-best planner's solution is attainable in equilibrium given the government's policies discussed above.

                                                    23
The WTP  ( ) measures the value creation by government mitigation regulation/spending
measured by the percentage increase in the society's certainty-equivalent wealth.


Comments. In our competitive equilibrium model, households can hedge using DIS con-
tracts. While an individual may have hedging demand (given by t (Z )), in equilibrium the
aggregate demand for these DIS contracts is zero. The financial hedging demand does not
change the distribution of Z and the aggregate risk is not mitigated at all in representative-
agent models. In contrast, aggregate mitigation spending is a form of real hedging.
      We choose a representative sector to keep our model analytically tractable. With say two
sectors to invest in, not only the households' belief about the disaster matters, the relative
size distribution between the two sectors also influences the optimal mitigation, investment,
and welfare. In this economy, the planner may want to subsidize households to move away
from the coastal areas and spend less on mitigation (e.g., building seawalls).18


6       Atlantic Hurricanes, Seawalls, and Coastal Property
6.1       Calibration and Parameter Choices

Our calibration exercise is intended to highlight the importance of mitigation for welfare
analysis. To this end, we start with a disaster calibration of an Atlantic States regional
economy--both with and without mitigation technology in the form of seawalls to guard
against fat-tailed damages from hurricane arrivals.


EIS. Estimates of the EIS  in the literature vary considerably, ranging from a low value
near zero (e.g., Hall, 1988) to values as high as two.19 Bansal and Yaron (2004) argue that
an EIS larger than one is necessary for equilibrium asset pricing predictions. Attanasio and
Vissing-Jørgensen (2003) estimate the elasticity to be above unity for stockholders, while
Hall (1988), using aggregate consumption data, obtains an estimate near zero. We choose a
value that is around the middle between the two ends of the EIS estimates in the literature,
 18
      Eberly and Wang (2011) develop a tractable two-sector AK model with capital adjustment costs.
 19
      Appendix to Hall (2009) provides a brief survey of estimates in the literature.


                                                   24
                                    Table 1: Parameter Values


              Parameters                                                  Symbol        Value
              elasticity of intertemporal substitution                                   1.1

              power law exponent with no mitigation                          0           249
              jump arrival rate if State is G                                G            1
              jump arrival rate if State is B                                B           10

              time rate of preference                                                  4.83%
              productivity                                                    A        14.2%
              quadratic adjustment cost parameter                                       34.48
              coefficient of relative risk aversion                                     3.27
              capital diffusion volatility                                             14.19%

              mitigation technology parameter                                1        3.0 × 104

              Targeted observables without mitigation (State G)
              (real) risk-free rate                                                    0.8%
              housing return risk premium                                               6.6%
              housing market return volatility                                         14.2%
              expected growth rate                                                      2.5%
              Tobin's q                                                                   2

              mitigation level (State G)                                              x(0) = 0

All parameter values, whenever applicable, are continuously compounded and annualized.


 = 1.1, slightly above one so as to be consistent with following the literature on long-run
risks (Bansal and Yaron (2004)).


Hurricane arrival and conditional damage. We calibrate the arrival rate G in state
G by using historical data: Atlantic States are exposed to about one to two major landfall
hurricanes per year. We could set G to be one or two per year. For our calculations,
we set G = 1 so as to maximize the difference from the bad state B . A conservative
ballpark estimate of Atlantic coastal housing stock at risk from hurricanes and flooding is
$5 trillion in 2018 dollars.20 We can then extrapolate the conditional damage from Atlantic
  20
     US housing stock in 2018 is $30 trillion. Atlantic housing stock is around 35-40% of this figure or around
$10 trillion. Of course not all the Atlantic housing stock is coastal property at risk from hurricanes and



                                                      25
hurricanes which Nordhaus (2010) estimates as 0.1% of US GDP (which in 2018 dollars is
$20.54 trillion) to a conditional damage of 0.4% of coastal housing stock in the Atlantic
region. We then use the expression for damage to capital stock conditional on a disaster
arrival ( ) = 1/(0 + 1) = 0.4% in the absence of mitigation as implied by equation (26) to
obtain the calibrated value of 0 = 249.
    We set the arrival rate in the bad state B = 10 per year. That is, in the bad state, a
landfall hurricane on average arrives 10 times a year, which means that state B is about ten
times more damaging per year than state G. Our choice of B = 10 is based on extremely
pessimistic states laid out in recent climate research.


Other parameters. We choose a widely used quadratic function (e.g., Hayashi (1982)):
                                                    i2
                                              (i) =    ,                                                   (41)
                                                    2
to model capital adjustment costs. The parameter  measures how costly it is to adjust
capital and will be chosen with other parameters to target certain moments, as we describe
next.
    We calibrate the adjustment cost parameter  along with the following four parameters--
time rate of preference , risk aversion  , diffusion volatility  , and productivity A--by
targeting the five key moments for state G. These include the annual (real) risk-free rate of
0.8%, the expected annual housing market risk premium of 6.6%, the annual housing market
                    
return volatility of 0.0211 = 14.2%, the expected growth rate of 2.5%, and Tobin's q of 2,
i.e., q (0) = 2 (e.g., Flavin and Yamashita, 2002). Doing so yields the following parameter
values:  = 14.19%,  = 34.48,  = 3.27, A = 14.2%, and  = 4.83%. These parameter
values are broadly in line with those used in the literature.21


Mitigation technology 1 . Finally, we calibrate the parameter 1 for the mitigation
technology by targeting the optimal mitigation at zero for State G, i.e., x(0) = 0. That is,
flooding. Assuming half of it is at risk, we then arrive at $5 trillion as a ballpark estimate.
   21
      As an example, while using a different calibration strategy (for example, they do not target the capital
adjustment costs), Barro and Jin (2011) also report the calibrated coefficient of relative risk aversion is their
paper is about three. Our estimates are also close to those in Pindyck and Wang (2013), even though they
use a different set of moments for the disaster arrival rate and the damage function.

                                                       26
the optimal usage of the mitigation technology by the planner under the most optimistic
belief,  = 0 is zero. The implied value of 1 is 1.5 × 104 . That is, there is no value-add
from the mitigation technology in State G and hence b(0) = b(0).

6.2       Undermitigated Competitive Equilibrium

The solutions to our model in Figures 2 and 3 emphasize how key variables of interest depend
on households' belief about arrival rates of disasters. The dashed red lines correspond to the
competitive market solution. In Figure 2, we plot optimal mitigation spending (Panel A),
investment (Panel B), consumption (Panel C) and the value of capital (Tobin's average q )
(Panel D) as functions of belief  , where  = 0 means the economy is in State G while  = 1
means the economy is in State B .
       Due to free-riders' incentives that we described in Section 4, there is no mitigation in
equilibrium (Panel A). Additionally, investment (Panel B) and Tobin's average q (Panel C)
move in sync as the standard investment optimality condition, 1 + i( ) = q ( ), holds. Both
i and q decrease mildly as beliefs worsen.22 Since no mitigation implies that ct + it + t = A
has to hold at all t and for all levels of t , consumption ct thus has to increase with t .
       In Figure 3, we examine how key outcomes vary with  as a result of these policies. In
Panel A, we plot the the (scaled) certainty-equivalent wealth for the competitive-market econ-
omy,  ( ) = b( )/b(0). The curve starts at one when  = 0 by definition. In competitive-
market economy (with no mitigation),  ( ) declines non-linearly with beliefs. The welfare
loss is significant. At  = 0.5, welfare loss is nearly 40%. This welfare loss is connected to
lower growth rates as  increases, i.e. unsustainable growth.
       In Panel C of Figure 3, since there is no mitigation spending, the expected damage
conditional on the arrival of a disaster is ( ) = 1/(0 + 1) = 0.4%, which is independent of
 , as if the mitigation technology were unavailable. In Panel D, we report the growth rate
in the competitive economy, g ( ) = i( ) - ( )/(0 + 1), is declining with  . The reason
is that as  increases, i( ) decreases and also the frequency of hurricanes hitting landfall,
  22
    This is primarily due to the assumption that the EIS is slightly above one ( = 1.1). If we increase the
EIS to values at the higher end of estimates in the literature, there would be a more pronounced decline
with  . We know that if we set  = 1, both i and q are independent of  in competitive equilibrium.


                                                    27
                          A. x( )                                         B. i ( )
       0.02                                             0.03
                    planner
                    market                             0.029
      0.015
                                                       0.028

                                                       0.027
       0.01
                                                       0.026

                                                       0.025
      0.005
                                                       0.024

         0                                             0.023
              0   0.2    0.4      0.6   0.8   1                0   0.2   0.4      0.6   0.8   1


                          C. c( )                                         D. q ( )
      0.102                                               2

        0.1
                                                        1.95
      0.098

      0.096                                              1.9

      0.094
                                                        1.85
      0.092

       0.09                                              1.8
              0   0.2    0.4      0.6   0.8   1                0   0.2   0.4      0.6   0.8   1
                                                                               


Figure 2: This figure plots (scaled) mitigation x( ) (Panel A), investment-to-capital ratio
i( ) (Panel B), consumption-to-capital c( ) (Panel C), and the value of capital (Panel D)
as functions of  , belief regarding disaster arrival rates.  = 0 is the most optimistic belief
in a low arrival rate and  = 1 is the most pessimistic belief in a high arrival rate. The
parameters values are given in Table 1.


( ), increases. Hence, expected total damage increases with  since conditional damage
( ) = 1/(0 + 1) = 0.4%, invariant with  . The growth rate when  = 0 is close to 2.5% per
annum. But at  = 0.5, the growth rate is close to zero due to adverse effects of disasters
on capital stock.

6.3      Optimal Mitigation Spending on Seawalls

Now we turn to the planner's solution (solid blue lines) in Figure 2. Panel A shows that
mitigation ramps up from zero to 1.3% of the capital stock and consumption decreases by
5% from 0.098 to 0.093 as we increase belief  from near zero to 0.5 (Panels A and C).


                                                  28
                           A.  ( ) and  ()                                                B. WTP  ( )
        1                                                              0.35
                                             planner,  ( )
      0.9                                    market,  ( )               0.3

                                                                       0.25
      0.8
                                                                        0.2
      0.7
                                                                       0.15
      0.6
                                                                        0.1
      0.5                                                              0.05

      0.4                                                                0
            0        0.2      0.4      0.6       0.8         1                0     0.2    0.4      0.6   0.8    1



            x 10
                -3 C. conditional damage ( )                                      D. expected growth rate g ()
        5                                                              0.03

                                                                       0.02
        4

                                                                       0.01
        3
                                                                         0

        2
                                                                      -0.01

        1                                                             -0.02
            0        0.2      0.4      0.6       0.8         1                0     0.2    0.4      0.6   0.8    1
                                                                                                 



Figure 3: This figure plots the welfare and growth implications of optimal mitigation strat-
egy. Panel A reports a welfare measure proportional to the household's certainty equivalent
wealth. Panel B reports the household's willingness to pay (specifically, certainty equivalent
wealth) for government mitigation spending (in percentage terms). Panels C and D report
the conditional damage ( ) and the expected growth g ( ), respectively. The parameters
values are given in Table 1.


This is in contrast to the competitive equilibrium where there is no mitigation spending and
consumption is rising with  . The additional impact of increasing  diminishes. Even when
the household believes entirely in the bad scenario
                                               1    ( = 1), the mitigation spending increases
only to 1.65%.
   We can relate our calibration to existing seawall proposals. There are several proposals
for seawalls under discussion. In particular, a non-profit group representing homeowners
of coastal property have produced a High Tide Tax report for the Atlantic Region. Their
estimate is around $15 million per mile of seawall. With 46,000 miles long Atlantic coastline,



                                                                 29
this translates to roughly $690 billion. There are other estimates based on proposals of Army
Corp of Engineers for New York City that are significantly more expensive per mile. We can
relate these estimates to our model's mitigation spending by amortizing these figures into an
annual payment (a risk-free rate of 1% plus 8% maintenance cost per annum). In short, this
proposal would entail spending $62.1 billion dollars. The housing capital stock for is around
$15 trillion dollars for Atlantic region per year for seawall.23 Realistically, not all $15 trillion
dollars of housing capital is under threat from hurricanes. A reasonable estimate is that say
50% of it is. This would then correspond to spending around 0.80% of per year on seawall
mitigation. This 0.80% figure is less than our model's optimal mitigation spending of 1.3%
corresponding to  = 0.5 but it does not account for improved drainage measures that we
consider as part of seawall spending.

6.4       Investment, Tobin's q of Coastal Property, and Seawall Tax

Next we report the effect of mitigation on behavior of investment and Tobin's q for housing
capital in planner's equilibrium. Going from  = 0 to  = 0.5, mitigation lowers investment
i by 14% (from 0.029 to 0.025) and Tobin's average q by 7% from 2 at  = 0 to 1.863 (the
value of q (0.5) in the planner's problem). It is also informative to compare the distance in
Tobin's q between the red dashed line corresponding to the competitive economy to the blue
solid line corresponding to the first-best solution. Tobin's average q falls by 5% from 1.956
(the value of q (0.5) in the competitive market with no mitigation) to 1.863 (the value of
q (0.5) in the planner's problem.)
       In this vein, it is interesting to reflect on the quantitative implications of our model for
tax policy and housing prices. The 1.3% figure for mitigation spending x as a fraction of
capital stock from our calibration of Atlantic seawalls would then be the optimal annual
tax rate for housing capital stock to fund the seawall spending, i.e. an annual seawall tax.
Moreover, Tobin's q for housing capital stock would be around 5% lower as a result with
optimal mitigation and moderate beliefs in the bad state ( = 0.5). In other words, due to
  23
   We take 45% of the total housing capital stock in the US, which is around 30 trillion dollars, as an
approximate value for the total capital stock in the Atlantic region.



                                                  30
mitigation externalities, Atlantic coastal property is around 5% higher in the competitive
equilibrium than the first-best outcome. Moreover, in the competitive equilibrium, housing
prices are only mildly sensitive to household beliefs to begin with. The change in prices
moving from a competitive equilibrium to the first-best outcome where there are taxes is
much larger quantitatively.

6.5       Social Welfare and WTP for Mitigation Technology

Despite the reduction of the asset market valuation, the society is better off. To see this,
consider the blue solid line in Panel A of Figure 3, which captures the (scaled) certainty-
equivalent wealth for the social-planner economy,  ( ) = b( )/b(0). In contrast to the
competitive equilibrium,  ( ) (the solid blue line) drops much less and stays above  ( ) =
b( )/b(0) (the dashed red line) because government mitigation generates substantial down-
side protection (curtailment or loosely speaking hedging benefits) which leads to higher social
welfare.
       In Panel B, we plot the WTP  ( ) given in (40), which is equal to the difference between
one and  ( )/ ( ), the ratio between the two lines in Panel A.24 For example, even with
 = 0.5, the household is willing to give up  (0.5) = 1 -  (0.5)/ (0.5) = 25% of the existing
capital stock for the government mitigation spending, as  (0.5) = 0.80 for the planner's
problem and  (0.5) = 0.60 for the competitive market solution. And the WTP reaches the
maximum of 30.4% at  = 1, i.e.  (1) = 30.4%.
       In summary, the planner economy is willing to pay about 25% of the capital stock to
move from the market solution to the planner's economy:  (0.5) = 25%. That the WTP
for the mitigation technology (25% of capital stock) is significantly larger than the asset
market value reduction (5%) reflects the general equilibrium effect (endogenous change of
the stochastic discount factor as the economy switches from the market economy to the
planner's economy). We elaborate on this point below.
  24
   As we noted earlier, b(0) = b(0). This is because the mitigation technology parameter so that the
household optimally chooses no mitigation even with access to the technology in the most optimistic scenario.




                                                     31
6.6     Damage Functions and Growth Rates

In Panel C, we corroborate the benefit of using the mitigation technology by showing that the
conditional damage ( ) is lower as a result of mitigation. The more pessimistic the society,
the greater the benefit of curtailing disaster risks and hence the lower the conditional damage
 ( ), explaining the decreasing relation of ( ) in  (see the solid blue line.)
   Notice that the decline is highly non-linear in  . The reason is the following. Frequency
of arrivals and inter-arrival times entirely drive perceived risks and hence mitigation in our
model. As a result, damage of a disaster conditional on an arrival is much higher when
perceived risks and mitigation are low, i.e., less preparedness. The reduced-form implication
is that a disaster that strikes when society has a higher perceived risk will lead to lower
conditional damage since society is more prepared with mitigation spending. In other words,
a disaster that strikes after a long absence of disasters (i.e. low  ) leads to much larger
conditional damages than a disaster that strikes following a recent cluster of disasters (i.e.
high  ) due to time-varying preparedness.
   As the society becomes more pessimistic (i.e., more weight on the bad scenario), the
government mitigation spending increases and the conditional damage decreases (as we just
discussed), which in turn significantly buffers growth slowdown by reducing the expected
disaster damages.25 This buffering is captures in Panel D. Whereas the expected grow rate
g ( ) falls quickly with  in the competitive equilibrium, the decline in the expected growth
rate corresponding to the social planner economy is milder. At  = 0.5, whereas the expected
growth rate in the competitive economy is close to 0, it is nearly 1.6% in the planner economy.

6.7     Decomposing Effects of Seawall Tax on Tobin's Average q

Finally, we take a deeper look at the impact of the 1.3% seawall tax on Tobin's q of housing
capital, which was only 5%. The impact on home prices is quite modest and contrary to
discussions in regulatory circles on how the large impact of climate change taxes might affect
  25
     As i( ) decreases at a faster rate with  with mitigation, there is an opposing force that may cause
expected growth g ( ) with mitigation to be higher than without mitigation. Quantitatively, we do not see
this possibility in the figure with our parameter values.



                                                   32
asset values (Carney (2015)). One of the main messages of our model is that the mitigation
tax comes with significant aggregate risk reduction benefits that are not emphasized enough.
When valuing capital stock, the competitive market equilibrium solution and the solution for
the planner's first-best outcome differ in two key aspects: one is that the cash flows differ as
mitigation and investment are different in the two settings; the other is that the equilibrium
SDF in the two economies is different as the equilibrium consumption for the representative
agent is different.
   To make this point more transparent, we consider a counterfactual exercise where the
1.3% tax is not spend on mitigation. That is, we decompose the total change of value of
capital, Tobin's average q , as we move from competitive market equilibrium to the compet-
itive equilibrium injected with optimal capital taxation and government optimal mitigation
policy. In the latter economy, the first-best outcome is attained as (government and/or
private) mitigation spending funded by stage-contingent capital taxation/subsidies fix the
under-provision of aggregate risk mitigation achieving the first best.
   We separate out the cash flow effect of taxation from the equilibrium SDF effect by
conducting the following decomposition. First, we hold the SDF channel the same as we
introduce optimal capital taxation into the economy. That is, we use the same SDF deter-
mined in the competitive market equilibrium with no capital taxation to value a firm's cash
flows. But, in terms of cash flows, we fix It and Xt to the (first-best) levels for the planner's
problem, and then interpret x         
                             t = Xt /Kt as the stochastic tax rate on capital to support

the first-best outcome in the competitive equilibrium as discussed earlier.
   We then ask the following counterfactual: If the government did not spend its tax pro-
ceeds to optimally mitigate and the firm pretends that it is still in the same market equilib-
rium (i.e., taking the SDF determined in the competitive market equilibrium), what is the
value of capital stock, which we denote by Qt ? We call this effect the "partial equilibrium"
effect of taxation on the value of capital. Next, we quantify this "partial equilibrium" effect
of taxation.




                                               33
   By using the standard asset-pricing theory, we obtain the following expression for Qt :
                                 
                                    Mt
                   Qt = E              (AKt - It - (It , Kt ) - Xt ) dt ,                  (42)
                             0      M0

where Mt is the SDF for the competitive market equilibrium with no mitigation and is
given by (B.22). As there is no mitigation spending despite capital taxation, the cumulative
distribution function for Z is (Z ) = Z 0 .
   By applying Ito's Lemma to Mt- (AKt- - It- - (It- , Kt- ) - Xt- )dt + d Mt Qt , which
is a martingale (Duffie, 2001), we obtain the following ODE for q t = q t /Kt = q (t ):

(r( ) + rp( ) - i ( ))q ( ) = A - i - (i ) - x + µ ( )q ( ) + ( )(q ( J )E(Z ) - q ( )) ,(43)

where the risk-free rate, r( ), and the risk premium, rp( ), are given by (B.32) and (B.33),
respectively.
   Figure 4 decomposes the change of Tobin's average q as we introduce optimal capital
taxation into the competitive equilibrium and use the tax proceeds to fund government
mitigation. The red dashed line depicts the average q in the competitive equilibrium with no
mitigation and the blue solid line describes the competitive equilibrium with optimal capital
taxation and government mitigation. The dotted black line shows the counterfactual: the
value of Tobin's average q if we value the firm's cash flow (obtained from the competitive
equilibrium with optimal capital taxation and government mitigation) and value this cash
flow using the SDF (obtained from the competitive equilibrium with no capital taxation and
hence no mitigation.)
   We show that the average q drops much more (for sufficiently large and empirically
relevant range of  ) in this "partial equilibrium" counter-factual calculation as the benefit of
aggregate risk mitigation is ignored in this counterfactual exercise. Instead of a 4.8% drop
(the gap between the dashed red and solid blue lines in Figure 4 at  = 0.5), property prices
would then be lower by 7.7% with taxes but no benefits of mitigation (the gap between the
dashed red and dotted black lines in Figure 4.) This effect is even more significant when we
consider  = 1. In this instance, the optimal capital tax is 1.65% (see Figure 2) and the
property value would be lower by 6.0% with optimal mitigation (the gap between dashed

                                                34
red and solid blue lines in 4) and by 15.4% without mitigation (the gap between dashed red
and dotted black lines in 4.)

                                                                    Tobin s q
                           2.1
                                           planner
                                           market
                          2.05             Tax + market SDF


                            2


                          1.95


                           1.9


                          1.85


                           1.8


                          1.75


                           1.7


                          1.65


                           1.6
                                 0   0.1      0.2    0.3      0.4      0.5      0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                                                       




Figure 4: This figure plots the value of capital, i.e., Tobin's average q , in competitive equi-
librium featuring no mitigation (dashed red line) and the planner's problem (solid blue line).
The dotted black line depicts the average q , if the firm assumes the government does not
spend on mitigation and investors take the SDF in the competitive market equilibrium to
value the firm. The parameters values are given in Table 1.



7    Conclusion
We provide the planner's solution to a model where households learn from exogenous nat-
ural disaster arrivals about arrival rates and spend to mitigate potential future damages.
Mitigation--by curtailing aggregate risk and insuring sustainable growth--is undersupplied
relative to the first-best planner's solution in competitive markets due to externalities. The
planner's solution can be implemented via a capital tax and mitigation subsidy scheme. Our
model provides an integrated assessment of the cost and benefit of mitigation efforts such as
seawalls via an aggregate risk management rationale. Our model also delivers a number of
testable implications pertaining to damage functions and regulatory risks.




                                                                    35
References
Abatzoglou, J.T. and Williams, A.P., 2016. Impact of anthropogenic climate change on wild-
    fire across western US forests. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(42),
    pp.11770-11775.

Abel, A. B., and Eberly, J. C., 1994. A unified model of investment under uncertainty. American
    Economic Review, 84: 1369-1384.

Auffhammer, M., Hsiang, S.M., Schlenker, W. and Sobel, A., 2013. Using weather data and
    climate model output in economic analyses of climate change. Review of Environmental
    Economics and Policy, 7(2), pp.181-198.

Bakkensen, L.A. and Barrage, L., 2017. Flood risk belief heterogeneity and coastal home price
    dynamics: Going under water? (No. w23854). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Baldauf, M., Garlappi, L. and Yannelis, C., 2020. Does climate change affect real estate prices?
    Only if you believe in it. The Review of Financial Studies, 33(3), pp.1256-1295.

Bansal, R. and Yaron, A., 2004. Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
    puzzles. Journal of Finance, 59(4), pp.1481-1509.

Barnett, M., Brock, W. and Hansen, L.P., 2020. Pricing uncertainty induced by climate change.
    Review of Financial Studies, 33(3), pp.1024-1066.

Barro, R.J., 2006. Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century. Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 121: 823-866.

Barro, R.J., and Jin, T., 2011. On the size distribution of macroeconomic disasters. Econometrica,
    79(5): 1567-1589.

Bernstein, A., Gustafson, M.T. and Lewis, R., 2019. Disaster on the horizon: The price effect of
    sea level rise. Journal of Financial Economics, 134(2), pp.253-272.

Bouwer, L.M., Crompton, R.P., Faust, E., Hppe, P. and Pielke Jr, R.A., 2007. Confronting
    disaster losses. Science-New York then Washington, 318(5851), p.753.

Bouwer, L.M., 2011. Have disaster losses increased due to anthropogenic climate change?. Bulletin
    of the American Meteorological Society, 92(1), pp.39-46.

Cai, Y. and Lontzek, T.S., 2019. The social cost of carbon with economic and climate risks.
     Journal of Political Economy, 127(6), pp.2684-2734.

Carney, M., 2015. Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon ­ climate change and financial stability.
    Speech given at Lloyd's of London, 29, pp.220-230.

Collin-Dufresne, P., Johannes, M. and Lochstoer, L.A., 2016. Parameter learning in general
     equilibrium: The asset pricing implications. American Economic Review, 106(3), pp.664-98.

Cox, J.C. and Huang, C.F., 1989. Optimal consumption and portfolio policies when asset prices
    follow a diffusion process. Journal of Economic Theory, 49(1), pp.33-83.


                                               36
Daniel, K.D., Litterman, R.B. and Wagner, G., 2019. Declining CO2 price paths. Proceedings of
    the National Academy of Sciences, 116(42), pp.20886-20891.
Dell, M., Jones, B.F. and Olken, B.A., 2014. What do we learn from the weather? The new
     climate-economy literature. Journal of Economic Literature, 52(3), pp.740-98.
Duffie, D. and Epstein, L.G., 1992. Stochastic differential utility. Econometrica, pp.353-394.
Eberly, J.C. and Wang, N., 2011, March. Reallocating and pricing illiquid capital: Two productive
    trees. Columbia and Kellogg working paper.
Epstein, L.G. and Zin, S.E., 1989. Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of
    consumption. Econometrica, 57(4), pp.937-969.
Emanuel, K., 2005. Increasing destructiveness of tropical cyclones over the past 30 years. Nature,
   436(7051), pp.686-688.
Flavin, M. and Yamashita, T., 2002. Owner-occupied housing and the composition of the house-
     hold portfolio. American Economic Review, 92(1), pp.345-362.
Gabaix, X., 2012. Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in macro-
    finance. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2): 645-700.
Gabaix, X., 2009. Power laws in economics and finance. Annual Review Economics, 1(1), pp.255-
    294.
Golosov, M., Hassler, J., Krusell, P. and Tsyvinski, A., 2014. Optimal taxes on fossil fuel in
    general equilibrium. Econometrica, 82(1), pp.41-88.
Gourio, F., 2012. Disaster risk and business cycles. American Economic Review, 102(6): 2734-
    2766.
Grinsted, A., Ditlevsen, P. and Christensen, J.H., 2019. Normalized US hurricane damage esti-
    mates using area of total destruction, 1900? 2018. Proceedings of the National Academy of
    Sciences, 116(48), pp.23942-23946.
Hall, R.E., 1988. Intertemporal substitution in consumption. Journal of Political Economy, 96(2),
     pp.339-357.
Hall, R.E., 2009. Reconciling cyclical movements in the marginal value of time and the marginal
     product of labor. Journal of Political Economy, 117(2), pp.281-323.
Hallegatte, S., 2017. A normative exploration of the link between development, economic growth,
     and natural risk. Economics of disasters and climate change, 1(1), pp.5-31.
Hambel, C., Kraft H., and Schwartz, E., Optimal carbon abatement in a stochastic equilibrium
   model with climate change. No. w21044. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2015.
Hayashi, F., 1982. Tobin's marginal q and average q : A neoclassical interpretation. Econometrica,
    50: 215-224.
Hong, H., Karolyi, G.A. and Scheinkman, J.A., 2020. Climate finance. Review of Financial
    Studies, 33(3), pp.1011-1023.

                                               37
Hong, H., Li, F.W. and Xu, J., 2019. Climate risks and market efficiency. Journal of Econometrics,
    208(1), pp.265-281.

Hsiang, S.M. and Jina, A.S., 2014. The causal effect of environmental catastrophe on long-run
    economic growth: Evidence from 6,700 cyclones (No. w20352). National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

Jensen, S. and Traeger, C.P., 2014. Optimal climate change mitigation under long-term growth
     uncertainty: Stochastic integrated assessment and analytic findings. European Economic
     Review, 69, pp.104-125.

Jermann, U. J., 1998. Asset pricing in production economies. Journal of Monetary Economics,
    41(2): 257-275.

Jongman, B., Ward, P.J. and Aerts, J.C., 2012. Global exposure to river and coastal flooding:
    Long term trends and changes. Global Environmental Change, 22(4), pp.823-835.

Kahn, M.E., 2005. The death toll from natural disasters: the role of income, geography, and
    institutions. Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2), pp.271-284.

Kirezci, E., Young, I.R., Ranasinghe, R., Muis, S., Nicholls, R.J., Lincke, D. and Hinkel, J., 2020.
     Projections of global-scale extreme sea levels and resulting episodic coastal flooding over the
     21st Century. Scientific reports, 10(1), pp.1-12.

Kossin, J.P., Knapp, K.R., Olander, T.L. and Velden, C.S., 2020. Global increase in major trop-
    ical cyclone exceedance probability over the past four decades. Proceedings of the National
    Academy of Sciences, 117(22), pp.11975-11980.

Kousky, C., Luttmer, E.F. and Zeckhauser, R.J., 2006. Private investment and government pro-
    tection. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 33(1-2), pp.73-100.

Martin, I.W. and Pindyck, R.S., 2015. Averting catastrophes: The strange economics of Scylla
    and Charybdis. American Economic Review, 105(10), pp.2947-85.

Murfin, J. and Spiegel, M., 2020. Is the risk of sea level rise capitalized in residential real estate?.
     The Review of Financial Studies, 33(3), pp.1217-1255.

National Academy of Sciences (2016), Attribution of extreme weather events in the context of
    climate change. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.

NOAA, 2020, Billion-dollar weather and climate disasters: Events.

Nordhaus, W.D., 2010. The economics of hurricanes and implications of global warming. Climate
    Change Economics, 1(01), pp.1-20.

Nordhaus, W.D., 2017. Revisiting the social cost of carbon. Proceedings of the National Academy
    of Sciences, 114(7), pp.1518-1523.

Pielke Jr, R.A., Gratz, J., Landsea, C.W., Collins, D., Saunders, M.A. and Musulin, R., 2008.
     Normalized hurricane damage in the United States: 1900-2005. Natural Hazards Review,
     9(1), pp.29-42.


                                                  38
Pindyck, R. S., and Wang, N., 2013. The economic and policy consequences of catastrophes.
    American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4): 306-339.

Rietz, T. A., 1988. The equity risk premium: a solution. Journal of Monetary Economics, 22(1):
     117-131.

Schumacher, I. and Strobl, E., 2011. Economic development and losses due to natural disasters:
    The role of hazard exposure. Ecological Economics, 72, pp.97-105.

Vissing­Jørgensen, A. and Attanasio, O.P., 2003. Stock-market participation, intertemporal sub-
     stitution, and risk-aversion. American Economic Review, 93(2), pp.383-391.

Wachter, J. A., 2013. Can time-varying risk of rare disasters explain aggregate stock market
    volatility?. Journal of Finance, 68(3):

Weil, P., 1990. Nonexpected utility in macroeconomics. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(1),
     pp.29-42.

Weitzman, M.L., 2009. On modeling and interpreting the economics of catastrophic climate
    change. Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(1), pp.1-19.




                                             39
                                              Appendices

A      Proof for Proposition 1 in Section 3
A.1     Planner's Resource Allocation
Substituting the value function (18) into the FOC (16) for investment and the FOC (17) for
mitigation spending, we obtain:
                                                                                         -/(1- )
                              b( ) = c( )1/(1-) (1 +  (i( )))                                      ,             (A.1)

                                                                        1-        1
                       -1     -1 -1               ( )         b( J )                   (Z ; x) 1-
              c( )- b( )                  =                                                   Z   dZ ,           (A.2)
                                                  1-           b( )           0        x

where the post-jump belief  J is given in (12) as a function of the pre-jump belief  . Then
substituting the resource constraint, c( ) = A - i( ) - (i( )) - x( ), into (A.1), we obtain (20).
By substituting (A.1) into (A.2), we obtain (21). Finally, substituting the value function, (18), and
(20) and (21) into the HJB equation (15) and simplifying, we obtain the ODE given in (19).
    By applying essentially the same argument to the right boundary,  = 1, we obtain the solution
for b(1), i(1), and x(1) by jointly solving the following three equations:
                                                      1-
                                b(1)
                             (1+ (i(1)))                   -1                 2    B
                    0 =                                          + i(1) -       +    E(Z 1- ) - 1 ,              (A.3)
                                  1 -  -1                                    2    1-
                                                                                                   -/(1- )
                 b(1) = (A - i(1) - (i(1)) - x(1))1/(1-) (1 +  (i(1)))                                       ,   (A.4)
                                          1
             1               B                 (Z ; x) 1-
                       =                              Z   dZ .                                                   (A.5)
         1 +  (i(1))        1-        0        x

Using the same argument, we obtain the three equations, (22)-(24), for the left boundary,  = 0.
Solving these three equations yields b(0), i(0), and x(0).


A.2     Asset Pricing Implications of Planner's Problem
By using the results in Duffie and Epstein (1992), we obtain the following stochastic discount factor
(SDF), {Mt : t  0}, implied by the planner's solution:
                                                  t
                            Mt = exp                  fV (Cs , Vs ) ds fC (Ct , Vt ) .                           (A.6)
                                              0

Using the FOC for investment (16), the value function (18), and the resource constraint, we obtain:
                                                      1
                             fC (C, V ) =                     b( )1- K - ,                                       (A.7)
                                                  1 +  (i( ))



                                                              40
and
                                                       -1
                                       (1 -  )C 1-
                fV (C, V ) =                        V - - (1 -  ) = - ( ) ,                    (A.8)
                             1 -  -1    ((1 -  ))-1
where
                                                  1- -1
                                 (1 -  )   c( )              -1 - 
                         ( ) = -                                     -1 .                      (A.9)
                                 1 -  -1   b( )             1-
Using the equilibrium relation between b( ) and c( ), we simplify (A.9) as:
                                                                                        
                                                                    J   1-
                                     2         b (  )    (  )   b  
    ( ) =  +  -1 -  i( ) -             + µ ( )        +                     E(Z 1- ) - 1 ,
                                   2           b( )     1-        b( )
                                                                                              (A.10)
where the post-jump belief  J is given in (12) as a function of the pre-jump belief  .
  Using Ito's Lemma and the optimal allocation, we have
  dMt                                   ( + 1) 2            b ( ) i ( ) (i( ))
      = - ( )dt -  [i( )dt + dWt ] +           dt + (1 -  )      -                         µ ( )dt
  Mt-                                     2                 b( )   1 +  (i( ))
                                               
                                   1 - 
            1 +  (i( ))    b J
        +                               Z - - 1 dJt .                                         (A.11)
           1 +  (i( J ))    b( )

     As the expected rate of percentage change of Mt equals -rt (Duffie, 2001), we obtain the
following expression for the interest rate:
                                 ( -1 + 1) 2                 b ( ) i ( ) (i( ))
           r( ) =  +  -1 i( ) -                 - (1 -  -1 )      -             µ ( )
                                          2                  b( )   1 +  (i( ))
                                                                  
                                                  1-
                          1 +   ( i (  ))   b J
                 - ( )                                E(Z - ) - 1
                         1 +  (i( J ))       b( )
                                                                
                                                   1-
                           -1 -             b J
                 - ( )             1 -                E(Z 1- ) .                              (A.12)
                           1-                b( )

    Since the dividend Dt is equal to Ct in equilibrium and Mt- Dt- dt + d(Mt Qt ) is a martingale
under the physical measure (Duffie, 2001), using Ito's Lemma and setting its drift to zero, we obtain
                                                                                         
                                                   J    1-
 c( )                         1 +  (i( ))     b                           J
                                                                      q ( )
       = r( ) +  2 + ( )               J
                                                           E(Z - ) -         E(Z 1- ) 
 q ( )                       1 +  (i( ))       b( )                    q ( )
                         q ( )
        - i( ) - µ ( )
                         q ( )
                                                                                          
                                                                             1-
                                 2         b (  )                    b J
        =  - (1 -  -1 ) i( ) -     + µ ( )        + ( ) 1 -                       E(Z 1- ) , (A.13)
                               2           b( )                       b( )

where  = (1 -  -1 )/(1 -  ). We can calculate Tobin's average q from (A.13). For the special case
with  = 1, c( )/q ( ) = .

                                                  41
B      Proof for Proposition 2 in Section 4
B.1     Household's Optimization Problem
The equilibrium aggregate stock value is Q      
                                           t = q (t )Kt . We conjecture and later verify that the
cum-dividend return of the aggregate asset market is given by
                                                                                     J
                    dQt + Dt- dt                                                 q  (t )
                                 = µQ (t- )dt + dWt -                      1-Z              dJt ,            (B.14)
                        Qt-                                                      q  (t- )

        J
where t    = B t- /(t- ) is the post-jump belief and µQ ( ) is the expected cum-dividend return
(ignoring the jump effect). In (B.14), the diffusion volatility is equal to  , the same parameter as in
(3), which we verify later. Also, by using the homogeneity property, we have conjectured a specific
form for the change of the cum-dividend return should a jump occur, which we also verify later.
    When a disaster occurs at time t, wealth changes discretely from Wt- to WtJ , where
                                                        J
                                                    q  (t )
                              WtJ = Wt- -     1-Z    
                                                                  Ht- + t- (Z )Wt- .                         (B.15)
                                                    q (t- )

The second term is the loss of the portfolio's market value upon the arrival of a disaster and the
last term is the repayment from the DIS contract entered at t-. While the mitigation spending
Xc makes disasters less damaging for the society, it does not generate any direct benefit for the
household upon a jump arrival. This is at the core of the market failure.
    The household accumulates wealth as:

    dWt = r(t- )Wt- dt + (µQ (t- ) - r)Ht- dt + Ht- dWt - Ct- dt - Xc,t- dt                                  (B.16)
                        1                                                                        J
                                                                                             q  (t )
              -             t- (Z )p(Z ; xt- )dZ Wt- dt + t- (Z )Wt- dJt -             1-Z    
                                                                                                       Ht- dJt .
                    0                                                                        q (t- )

The first four terms in (B.16) are standard in the classic portfolio-choice problem with no insurance
or disasters (Merton, 1971). The fifth term Xc,t- dt is the cost of the household's mitigation
spending. The sixth term is the total DIS premium paid by the households before the arrival of
disasters. Note that this term captures the financial hedging cost. The seventh term describes the
DIS payments by the DIS seller to the household when a disaster occurs. The last term is the loss
of the household's wealth from her portfolio's exposure to the asset market.
    The HJB equation for the household in our decentralized market setting is given by
                                                                       1
                                            2 H 2 JW W
    0 = max      f (C, J ) + µ ( )J +                  + ( )               J W J ,  J - J (W,  )  (Z ; x )dZ
       C,H,,Xc                                  2                  0
                                                           1
              + r( )W + (µQ ( ) - r( ))H -                      (Z )p(Z ; x )dZ W - C - Xc JW ,              (B.17)
                                                       0

where  J is the post-jump belief given in (12) and W J is the post-jump wealth given in (B.15). The
        1
term, 0 t (Z )p(Z ; x )dZ Wt dt, is the total DIS premium payment in the time interval (t, t + dt).

                                                      42
The FOCs for consumption C and the market portfolio allocation H are given by

         fC (C, J ) = JW (W,  )                                                                          (B.18)
                                                                              q  ( J )
  2 HJW W (W,  ) = -(µQ ( ) - r( ))JW (W,  ) + ( )E                     1-Z              JW W J ,  J   . (B.19)
                                                                              q  ( )

The second term in (B.19) captures the the jump effect on the household's portfolio choice. The
DIS demand  (Z ) for each Z is given by

                       p(Z ; x )JW (W,  ) = ( )JW W J ,  J  (Z ; x ) .                                   (B.20)

The left side of (B.20) is the marginal (utility) cost when the household purchases a unit of DIS
contract and the right side of (B.20) is the marginal (utility) benefit. This FOC follows from the
point-by-point optimization in (B.17) for the DIS demand and hence it holds for all levels of Z .
   Substituting (33) into the FOC (B.18) yields the following consumption rule:

                                       C (W,  ) =  u( )1- W ,                                            (B.21)

which is linear in W but nonlinear in belief  in general.


B.2     Firm Value Maximization
Using (33) and (B.21), we conjecture and then verify later that the SDF is given by
                                                                      
                                           1-               -
                                       J              J
 dMt                              u ( )          q (t )
      = -r(t- )dt - dWt +   t                                 Z - - 1 (dJt - (t- )dt) . (B.22)
 Mt-                              u (t- )        q  (t- )

The equilibrium drift of dMt /Mt- is -r(t- ) (Duffie, 2001). The last term is a jump martingale
and the terms inside the square bracket follow from (A.6), (33), and (B.21).
   By using Ito's Lemma, we obtain the following dynamics for Qt = Q(Kt , t ):

              1
 dQ =    IQK +  2 K 2 QKK + µ ( )Q dt + KQK dWt + Q(ZK,  J ) - Q(K,  ) dJt . (B.23)
              2

No arbitrage implies the drift of Mt- (AKt- - It- - (It- , Kt- ) - Xf,t- )dt + d (Mt Qt ) is zero. By
applying Ito's Lemma to this martingale, we obtain
                                                 1
0 = max Mt- (AK - I - (I, K ) - Xf )dt + Mt- QK +  2 K 2 QKK + µ ( )Q dt
    I, Xf                                        2
                                                   1-                   -
                                       u ( J )               q  ( J )
           + Q -r( ) - ( )E                                                 Z - - 1      Mt- dt - Mt-  2 KQK dt
                                        u ( )                 q  ( )
                                  1-                -
                       u ( J )          q  ( J )
           + ( )E                                        Z - Q(ZK,  J ) - Q(K,  ) Mt- dt .               (B.24)
                        u ( )            q  ( )

And then by using Q(K,  ) = q ( )K , we obtain (31).

                                                        43
B.3     Market Equilibrium
First, mitigation spending for both households and firms is zero: xc = xf = 0. Second, in equilib-
rium, the household (1) invests all wealth in the asset market and holds no risk-free asset, H = W
and W = Q ; (2) has zero disaster hedging position,  (Z ) = 0 for all Z . Simplifying the FOCs,
(B.18), (B.19), and (B.20), and using the preceding equilibrium conditions, we obtain we obtain:

      c ( ) =  u( )1- q  ( ) ,                                                                              (B.25)
                                                 1-                -
                                      u( J )            q  ( J )                      q  ( J )
   µQ ( ) = r( ) +  2 + ( )                                            E(Z - ) -               E(Z 1- ) ,   (B.26)
                                       u( )              q  ( )                        q  ( )
                              1-                 -
                    u( J )            q  ( J )
   p(Z ; 0) = ( )                                     Z -  (Z ; 0) .                                        (B.27)
                     u( )              q  ( )

Using these equilibrium conditions, we simplify the HJB equation (B.17) as follows:

                           1        c ( )                 c ( )                  2         u ( )
              0 =                          -  + µQ (  ) -                  -       + µ ( )
                        1 -  -1     q  ( )                q  ( )                2          u( )
                                                       1-
                          ( )       u( J )q  ( J )
                        +                                     E(Z 1- ) - 1 .                                (B.28)
                          1-         u( )q  ( )

   Third, by substituting c ( ) = A - i ( ) - (i ( )) into (31), we obtain

                    c ( )                             q ( )
               0=          - r (  ) + i (  ) + µ (  )        -  2
                    q  ( )                            q  ( )
                                         1-                   -
                              u ( J )             q  ( J )                      q ( J )
                    - ( )                                          E(Z - ) -            E(Z 1- ) .          (B.29)
                               u ( )               q  ( )                        q ( )

By using the homogeneity property and comparing (B.14) and (B.23), we have

                                             c ( )                     (q  ( ))
                                  µQ ( ) =          + i (  ) + µ  (  )          .                           (B.30)
                                             q  ( )                     q  ( )

   And then substituting (B.30) into (B.28), we obtain

               c ( )                                       2               u ( ) (q  ( ))
                         =  - (1 -  -1 ) i ( ) -             + µ ( )            + 
               q  ( )                                     2                u( )   q ( )
                                                                                 1-
                                       1 -  -1                 u( J )q  ( J )
                             +( )                      1-                             E(Z 1- ) .            (B.31)
                                        1-                      u( )q  ( )




                                                         44
   Finally, substituting (B.31) into (B.29), we obtain the following equilibrium interest rate:

                              ( -1 + 1) 2                        u ( ) (q  ( ))         (q  ( ))
  r( ) =  +  -1 i ( ) -                   - (1 -  -1 )                +             -              µ ( )
                                  2                              u( )   q ( )            q  ( )

                                 1-                -
                     u ( J )           q  ( J )
          - ( )                                        E(Z - ) - 1
                      u ( )             q  ( )


                                                          1-
                 -1 -                  u( J )q  ( J )
          - ( )                1-                              E(Z 1- )    .                           (B.32)
                1-                      u( )q  ( )

Finally, we obtain the following expression for the market risk premium, which we denote by rp( ):
                                  1-               -
           2            u( J )           q ( J )                     q ( J )            q J
rp( ) =  + ( )                                           E(Z - ) -           E[Z 1- ] +        E(Z ) - 1 (B.33)
                                                                                                          .
                         u( )             q ( )                       q ( )              q ( )

B.4     Equivalence between Market Solution and Planner's Problem
        with No Mitigation Technology
The value function for the planner's problem V (K,  ) with no mitigation technology (i.e., x = 0),
is equal to the household's value function under competitive equilibrium, J (W,  ). As the house-
hold's wealth is equal to the total asset market capitalization, i.e., W = q ( )K in equilibrium, b( )
in the planner's problem is equal to u( )q ( ) in the decentralization formulation. The optimal
consumption in the planner's problem (20) with no mitigation is the same as (B.25) in the decen-
tralized market formulation. The resource constraints A = i( ) + (i( )) + c( ) then implies that
investment is also the same in the two formulations.
    By substituting b( ) = u( )q ( ) into ODE (19) for the planner's problem, we have
                                         1-
                                 u( )                             2             u ( ) q ( )
            0 =                               - 1 + i( ) -          + µ ( )          +
                   1 -  -1                                       2              u( )   q ( )
                                             1-
                       ( )        u( J )
                   +                               E(Z 1- ) - 1 ,                                      (B.34)
                       1-        u( )q ( )

which is consistent with the market solution given in (B.31). By substituting b( ) = u( )q ( ) and
q ( ) = 1 +  (i( )) into (B.57), we verify that the interest rate process is the same in the two
formulations, e.g., (B.32) and (B.57) are the same in equilibrium.
    In sum, we have verified that the resource allocation in the decentralized market formulation
features no mitigation in equilibrium due (a free-rider's problem) and hence is the same as in the
social planner's problem with no mitigation spending.




                                                        45
                  Supplementary Internet Appendices

A      Proof for Proposition 3 in Section 5
As in Section 4.1, we include the following securities (traded at each point in time): (i) a risk-free
asset, (ii) a claim on the value of firm's capital, and (iii) insurance claims for disasters with every
possible recovery fraction Z .
    We define the economy as follows: (a) The representative household dynamically chooses con-
sumption Ct , investments in the risk-free asset and risky equity, and various DIS claims to maximize
utility as given by (5) and (6); (b) The representative firm chooses the level of investment It to
maximize its market value taking the equilibrium SDF as given; (c) The government chooses miti-
gation spending Xt to maximize the representative household's utility as given by (5) and (6); (d)
All markets clear. We use superscript  to denote the equilibrium variables and/or processes.
    In this section, we verify that the market mechanism delivers the first-best consumption and
investment policies provided that the mitigation spending is chosen by a benevolent government.


A.1     Household Optimization
As in Section B, the household accumulates wealth as:

      dWt = r(t- )Wt- dt + (µQ (t ) - r)Ht- dt + Ht- dWt - Ct- dt                                               (A.35)
                                                                                                  J
                      1                                                                       q  (t -)
            -             t- (Z )p(Z ; xt- )dZ Wt- dt + t- (Z )Wt- dJt -                1-Z     
                                                                                                         Ht- dJt ,
                  0                                                                           q (t- )

where x is chosen by the government. As it is in the household's interest to choose no mitigation
spending, we leave this term out of (A.35). The HJB equation for the household in this setting is:
                                                                       1
      0 = max f (C, J ) + r( )W + (µQ ( ) - r( ))H -                        (Z )p(Z ; x )dZ W - C JW
          C,H                                                      0
                                                         1
                            2 H 2 JW W
                + µ ( )J +             + ( )                 J W J ,  J - J (W,  )  (Z ; x )dZ ,                (A.36)
                                2                    0

Additionally, the FOCs for consumption, market portfolio allocation, and DIS demand are the same
as (B.18)-(B.20). Let J (W,  ) denote the household's value function, given in (33).
    Imposing the equilibrium outcome on the households' side, we obtain (B.25), (B.26), and (B.27).
Using (33) and these conditions to simplify (A.36), we obtain the following ODE for u( ):
                                          1-
                                   u( )                                                     2
          0 =                                  - 1 + µQ ( ) -  u( )1- -
                  1 -  -1                                                                  2
                                                                   1-            1
                               u ( )   ( )       u( J )q  ( J )
                   +µ ( )            +                                               Z 1-  (Z ; x )dZ - 1 .     (A.37)
                               u( )    1-         u( )q  ( )                 0




                                                      46
A.2     Firm Value Maximization
Taking the SDF in (B.22) as given, the firm chooses investment I to solve:
                                       
                                          Mt                         
                       max E                 (AKt - It - t - Xf,t - Xt ) dt ,                                             (A.38)
                       I,Xf        0      M0

where X  is chosen by the government and hence exogenous to the firm. By applying Ito's Lemma
to Mt- (AKt- - It- - (It- , Kt- ) - Xt   )dt + d (M Q ), which is a martingale due to no arbitrage
                                        -          t t
(Duffie, 2001), we obtain the following ODE for qt = Qt /Kt = q (t ):

  r( )q ( ) = A - i - (i) - x + i( )q ( ) + µ ( )q ( )
                                                    1-                    -             1
                                          u ( J )           q  ( J )
                 -  2 + ( )                                                                 Z -  (Z ; x )dZ - 1   q ( )
                                           u ( )             q  ( )                 0
                                          1-                -                     1
                              u ( J )           q  ( J )        q ( J )
                 + ( )                                                                Z 1-  (Z ; x )dZ - 1 q ( ) . (A.39)
                               u ( )             q  ( )          q ( )        0

By differentiating (A.39) with respect to i, we obtain the investment FOC:

                                                q ( ) = 1 +  (i) .                                                        (A.40)

     By using the aggregate resource constraint, c ( ) = A - i ( ) - (i ( )) - x , we obtain the
following expression for the equilibrium expected return of the aggregate asset market:

                                A - i ( ) - (i ( )) - x                    (q  ( ))
                   µQ ( ) =                             + i (  ) + µ  (  )          .                                     (A.41)
                                          q  ( )                            q  ( )

By substituting (A.41) into (A.37), we obtain,
                           1-
                   u( )                        A - i ( ) - (i ( )) - x                    (q  ( ))
0 =                              -1 +                                  + i  (  ) + µ (  )          -  u( )1-
       1 -  -1                                           q  ( )                            q  ( )
                                                                  1-            1
          2         u ( )   ( )                u( J )q  ( J )
       -    + µ ( )       +                                                         Z 1-  (Z ; x )dZ - 1 ,                         (A.42)
         2          u( )    1-                  u( )q  ( )                  0

which is the simplified HJB equation for the government. Using the FOC for x, we obtain
                                                            1-        1
                         ( )q  ( )        u( J )q  ( J )                               (Z ; x )
                  1=                                                      Z 1-                  dZ ,                      (A.43)
                          1-               u( )q  ( )             0                    x

which implies (21) by using b( ) = u( )q ( ) and q ( ) = 1 +  (i), which also hold in Section B.
    Using the same analysis as in Section B, we can show that the equilibrium dividend yield,
c ( )/q  ( ), is given by (B.31) and the equilibrium interest rate is given by (B.32).
 

    Finally, we require all the variables at the micro level to equal the corresponding variables at
the macro level, e.g., c( ) = c ( ), i( ) = i ( ), and u( ) = u ( ).


                                                           47
B      Mitigation Spending Benefits: Alternative Model
In this section, we consider an alternative specification where by spending on mitigation, a private
agent reduces the damage of a disaster upon its arrival. This specification is different from the
baseline model in Section 2, which assumes that mitigation spending influences the distribution of
the post-jump recovery fraction Z .
    Specifically, we assume that for a given pre-jump mitigation spending Xt- , the post-jump
fractional loss changes from (1 - Z ) to N (xt- )(1 - Z ), where 0  N (x)  1, N (x)  0, and
N (x)  0. Note that as in our baseline model, this specification also has the homogeneity property
in K . Capital stock K evolves as:
                     dKt = It- dt + Kt- dWt - N (xt- )(1 - Z )Kt- dJt .                          (B.44)
All the other parts of the model remain unchanged. We show that the welfare theorem holds in
this setting as no private agent has incentive to free ride on others. This is because the private
agent's and the societal FOCs are the same regarding mitigation spending and other choices.
    Next, we show planner's solution and then competitive market solution.

B.1    Planner's Solution
The HJB equation for the planner's allocation problem is:
                                                                1
             0 =    max f (C, V ) + IVK (K,  ) + µ ( )V (K,  ) +  2 K 2 VKK (K,  )
                    C, I, x                                     2
                                                           J
                            +( )E V (1 - N (x)(1 - Z ))K,  - V (K,  ) ,                          (B.45)
And the the first-order condition (FOC) for investment I is
                                (1 + I (I, K ))fC (C, V ) = VK (K,  ) .                          (B.46)
The FOC with respect to mitigation spending X is
                                                                                 B
           KfC (C, V ) = ( )N (x)E (Z - 1)VK             (1 - N (x)(1 - Z ))K,             .     (B.47)
                                                                                 ( )
   Using the FOCs (B.46) and (B.47) and substituting the value function V (K,  ) given in (18)
together with the implied policy rules into the HJB equation (B.45), and simplifying the equations,
we obtain the following three-equation ODE system for b( ), i( ), and x( ):
                                                   1-
                                     b( )                                2         b ( )
           0 =                                           - 1 + i( ) -      + µ ( )
                   1 -  -1       (1 +  (i( )))                          2          b( )
                                                                             
                                          1-
                     ( )  b  J
                   +                           E (1 - N (x)(1 - Z ))1- - 1 ,                     (B.48)
                     1-    b( )
                                                                           -/(1- )
        b( ) = [A - i( ) - (i( )) - x( )]1/(1-) (1 +  (i( )))                          ,         (B.49)
                                                   1-
                                          b J
           1 = ( )(1 +  (i( )))                          N (x)E (Z - 1)(1 - N (x)(1 - Z ))-    . (B.50)
                                           b( )

                                                    48
And by setting  = 0 and  = 1, we obtain the corresponding boundary conditions.

B.2     Asset Pricing Implications of Planner's Problem
By using the results in Duffie and Epstein (1992), we obtain the following stochastic discount factor
(SDF), {Mt : t  0}, implied by the planner's solution:
                                              t
                           Mt = exp               fV (Cs , Vs ) ds fC (Ct , Vt ) .            (B.51)
                                          0
Using the investment FOC (B.46), the value function (18), and the resource constraint, we obtain:
                                                  1
                             fC (C, V ) =                 b( )1- K - ,                        (B.52)
                                              1 +  (i( ))
and
                                                               -1
                                       (1 -  )C 1-
               fV (C, V ) =                         V - - (1 -  ) = - ( ) ,                   (B.53)
                            1 -  -1     ((1 -  ))-1
where
                                                          1- -1
                                (1 -  )            c( )              -1 - 
                      ( ) = -                                                    -1 .         (B.54)
                                1 -  -1            b( )             1-
Using the equilibrium relation between b( ) and c( ), we simplify (B.54) as:
                                2          b ( )
        ( ) =  +  -1 -  i( ) -     + µ ( )
                               2           b( )
                                                                         
                                      J   1 -
                          ( )     b  
               +  -1 -                        E (1 - N (x)(1 - Z ))1- - 1 .                   (B.55)
                         1-         b( )

   Using Ito's Lemma and the optimal allocation, we have
  dMt                                 ( + 1) 2               b ( ) i ( ) (i( ))
      = - ( )dt -  [i( )dt + dWt ] +          dt + (1 -  )        -                        µ ( )dt
  Mt-                                   2                    b( )    1 +  (i( ))
                                                               
                                   1-
            1 +  (i( ))    b J
        +                             (1 - N (x)(1 - Z ))- - 1 dJt .                          (B.56)
           1 +  (i( J ))    b( )

     As the expected rate of percentage change of Mt equals -rt (Duffie, 2001), we obtain the
following expression for the interest rate:
                                ( -1 + 1) 2                 b ( ) i ( ) (i( ))
          r( ) =  +  -1 i( ) -                 - (1 -  -1 )      -               µ ( )
                                         2                  b( )   1 +  (i( ))
                                                                                 
                                                 1-
                         1 +   ( i (  ))   b J
                - ( )                                E((1 - N (x)(1 - Z ))- ) - 1
                        1 +  (i( J ))       b( )
                                                                              
                                              J   1-
                          -
                         -  1              b 
                - ( )                1-              E((1 - N (x)(1 - Z ))1- ) .              (B.57)
                          1-                b( )


                                                          49
Since the dividend Dt is equal to Ct in equilibrium and Mt- Dt- dt + d(Mt Qt ) is a martingale (Duffie,
2001), by using Ito's Lemma and setting its drift to zero, we obtain

                      c( )                          2          b ( )
                            =  - (1 -  -1 ) i( ) -     + µ ( )
                      q ( )                        2            b( )
                                                                                  
                                                 J  1 - 
                                             b 
                              + ( ) 1 -                  E((1 - N (x)(1 - Z ))1- ) ,                     (B.58)
                                              b( )

where  = (1 -  -1 )/(1 -  ).


B.3     Market Equilibrium Solution
Competitive Equilibrium. (i) the net supply of the risk-free asset is zero; (ii) the demand
for the unlevered equity claim to the representative firm is equal to unity, the normalized aggregate
supply; (iii) the net demand for the DIS of each possible recovery fraction Z is zero; and (iv) the
goods market clears, i.e., Yt = Ct + It + t + Xc,t + Xf,t at all t  0.

Household's Optimization Problem. The equilibrium aggregate stock value is Q     
                                                                            t = q (t )Kt .
We later verify that the cum-dividend return of the aggregate asset market is given by
                                                                                      J
        dQt + Dt- dt                                                              q  (t )
                     = µQ (t- )dt + dWt -            1 - (1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))                dJt ,      (B.59)
            Qt-                                                                   q  (t- )

where µQ (t- ) is the expected cum-dividend return absent jumps. When a disaster occurs at time
t, wealth changes discretely from Wt- to WtJ , where

                                                                       J
                                                                   q  (t )
                WtJ = Wt- -          1 - (1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))      
                                                                             Ht- + t- (Z )Wt- .          (B.60)
                                                                   q (t- )

And the household accumulates wealth as:

   dWt = r(t- )Wt- dt + (µQ (t- ) - r)Ht- dt + Ht- dWt - Ct- dt - Xc,t- dt + t- (Z )Wt- dJt
                      1                                                              J
                                                                                 q  (t )
           -              t- (Z )p(Z )dZ Wt- dt -   1 - (1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))     
                                                                                             Ht- dJt .   (B.61)
                  0                                                              q (t- )

   The HJB equation for the household in our decentralized market setting is given by

                                             2 H 2 JW W
      0 = max     f (C, J ) + µ ( )J +                  + ( )E J W J ,  J - J (W,  )
        C,H,,Xc                                  2
                                                               1
                  + r( )W + (µQ ( ) - r( ))H -                      (Z )p(Z )dZ W - C - Xc JW .          (B.62)
                                                           0




                                                      50
The FOCs for consumption C and the market portfolio allocation H are given by

              fC (C, J ) = JW (W,  )                                                                 (B.63)
       2 HJW W (W,  ) = -(µQ ( ) - r( ))JW (W,  )
                                                                    q  ( J )
                           + ( )E       1 - (1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))              JW W J ,  J   .       (B.64)
                                                                     q  ( )
The DIS demand  (Z ) for each Z is given by

                            p(Z )JW (W,  ) = ( )JW W J ,  J  (Z ) .                                  (B.65)

Since there is not benefit for the household to spend on mitigation, we have

                                                 xc ( ) = 0 .                                        (B.66)

   Substituting (33) into the FOC (B.63) yields the following consumption rule:

                                        C (W,  ) =  u( )1- W .                                       (B.67)

Firm Value Maximization. Using (33) and (B.67), we verify that the SDF is given by
  dMt
      = -r(t- )dt - dWt
  Mt-
                                                                               
                    1-                        -
            u ( J )         J
                        q  (t )
        +        t
                         
                                                   (1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))
                                                                        -
                                                                          - 1 (dJt - (t- )dt) .      (B.68)
            u (t- )     q (t- )

   And then by using Ito's Lemma, we obtain the following dynamics for Qt = Q(Kt , t ):
                                     1
                     dQ =       IQK +  2 K 2 QKK + µ ( )Q dt + KQK dWt
                                     2
                            + Q((1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))K,  J ) - Q(K,  ) dJt .                         (B.69)

No arbitrage implies the drift of Mt- (AKt- - It- - (It- , Kt- ) - Xf,t- )dt + d (Mt Qt ) is zero. By
applying Ito's Lemma to this martingale and then by using Q(K,  ) = q ( )K , we obtain

0 = max A - i - (i) - xf - (r( ) - i( ))q ( ) + µ ( )q ( )                                           (B.70)
    i, xf
                                     1-                 -
                           u ( J )           q  ( J )
      -  2 + ( )                                             E (1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))
                                                                                    -
                                                                                      -1     q ( )
                            u ( )             q  ( )
                           1-                -
                 u ( J )          q  ( J )        q ( J )
      + ( )                                               E (1 - N (x            -
                                                                     f )(1 - Z )) (1 - N (xf )(1 - Z )) - 1 q ( ) .
                  u ( )            q  ( )          q ( )
The FOC for investment implied by (B.70) is

                                        q ( ) = 1 +  (i( )) .                                        (B.71)

And the FOC for mitigation implied by (B.70) is
                           1-                -
                u ( J )          q  ( J )
    1 = ( )                                      q ( J )N (xf )E (Z - 1)(1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))
                                                                                             -
                                                                                               .     (B.72)
                 u ( )            q  ( )

                                                        51
Market Equilibrium. First, the mitigation spending for households is zero, xc = 0. Second, a
firm's mitigation spending is xf = xf and rewriting the FOC for mitigation given in (B.72) yields

                                     1-                  1-
                          u ( J )             q  ( J )
     1 = ( )q  ( )                                            N (x                     
                                                                  f )E (Z - 1)(1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))
                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                     , (B.73)
                           u ( )               q  ( )

where q  ( ) solves

     0 = A - i - (i ) - x                                
                         f - (r ( ) - i( ))q ( ) + µ ( )q ( )
                                                 1-                 -
                  2                 u ( J )              q  ( J )
           -  + ( )                                                     E (1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))
                                                                                               -
                                                                                                 -1       q  ( )
                                     u ( )                q  ( )
                                     1-                  1-
                          u ( J )             q  ( J )
           + ( )                                              E (1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))
                                                                                     1-
                                                                                        - 1 q  ( ) .          (B.74)
                           u ( )               q  ( )

    Third, in equilibrium, the household invests all wealth in the asset market and holds no risk-free
asset, H = W = Q , and has zero disaster hedging position,  (Z ) = 0 for all Z . Simplifying the
FOCs (B.63), (B.64), and (B.65), and using the equilibrium conditions, we obtain

c ( ) =  u( )1- q  ( ) ,                                                                                      (B.75)
                      2
µQ ( ) = r( ) +                                                                                               (B.76)
                                1-                  -
                      u( J )           q  ( J )                                           q  ( J )
          + ( )                                          E((1 - N (x            -
                                                                    f )(1 - Z )) ) -               E((1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))
                                                                                                                          1-
                                                                                                                             ) ,
                       u( )             q  ( )                                             q  ( )
                              1-                 -
                  u( J )             q  ( J )
 p(Z ) = ( )                                          (1 - N (x            -
                                                               f )(1 - Z ))  (Z ) .                           (B.77)
                   u( )               q  ( )

Using these equilibrium conditions, we simplify the HJB equation (B.62) as follows:

                             1         c ( )                 c ( )                  2         u ( )
               0 =                            -  + µQ (  ) -                   -      + µ ( )
                          1 -  -1      q  ( )                q  ( )                2          u( )
                                                            1-
                              ( )      u( J )q  ( J )
                          +                                        E((1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))
                                                                                          1-
                                                                                             )-1 .            (B.78)
                              1-        u( )q  ( )

     Fourth, by substituting c ( ) = A - i ( ) - (i ( )) - xf into (B.74), we obtain

     c ( )                             q ( )
0=          - r (  ) + i (  ) + µ (  )        -  2                                                            (B.79)
     q  ( )                            q  ( )
                           1-                   -
              u ( J )              q  ( J )                                           q  ( J )
     - ( )                                          E((1 - N (x            -
                                                               f )(1 - Z )) ) -                E((1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))
                                                                                                                      1-
                                                                                                                         ) .
               u ( )                q  ( )                                             q  ( )

     By using the homogeneity property and comparing (B.59) and (B.69), we have

                                                 c ( )                     (q  ( ))
                                    µQ ( ) =            + i (  ) + µ  (  )          .                         (B.80)
                                                 q  ( )                     q  ( )


                                                              52
And then substituting (B.80) into (B.78), we obtain
      c ( )                                   2                u ( ) (q  ( ))
                =  - (1 -  -1 ) i ( ) -         + µ ( )             + 
      q  ( )                                 2                 u( )   q ( )
                                                                  1-
                            1 -  -1              u( J )q  ( J )
                     +( )                1-                            E((1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))
                                                                                              1-
                                                                                                 ) . (B.81)
                             1-                   u( )q  ( )
   Finally, substituting (B.81) into (B.79), we obtain the following equilibrium interest rate:
                             ( -1 + 1) 2                       u ( ) (q  ( ))          (q  ( ))
  r( ) =  +  -1 i ( ) -                  - (1 -  -1 )               +              -               µ ( )
                                 2                             u( )   q ( )             q  ( )

                                1-               -
                      u ( J )         q  ( J )
          - ( )                                      E((1 - N (x            -
                                                                f )(1 - Z )) ) - 1
                       u ( )           q  ( )


                                                        1-
                 -1 -                 u( J )q  ( J )
          - ( )                 1-                           E((1 - N (xf )(1 - Z ))
                                                                                    1-
                                                                                       )       .       (B.82)
                1-                     u( )q  ( )

B.4    Equivalence between Market Solution and Planner's Problem
The equivalence between market solution and planner's problem implies u( )q ( ) = b( ). First,
substituting u( )q ( ) = b( ) and (B.71) into (B.72), we obtain the following equation for the
optimal mitigation in the market solution:
                                            1-
                                 b J
          1 = ( )(1 +  (i))                      N (x)E (Z - 1)(1 - N (x)(1 - Z ))- ,                  (B.83)
                                  b( )
which is the same as (B.50) for the planner's problem. Substituting u( )q ( ) = b( ) and (B.71)
into (B.75), we obtain the following expression for optimal investment in market solution:
                                                                               -/(1- )
               b( ) = [A - i( ) - (i( )) - x( )]1/(1-) (1 +  (i( )))                       ,           (B.84)

which is the same as (B.49) for the planner's problem. Substituting (B.80) into (B.78), and com-
bining c( ) = A - i( ) - (i( )) - x (the equilibrium condition) with (B.71), we obtain:
                                                       1-
                                     b( )                                   2         b ( )
               0 =                                          - 1 + i( ) -      + µ ( )
                      1 -  -1    (1 +  (i( )))                             2          b( )
                                                                                
                                            1-
                        ( )  b  J
                      +                          E (1 - N (x)(1 - Z ))1- - 1 ,                         (B.85)
                        1-    b( )

which is the same as (B.48) for the planner's problem.
   By using u( )q ( ) = b( ), we also verify that the equilibrium dividend yield c( )/q ( ) given in
(B.81) for the market solution is the same as (B.58) for the planner's problem.
   Finally, by using u( )q ( ) = b( ) and (B.71), we verify that the interest rate r( ) given in
(B.57) for the market solution is the same as (B.82) for the planner's problem.

                                                      53
