                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           ASIAN AMERICAN DISCRIMINATION IN HARVARD ADMISSIONS

                                       Peter Arcidiacono
                                         Josh Kinsler
                                        Tyler Ransom

                                      Working Paper 27068
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27068


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




Peter Arcidiacono served as an expert witness for Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. (SFFA) in
the SFFA v. Harvard case. SFFA is not funding his work on this paper. Josh Kinsler worked as a
consultant for SFFA in the SFFA v. Harvard case. SFFA is not funding his work on this paper.
The views expressed and conclusions reached in this paper are those of the authors; they do not
purport to reflect the views of SFFA or the National Bureau of Economic Research. To the
extent this paper relies on records from the SFFA v. Harvard case, it relies solely on the public
records from the case.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Peter Arcidiacono, Josh Kinsler, and Tyler Ransom. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Asian American Discrimination in Harvard Admissions
Peter Arcidiacono, Josh Kinsler, and Tyler Ransom
NBER Working Paper No. 27068
April 2020
JEL No. I23,I24,J15

                                         ABSTRACT

Detecting racial discrimination using observational data is challenging because of the presence of
unobservables that may be correlated with race. Using data made public in the SFFA v. Harvard
case, we estimate discrimination in a setting where this concern is mitigated. Namely, we show
that there is a substantial penalty against Asian Americans in admissions with limited scope for
omitted variables to overturn the result. This is because (i) Asian Americans are substantially
stronger than whites on the observables associated with admissions and (ii) the richness of the
data yields a model that predicts admissions extremely well. Our preferred model shows that
Asian Americans would be admitted at a rate 19%higher absent this penalty. Controlling for one
of the primary channels through which Asian American applicants are discriminated against--the
personal rating--cuts the Asian American penalty by less than half, still leaving a substantial
penalty.

Peter Arcidiacono                               Tyler Ransom
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
201A Social Sciences Building                   University of Oklahoma
Duke University                                 158 CCD1
Durham, NC 27708                                308 Cate Center Drive
and NBER                                        Norman, OK 73072
psarcidi@econ.duke.edu                          ransom@ou.edu

Josh Kinsler
University of Georgia
jkinsler@uga.edu
1         Introduction
Discrimination on the basis of race or ethnicity has a long and sordid history in the United
States, with the attacks against Asian Americans during the COVID-19 pandemic providing a
recent example (Tavernise and Oppel Jr., 2020). While significant progress has been made,
unequal treatment on the basis of race or ethnicity--be it in the labor market, criminal
justice, or the education system--remains a concern.1 But detecting how discrimination
affects these and other outcomes using observational data is difficult because of the presence
of unobservables that may be correlated with race.
        Concern regarding unobserved attributes is particularly salient in this context for two
reasons. First, adding control variables to a model that links race to a specific outcome
often reduces racial disparities.2 This occurs in part because race can proxy for differences
in unobserved factors, such as pre-labor-market or pre-college human capital. If additional
measures of these underlying attributes were available and included in the model, the evi-
dence for discrimination might be eliminated. Second, unease about unobserved attributes
is magnified when a statistical model explains only a small portion of the outcome. Most
observational studies of discrimination explain significantly less than half of the variation
in the relevant outcome, leaving substantial room for omitted variable bias. Concern about
omitted variable bias has resulted in a shift to audit and correspondence studies that rely
on fictitious applicants.3 However, these studies also face limitations such as experimenter
effects, heterogeneity in unobservables, where they can be applied, and how applicants signal
race.4
    1
      A lengthy literature in economics examines racial discrimination in the workplace (e.g. Bertrand and
Mullainathan, 2004; Charles and Guryan, 2008), criminal justice system (e.g. Knowles, Persico, and Todd,
2001; Anwar and Fang, 2006; Antonovics and Knight, 2009), and education system (e.g. Dorsey and Colliver,
1995; Figlio, 2005; Botelho, Madeira, and Rangel, 2015).
    2
      See, for example, Altonji and Blank (1999) and Arcidiacono, Aucejo, and Spenner (2012), where adding
controls reduces racial disparities in earnings and college grades, respectively.
    3
      Examples include Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004), Edelman, Luca, and Svirsky (2017), and Agan
and Starr (2018).
    4
      See Heckman (1998) and Neumark (2018) for more detail on experimenter effects and heterogeneous
variances in the unobserved components of productivity. Typically audit and correspondence studies must
be implemented in environments where some anonymity can be preserved (so it will not be clear that it
is an experiment) and outcomes that are early in the process (for example, callbacks not wages). Finally,
race is often communicated through an applicant's name which complicates interpretation since distinctively
African American names can also indicate socioeconomic status (Fryer and Levitt, 2004). An exception to
this criticism is Pope and Sydnor (2011), who rely on pictures to indicate applicant race.


                                                    2
      Using data made public in the SFFA v. Harvard case, we study discrimination using
observational data in an environment where these two concerns are mitigated: discrimination
against Asian Americans in college admissions. Namely, we show that there is a substantial
penalty against Asian Americans in admissions with very limited scope for omitted variables
to overturn the result. This is because (i) Asian Americans are substantially stronger than
whites on the observables associated with admissions and (ii) the richness of the data yields
a model that predicts admissions extremely well.
      For years there has been a perception of discrimination against Asian Americans in elite
college admissions (Golden, 2006; Fuchs, 2019). But despite this public perception, empirical
work on the topic is scarce, primarily due to lack of data. Universities tightly guard access
to admissions data, and even the criteria by which universities score their applicants is
often unknown. The SFFA v. Harvard case provided unprecedented access to Harvard's
admissions process. Using information made public through this lawsuit, we examine how
Asian American applicants are treated relative to their white counterparts.
      The data we analyze covers the admissions cycles for applicants who, if they were to have
graduated in four years, would have done so as the Classes of 2014­2019. In addition to many
demographic and academic measures, the data include information on the various Harvard
ratings that influence admissions decisions. These include Harvard admissions officers' rat-
ings of the applicant overall as well as ratings on academics, extracurriculars, athletics, and
personal qualities. It also includes the admissions officers' ratings of the letters submitted
by high school counselors and teachers. Finally, it includes information on alumni interviews
of the applicants in the form of an overall score and a personal score. We describe the data
and the admissions process itself in Section 2.
      There are certain groups of applicants that receive substantial preferences in admissions.
These include recruited athletes, legacies, children of donors, and children of faculty and staff
(ALDC).5 We focus on applicants that are not in one of these special recruiting categories
so that we can compare similarly situated applicants. Typical applicants (i.e., those who
are not ALDC) make up over 95% of domestic applicants and over 97% of Asian American
  5
     See Section 2.1.3 of Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom (2019b) for how ALDC applicants are treated
differently in Harvard's admissions process.



                                                  3
applicants. It should be clear that consistent estimates of racial discrimination against
typical Asian American applicants can be obtained from estimating an admissions model
only on typical applicants. However, given the central role ALDC applicants played in the
court case, we show both theoretically and empirically why estimating without this group is
appropriate in Section 3.6 For ease of exposition, when we refer to Asian American applicants
going forward, we mean the subset who are not ALDC.
       After removing ALDC applicants, Asian Americans actually have a slightly higher un-
conditional admit rate than whites. But as we show in Section 4, these unconditional admit
rates mask substantial differences in qualifications between the two groups. While it is
widely understood that Asian American applicants are academically stronger than whites,
it is startling just how much stronger they are. During the period we analyze, there were
42% more white applicants than Asian American applicants overall. Yet, among those who
were in the top ten percent of applicants based on grades and test scores, Asian American
applicants outnumbered white applicants by more than 45%.
       Of course, Harvard values much more than just academics. And here, too, Asian Amer-
ican applicants as a whole perform as well or better than white applicants on almost all of
Harvard's ratings.7 The strong performance of Asian Americans is in part because academ-
ically strong applicants also tend to be stronger on Harvard's ratings.8
       But Harvard's ratings may also be affected by racial preferences and penalties. Indeed,
Harvard acknowledges that race is one of the inputs into the overall rating. Consistent
with this, we find substantial preferences given to African Americans and Hispanics and a
corresponding penalty for Asian Americans in the overall rating. But we also find that race
substantially influences the personal rating, to the detriment of Asian Americans.
       The arguments for the personal rating being influenced by race--with Asian Americans
receiving a penalty--are abundant. We list three here, though we also provide additional
evidence in Section 5. First, Asian American applicants are slightly stronger than white
applicants on the observable characteristics correlated with the personal rating, yet receive
   6
      Note that estimating only on typical applicants is equivalent to estimating a model where ALDC status
is fully interacted with the controls when the purpose is to measure the effect of race for typical applicants.
    7
      The two exceptions are the athletic and personal ratings.
    8
      This is true for all ratings but one: there is no information in the public record regarding how the athletic
rating--at least for non-recruited athletes--is correlated with academic strength.


                                                        4
markedly lower personal ratings. Second, alumni interviewers--who are primarily white but
actually met the applicants in person--score Asian American applicants better on the per-
sonal rating than Harvard admissions officers do.9 Finally, there is clear evidence that other
racial groups receive a tip on the personal rating. For example, conditional on observables,
African Americans receive substantially higher personal ratings despite having observable
characteristics associated with lower personal ratings. Indeed, African Americans in the top
ten percent of the applicant pool according to grades and test scores are over twice as likely
as their Asian American counterparts to receive a strong personal rating.
       Given our findings that race influences both the overall and personal ratings, our preferred
model of admissions, described in Section 6, excludes both of these ratings. That said,
we include numerous other variables that would capture differences in the non-academic
attributes of the applicant pool. The set of controls available far outnumbers past work on
admissions and, as a result, the model fits the data extremely well.10
       Our preferred admissions model shows a substantial penalty against Asian American
applicants relative to their white counterparts. The average marginal effect of being Asian
American is -1 percentage point. Given that the overall admit rate for Asian Americans is
around 5 percent, removing the penalty would increase their admissions chances by roughly
19%.11 Yet, even if the personal rating is included in the model, the statistical case for
discrimination against Asian Americans is still clear and the penalty remains large.12
       Concerns about the scope for omitted variable bias are significantly reduced in our set-
ting. The richness of the applicant data yields a model of admissions outcomes that matches
   9
      Less than 1% of typical Asian American applicants receive an interview with an admissions officer. See
Table 7.3N of Document 415-9.
   10
      Previous work on college admissions typically uses data from a third party, and thus does not have access
to detailed admissions data. As a result, the admissions models employed often only include basic measures
such as race, gender, test scores, and athlete/legacy status. Examples include Hurwitz (2011), Long (2004),
Espenshade, Chung, and Walling (2004), and Espenshade and Chung (2005). An exception is Bhattacharya,
Kanaya, and Stevens (2017), who have access to admissions data for a selective UK university that includes
not only test scores, but also interview and essay scores.
   11
      Our finding of a 19% penalty is large, considering the magnitude of other penalties in the discrimination
literature. As a common example, consider the gender wage gap. The unconditional gender gap in earnings
for full-time workers in the United States is approximately 20%, with the gap narrowing to roughly 9% after
adjusting for a battery of worker and job characteristics (Blau and Kahn, 2017).
   12
      The average marginal effect is -0.54 percentage points, a little more than half the penalty in the preferred
model. Indeed, as we show in Appendix B, the penalty Asian Americans receive is robust to a host of
alternative modeling assumptions.



                                                        5
the data incredibly well. The Pseudo R2 of our preferred model is equal to 0.56, a value well
above what is considered an excellent fit (McFadden, 1979). For comparison purposes, Es-
penshade, Chung, and Walling (2004) estimate racial preferences and preferences for legacies
and athletes in elite college admissions and obtain a Pseudo R2 of around 0.2. In a setting
analogous to ours--elite academic journal editorial decisions--Card et al. (2020) and Card
and DellaVigna (2020) estimate rich models of revise and resubmit decisions for a sample of
manuscripts. Their models are notable in that they incorporate reviewer recommendations--
which we would expect to be highly correlated with editor decisions--yet the Pseudo R2 of
their models is never larger than 0.5. In Section 6 we provide further insight regarding the
fit of our model by mapping our Pseudo R2 value to model accuracy and a more traditional
R2 measure.
       Not only is there limited scope for omitted variable bias, the evidence suggests that,
if anything, we are likely understating the direct penalty Asian Americans face in the ad-
missions process. First, Asian American applicants are significantly stronger than white
applicants on the observable characteristics--outside of race--that Harvard values when
making admissions decisions.13 While there may be differences in unobservables as well,
researchers typically assume that groups that are stronger on the observed characteristics
are also likely to be strong on the unobserved characteristics. Indeed, that selection on ob-
served characteristics moves in the same direction as selection on unobserved characteristics
provides the motivation for the empirical approaches of Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005),
Krauth (2016), and Oster (2019). However, in our case, the estimated effect of being Asian
American is negative despite Asian Americans being positively selected on the observables
associated with admission. Thus, if we follow the literature and assume Asian American
applicants are also stronger on the unobserved factors affecting admission, the actual degree
of discrimination is larger than our estimates indicate.
       A second reason that we are likely understating the penalty against Asian American ap-
plicants is that some of the other Harvard ratings we include also show patterns indicative
of discrimination against Asian American applicants.14 Similar to the personal rating, how
  13
     They are also at least as strong or stronger than white applicants on the non-academic portion of the
observables. See Section 6.
  14
     A common issue researchers face is whether to control for variables that are themselves possibly a result


                                                      6
Harvard admissions officers rate the high school teacher and counselor letters also suggests
racial bias. Namely, Asian Americans are stronger on the observable characteristics associ-
ated with these ratings, yet Asian Americans receive lower scores on these ratings conditional
on the observables. We include these ratings in our preferred model as the penalties are not
as egregious as what is observed in the personal rating. In doing so, we set an extremely
high bar for establishing discrimination, likely underestimating the penalty Asian American
applicants face as a result.
    That Asian Americans still manage to make up over 20% of Harvard admits despite
the disadvantages they face in the admissions process is striking. But it does not justify
Asian Americans losing out on a substantial number of seats because of their race and their
unexplainably low personal ratings.



2     Data and Admissions Process
We now briefly describe the data used in our analysis, as well as how the admissions process
operates at Harvard. More details are available in Section 2 of Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and
Ransom (2019b).


2.1     Data

Our primary data source is applicant-level data from the Classes of 2014­2019 produced by
Harvard in the SFFA v. Harvard lawsuit. However, due to court protections, we do not use
this data directly. Rather, we rely on publicly available documents such as expert witness
reports or internal admissions office memos that were made public as part of the lawsuit.
Among these publicly available documents, we rely most heavily on the plaintiff's expert
witness rebuttal report (Document 415-9).15
    In all, the data used in Document 415-9 consist of 142,728 typical domestic applicants
who have complete application data. For each applicant, the microdata contain details
of racial bias. Neal and Johnson (1996) pointed this out when studying racial differences in the labor market
and researchers have addressed similar issues in racial discrimination in criminal justice and school discipline
(see Rehavi and Starr (2014) and Kinsler (2011), respectively).
   15
      For a complete list of legal documents we rely on in this paper, see Appendix Table D1.


                                                       7
on academics, demographics, ALDC status, Harvard internal ratings, and a host of other
variables (e.g. whether the applicant applied for financial aid, parental education, etc.).


2.2     Admissions Process

In each admissions cycle, applications are divided into geographical areas called dockets.
Harvard admissions officers are divided into subcommittees according to each docket. Ad-
missions officers read each application and assign three classes of ratings on a number of
dimensions: (i) overall; (ii) the profile ratings, which include the academic, extracurricular,
athletic, and personal ratings; and (iii) the school support ratings which include the coun-
selor rating and typically two teacher ratings. Ratings typically take on values between 1
and 5, with 1 being the best. For some ratings, +/- suffixes are used to distinguish values
within a given integer. For example, a 1- is a better rating than a 2+.
    Trial Exhibit P001 contains a summary of the criteria by which ratings are assigned
for the Class of 2018. Among the profile ratings, the criteria for evaluating academics and
extracurriculars are straightforward and generally coincide with what one would expect. For
the athletic rating, high ratings appear to be related to one's ability to play competitively
for Harvard's teams, either as a recruit or a walk-on. The personal rating, which is meant to
capture personal qualities such as likeability, courage, and kindness, is the most vague.16 The
reading procedures instruct the reader to score a 1 if the applicant's personal qualities are
"outstanding," a 2 if they are "very strong," a 3 if they are "generally positive," a 4 if they
are "bland or somewhat negative or immature," a 5 for "questionable personal qualities,"
and a 6 for "worrisome personal qualities."17
    It is also important to note that the school support ratings are assigned by the Har-
vard admissions office and not directly by the high school teachers themselves. High school
  16
     Harvard revised their reader guidelines the summer before the trial, providing much clearer guidance
on the scoring of the personal rating. In contrast to previous reader guidelines, the 2023 reader guidelines
explicitly state that race should not be considered when assigning the personal rating. See Trial Exhibit
P633.
  17
     Harvard's admissions director said the following when asked about the personal rating criteria: "[The
guidelines are] not terribly helpful. I think `unusual appeal' is ... the phrase we use [for a 1]. ... [R]eaders
will construe that in different ways. And 2 is ... a very attractive person to be with and have in your school
community and widely respected. And 3 means, you know, just fine. ... 4 is a kind of negative" (Document
419-1, p. 171).



                                                       8
teachers submit a letter of recommendation and also fill out a questionnaire where they are
asked to rate the applicant's academic strength and personal qualities (such as maturity,
motivation, integrity and leadership skills).18 Harvard admissions officers then assign the
school support ratings based on the information contained in recommendation letters and
questionnaire.
       In addition to submitting application materials, most Harvard applicants are also inter-
viewed in person by an alumnus or alumna who lives close to their high school. The alumni
rate applicants on a number of qualities, but only the overall and personal rating are included
in the database. A small number of applicants interview with Harvard admissions staff.
       After applications have been read and assigned ratings for each category, a subset of the
applicants are passed on to an additional reader, called the "third reader."19 Provisional ad-
missions decisions are then made at the docket subcommittee level. In March, final decisions
are made at the full committee level with all admissions officers present.20



3        Modeling Admissions and the Relevant Sample
As noted in the introduction, we focus on estimating the Asian American penalty among
typical applicants. This decision reflects a desire to make comparisons of similarly-situated
applicants. In this section we expand on this idea, showing that consistent estimates of
a penalty against typical Asian American applicants can be recovered from the subset of
applications that are typical (i.e. not ALDC). Further, incorporating ALDC applicants
into the estimation in a meaningful way requires stronger assumptions in order to recover
consistent estimates of a penalty against typical Asian American applicants.21 As we show,
these assumptions are violated in the Harvard data.
  18
      For an example of this taken from the Class of 2012 Casebook, see Trial Exhibit DX 002, pp. 6­7.
  19
      Second readers are present when the admissions officer is new or if the case is especially difficult.
   20
      For four of the six application cycles in our sample (2016­2019), Harvard offered an Early Action program
to its applicants. Full-committee admissions decisions for Early Action applicants were made before the end
of December. Possible admissions outcomes include admission, rejection, or deferral to the regular application
pool. Harvard states that Early Action applications are reviewed in exactly the same manner as non-early-
action applications; see https://college.harvard.edu/admissions/apply/first-year-applicants.
   21
      Incorporating ALDC applicants by interacting ALDC with every variable effectively allows the admis-
sions process to operate differently for typical applicants and ALDC applicants. The addition of ALDC
applicants in the fully interacted model then has no effect on the estimates of racial discrimination against
typical applicants.

                                                      9
       Discrimination can manifest itself in many forms and it may operate in some places more
than in others. Consider professional football players. Well after the National Football
League had integrated, there was still substantial discrimination against black quarterbacks,
with the perception being that they were not cerebral enough or did not have the leader-
ship skills necessary for the position (Hruby, 2019). Clearly it would be insufficient for a
team to refute an accusation of discrimination against quarterbacks by showing it does not
discriminate against non-quarterbacks.
       A similar dynamic can be at work between ALDC and typical applicants. Asian Ameri-
cans are stereotyped as enjoying math, aspiring to be doctors, and being a "model minority"
(Kim and Lewis, 1994; Yam, 2019). One way of overcoming those stereotypes is through
connections, such as having the opportunity to make oneself known to the admissions com-
mittee or Harvard in general. Athletes provide the clearest example through their contact
with Harvard coaches. Chances to interact with the Harvard community will also be present
for legacies through alumni events. More importantly, simply being in one of these ALDC
categories bucks the stereotype given how few Asian Americans are ALDC: less than 2.5%
of Asian American applicants fall into one of these groups, compared to over 9% of whites
(see Table 3.2 of Document 415-8).
       Yet, regardless of whether ALDC Asian Americans are discriminated against relative to
their white counterparts, whether Harvard is discriminating against typical Asian Americans
can be determined from looking only at typical applicants. To illustrate, consider a model
of admissions where applicants compete for a fixed number of slots, N . Consider a latent
index Yi that represents Harvard's perception of the quality of applicant i. All applicants
above some threshold  are admitted: if Yi >  then Yi = 1 and the applicant is admitted,
otherwise the applicant is rejected. That all applicants face the same admissions threshold
is without loss of generality: any preferences (e.g. for ALDC applicants or particular racial
groups) can be folded into Yi .22 The threshold  is set to ensure the number of admits
equals N .
       The competition for slots manifests itself through  . So even though, in principle, all
  22
    Preferences for balancing factors such as initial major interest or geography can also be included in the
latent index. For example, if there are few humanities applicants in a particular admissions cycle, then
humanities applicants may see higher latent indexes all else equal.


                                                     10
students are competing against one another for a limited number of slots, it is still possible
to estimate models of admission on subsets of the applicants, as any competitive effects will
be reflected in  .
      Consider the subset of applicants that are typical (i.e. not ALDC). Further decompose
the latent index Yi for these applicants into the sum of three parts:


                                           Yi = Ai + Xi  +            i                                  (1)


(i) a part due to being Asian American, Ai = 1; (ii) a part due to other observables, Xi ;
and (iii) a part due to unobservables,          i.

      To fix ideas, consider the case where          i   follows a logistic distribution and is uncorrelated
with Ai and Xi . In this case, a logit model yields consistent estimates of the parameters
 and  up to a scale parameter, where the scale parameter embeds the variance of .23
Embedded in  will be a constant term that can be interpreted as a scaled version of  .
      Now suppose we add ALDC applicants to the data set, adding controls for their ALDC
status to Xi to reflect any preferences these applicants receive. Suppose the same conditions
hold as before:      i   follows a logistic distribution and is uncorrelated with Ai and Xi . In this
case, the additional observations increase the statistical power of the model. They do not,
however, affect consistency: consistent estimates of the parameters can be obtained from a
subset of the applicants.
      However, if the Asian American coefficient substantially changes when ALDC applicants
are added and this change is statistically significant, this suggests the model is misspecified.
Either the effect of being Asian American differs for ALDC applicants, or other characteristics
operate differently for ALDC applicants that in turn affect the coefficient on Asian American.
Note that this is not a case of adding controls and having the coefficient change (i.e. omitted
variable bias), but of adding observations.
      One potential fix would be to allow the effect of being Asian American to vary between
ALDC and typical applicants. Denoting Si = 1 (Si = 0) if the applicant was (was not)
 23
      Note that the marginal effect of Ai is not affected by the normalization on the scale parameter.




                                                          11
ALDC, we can specify the index as:

                                             1
                                Yi   =            I (Si = s)s Ai + Xi  +   i                          (2)
                                         s=0


But again, if the estimate of 0 is substantially different when ALDCs are included, this
suggests misspecification: the other variables matter in a different way for ALDC applicants,
which in turn affects the Asian American coefficient.
       A more general model--where ALDC status is interacted with all variables--would be:

                                         1
                               Yi   =            I (Si = s) (s Ai + Xi s ) +   i                      (3)
                                        s=0


Note that this model implicitly builds in differences in the unobservables as well. By estimat-
ing separate coefficients for ALDC applicants, it allows for the possibility that the variance of
 is different for ALDC applicants. The coefficients for each group are all estimated relative
to the underlying variances of their unobservables.
       The model given in (3) can be estimated as two separate logits. These two logits will
yield identical estimates to one where all the coefficients are estimated at once. Hence, for
the purpose of estimating 0 , estimating a logit only on typical applicants is sufficient.
       As we will show, the evidence suggests that the effects of being Asian American differ
for ALDC applicants and the effects of Xi differ for ALDC applicants. One example is
academics. Preliminary evidence that academics matter differently depending on ALDC
status can be seen in Tables 2 and 6 of Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom (2019b).24 The
former shows that those who receive an academic rating of 5 are guaranteed rejection unless
they are athletes, and those who receive a 4 are virtually guaranteed rejection unless they are
ALDC. The latter shows that, in the bottom decile of the academic index (a weighted average
of SAT scores and high school GPA), 6 percent of white LDC applicants were admitted, yet
zero typical white applicants were admitted from this decile.
       We will also show that Asian Americans are substantially stronger than white applicants
on academics. If including ALDC applicants results in the coefficients on academics being
  24
   For additional evidence of race mattering differently for athletes and legacies that generalizes beyond
Harvard, see Table 6 of Espenshade, Chung, and Walling (2004).

                                                         12
attenuated (assuming no interactions between ALDC status and academics), this will make
it appear as though academics are not as important as they really are for typical applicants.
Hence, Harvard could falsely claim they were not discriminating against Asian Americans;
academics are just not as important as one would think despite the important role academics
play for typical applicants.
       Given the substantial difference in admit rates depending on ALDC status as well as
the evidence that academics matter less for this group, we focus on typical applicants.25
We return to show how including ALDC applicants distorts the coefficients of the model in
Section 6.2.



4        Descriptive Analysis
We now turn to the characteristics of typical Asian American and white applicants. We
begin by looking at their family backgrounds, showing that, on average, Asian American
applicants come from poorer families than white applicants. Despite this, Asian Americans
substantially outperform their white counterparts on academics. We then examine how
Asian Americans and whites are rated by Harvard admissions officers and how these ratings
are correlated with academic preparation.


4.1       Demographics

The first panel of Table 1 presents demographic characteristics for typical white and Asian
American applicants as well as by whether or not they were admitted. The overall admit
rate of white applicants over this period is 4.89% which is slightly lower than the 5.13%
admit rate for Asian American applicants.
       Asian American applicants are 4.49 percentage points more likely to be labeled disadvan-
taged by Harvard readers off a base of 6.36 percent.26 Those who are labeled disadvantaged
  25
      As further evidence that admissions for ALDCs operates differently, Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom
(2019a) show that the share of admits who are legacies or recruited athletes (LA) shows no time trend for
the Classes of 2000­2017, despite the share of applicants who are LA showing a steep downward time trend
over the same period (see Figure 2).
   26
      Trial Exhibit P001 instructs the Harvard reader to code the applicant as disadvantaged if "the applicant
is from a very modest economic background."


                                                     13
are significantly more likely to be admitted, and this alone removes the difference in admis-
sion rates between white and Asian American applicants: for those who are disadvantaged,
the admit rate for whites (Asian Americans) is 11.22% (10.33%); for those who are not, the
admit rate for whites (Asian Americans) is 4.46% (4.49%).27 Asian Americans are also more
likely to be first-generation college students and to have applied for a fee waiver. Both of
these variables are also positively correlated with admission, though not as strongly as the
disadvantaged status variable.
       With regard to parental education, Asian American mothers are slightly less likely (by 0.3
percentage points) to have a degree higher than a bachelor's, while Asian American fathers
are more likely (by 8.5 percentage points) to have a degree higher than a bachelor's. Both
of these variables are positively correlated with admission.


4.2        Academics

The second panel of Table 1 shows measures of the academic preparation of white and
Asian American applicants. And here it is striking how much stronger Asian American
applicants are. Using white applicants as a base, Asian Americans on average score 0.3
standard deviations better on both the SAT math and SAT II subject tests, around 0.05
standard deviations better on high school grades, and take over 1.5 more AP exams with an
average score that is 0.09 points higher. While the average white applicant scores at the 53rd
percentile of the academic index distribution, the average Asian American applicant is at
the 63rd percentile.28 The only measure of academic preparation that whites do comparably
  27
       These numbers are computed using Bayes' rule from figures reported in Table 1. For example:

                                                  Pr (Disadvantaged | Admit) Pr (Admit)
                     Pr (Admit | Disadvantaged) =
                                                            Pr (Disadvantaged)
                                                  0.2186 × 0.0513
                                                =
                                                       0.1085
                                                = 10.33%

for Asian Americans. A similar strategy yields the admit rate for disadvantaged whites and non-
disadvantaged applicants.
  28
     The academic index is a weighted average of the applicant's scores on the SAT, SAT II, and high
school grade point average (or class rank). It is used by Ivy League institutions to ensure recruited athletes
meet minimum academic standards. See Document 415-8 footnote 29 for a more detailed discussion of the
academic index.



                                                     14
on is the SAT verbal.
      The differences in academic achievement between white and Asian American applicants
become even more staggering when looking at deciles of the academic index. The first
set of columns of Table 2 show the number of applicants in each decile for whites and
Asian Americans. Overall, there are 42.5% more white applicants than Asian American
applicants.29 But in the top decile there are 45.6% more Asian American applicants than
white applicants. In the bottom five deciles, there are over two white applicants for every
Asian American applicant. But in the top three deciles, there are 11% more Asian American
applicants than white applicants.
      The differences in representation across academic index deciles are only relevant if the
academic index is correlated with admission. And it is. No white or Asian American typical
applicants were admitted from the bottom decile in any of the six admissions cycles, and
less than 10% of white and Asian American admits come from the bottom five deciles.
In contrast, 73% of white and Asian American admits come from the top three deciles.
Additionally, the admit rate increases monotonically with academic index decile for both
whites and Asian Americans.
      But as shown in Table 2, admission rates conditional on academic index decile are quite
different between white and Asian American applicants. From the fourth decile to the
tenth, white applicants are over 20% more likely to be admitted than their Asian American
counterparts in the same decile. To illustrate, whites in the top (tenth) decile have an admit
rate of 15.3% compared to an Asian American admit rate of 12.7%. And from the fifth decile
to the ninth, Asian Americans are admitted at a rate similar to whites one decile lower.


4.3      Harvard Ratings

It is of course the case that Harvard values much more than academics. Indeed, if the
academic index were used to decide admissions for white and Asian American applicants
(holding the admissions decisions of everyone else fixed), the number of Asian Americans
 29
  Summing the first two columns of Table 2 indicates that there are 57,451 whites and 40,308 Asian
Americans.




                                               15
admitted would increase by 828, a 40% increase.30 So in order to rationalize the similarity
in the overall admission rate between white and Asian American applicants, it must be the
case that Asian Americans are substantially worse on other characteristics Harvard values,
or they are being discriminated against, or some combination thereof.
       In Table 3, we report how white and Asian American applicants score on each of Harvard's
ratings. Given the previous discussion, it is not surprising that Asian Americans score
substantially better on the academic rating: 60.2% of Asian Americans receive a 2 or better,
compared to 45.3% of white applicants.
       But Asian Americans also score well on many of the other ratings. Asian Americans
are more likely to have a 2 or better on the extracurricular rating and alumni overall rating
and slightly more likely on both teacher ratings, the alumni personal rating, and the overall
rating. They are slightly less likely to have a 2 or better on the counselor rating, but the
difference is less than 0.2 percentage points.
       There are, however, two ratings where Asian Americans score significantly worse: the
athletic rating and the personal rating.31 Receiving an athletic rating of 2 does boost one's
chances of admission. However, the change in admissions probability from moving from a 3 to
a 2 is much smaller than the corresponding change in any of the other ratings, and the share
of applicants who receive a 2 on the athletic rating is also smaller than the corresponding
share on any other rating. And there is no difference in the admit rate between those who get
a 3 on the athletic rating versus those who get a 4, while for the other three profile ratings,
getting a four virtually guarantees rejection. Thus, it appears that the athletic rating is less
important than the other profile ratings in determining admissions outcomes.
       Turning to the personal rating, not only do Asian Americans score worse than whites,
they score worse than African Americans, Hispanics, and those not in one of the four major
race/ethnic groups.32 And the personal rating is strongly correlated with admission: 84% of
white admits scored a 2 or better on the personal rating, compared to 18% of white rejects.33
  30
     This number is obtained by fixing the total number of white and Asian American admits at their current
level, 4884, and then randomly sampling from the tenth decile to fill the class.
  31
     When the Office of Civil Rights investigated Harvard, it was these two ratings that were found to be the
most subjective. See Trial Exhibit P555.
  32
     See the "Average" row in Table 5.6R of Document 415-9.
  33
     See Table 4.1R of Document 415-9.



                                                     16
4.4       Academics and Harvard Ratings

Given that Asian Americans are so much stronger on academics, could it be that excelling
at academics comes at the cost of being appealing to Harvard on the personal front? This
turns out to not be the case. In fact, the academic index is positively correlated with each of
Harvard's ratings with the exception of the athletic rating.34 Appendix Tables D2 through
D4 show the share of applicants receiving a 2 or better for each of the ratings by academic
index decile and race. For ratings like the academic rating, virtually no one receives a 2 if
they are in the bottom decile, and virtually everyone receives a 2 if they are in the top decile
regardless of their race. But for every rating and for every racial group, higher academic
index deciles are associated with higher probabilities of receiving a 2 or better.
       Figure 1 illustrates this pattern graphically for the academic, extracurricular, personal,
and overall ratings. The share receiving a 2 or better declines significantly from the 10th to
the 1st decile of the academic index for each rating and each racial group. For the academic
and extracurricular ratings, the racial gaps in the share receiving a 2 or better within each
academic index decile are fairly small. In contrast, the personal and overall ratings indicate
large and consistent racial gaps in the likelihood of receiving a 2 or better within each
academic index decile. Moreover, the ordering of the racial categories within an academic
index decile is identical between the overall and personal rating, with African Americans
receiving the highest shares and then followed by Hispanics, whites, and Asian Americans
respectively. Note that when readers assign an overall rating, they are allowed to incorporate
any factors deemed valuable to Harvard, including race.35 Thus, the patterns observed for
the overall rating are likely a reflection of racial preferences. Because the pattern for the
personal rating mirrors that of the overall rating, there is suggestive evidence that racial
preferences play a role in the personal rating as well.
       Further evidence that racial preferences impact the personal rating is presented in Table
4. This table focuses on applicants in the top academic index decile and compares the
probability of receiving a two or higher on each of Harvard's ratings for Asian Americans
  34
     There is no information in the public record about how the athletic rating is correlated with other factors
for non-recruited athletes.
  35
     See Document 421-9, pp. 259, 288 and 422.



                                                      17
relative to the three other major racial/ethnic groups.36 The first column of Table 4 shows
the share of Asian Americans in the top academic index decile who receive a 2 or better on
each of the ratings. The second column shows how much higher (or lower) the similar share
was for white students in the top decile, with the third column showing the corresponding
percentage increase (or decrease) relative to Asian Americans. The results are sorted by
the difference between the white and Asian American share. In the top decile, the share of
whites receiving a 2 or better on the personal rating was over seven percentage points higher
than Asian Americans, a 33% increase. While whites in the tenth decile scored higher on
other ratings as well, the gaps are smaller.
      The fourth column shows the lowest decile in the white academic index distribution that
would still have a higher probability of receiving a 2 or better rating than Asian Americans.
For the personal rating, whites in the 6th academic index decile have a higher probability
of receiving a 2 or better than Asian Americans in the top academic index decile. For all of
the other ratings, Asian American applicants in the top decile have a higher probability of
receiving a 2 or better than whites below the 9th decile.
      While the Asian American and white comparisons illustrate that the personal rating
stands out relative to the other ratings, the especially striking comparisons are with African
American applicants. African American applicants in the top academic index decile are
over twice as likely (111.57%) to receive a 2 or better on the personal rating as their Asian
American counterparts (47% for African Americans versus 22% for Asian Americans). It is
important to note that higher academic index deciles are associated with higher personal
ratings. African American applicants in the top (10th) decile are also twice as likely to
receive a 2 or better as African American applicants in the third decile.37 Yet, even African
Americans in the third academic index decile score better on the personal rating than Asian
Americans in the tenth decile.
      The patterns in the personal rating mirror what we see in places where Harvard acknowl-
edges race places a role: in the overall rating and in the admit rates themselves. The bottom
panel of Table 4 shows the overall rating and admit rate for those in the top academic index
 36
      Over 44% of Asian American admits are in the top academic index decile.
 37
      See Appendix Table D3.



                                                    18
decile. Like the personal rating, Asian Americans are rated the lowest and this is is especially
so when compared to African Americans and Hispanics.
       The descriptive analysis strongly suggests that race plays a role in the personal rating in
addition to the overall rating and admissions. It may affect the other ratings as well, but
the personal rating is where the patterns are most stark. In the next section, we estimate
models of these ratings to see the effects of race after accounting for many of the multitude
of variables available in the Harvard database.



5        Discrimination in Harvard Ratings
A key advantage of working with the Harvard data to ascertain racial preferences or penalties
in admissions is the availability of Harvard's own internal ratings for each applicant. These
ratings can potentially capture important applicant attributes that are unobserved to the
researcher but correlated with applicant race. Including these ratings in a model of admis-
sions will thus reduce the scope for omitted variable bias. However, if Harvard's applicant
ratings also encompass racial preferences, then they would be inappropriate controls in an
admissions model aimed at estimating the role of applicant race.
       In this section, we more formally investigate whether Harvard's ratings incorporate racial
preferences, making them improper controls in an admissions model. To isolate the effect of
race in applicant ratings, we estimate a series of ordered logit regressions where the outcome
is a rating of interest, say the extracurricular rating, and the key controls include applicant
race, gender, test scores, disadvantaged status, intended major, geography, neighborhood
characteristics, and high school characteristics.38 Importantly, in each of the ratings models,
we condition on all of the other Harvard ratings, excluding the personal and overall ratings.
We exclude the personal and overall ratings since, as shown in Figure 1 and additional
evidence below will show, they directly incorporate racial preferences. But if there is bias
against Asian Americans in some of the other ratings, controlling for these ratings will lead to
an under-estimate of any bias against Asian Americans. Hence our test is quite stringent.39
  38
     There are no estimates of the athletic rating in the public record but we do control for it in our preferred
ratings models.
  39
     For a full description of the variables included in the ratings models, see Document 415-8 and Document


                                                       19
    The ordered logit framework is appropriate when the dependent variable, in this case
an applicant rating, takes on a discrete number of values that have a natural ordering. In
Harvard's rating system, applicants are typically rated on a scale from 1 to 4, with 1 being
the best rating.40 Suppose there is a latent index by which admissions officers rate applicants,
where R indexes the rating (e.g. R  {Overall, Academic, Personal, . . .}):

                                               R
                                               i = XiR  R + R
                                                            i                                                   (4)

such that the observed rating for applicant i, YiR , takes on a particular value, say 3, when
 R
i  is within a certain range. Namely:

                                                             R   R
                                                1      if   i   k1
                                                             R   R   R
                                               2       if   k1 > i  k2
                                       YiR   =               R   R   R
                                                                                                                (5)
                                               
                                                3      if   k2 > i  k3
                                                             R   R
                                                4      if   k3 > i
        R    R    R
 where k1 > k2 > k3 are the thresholds associated with each ranking. Assuming that
R
i follows a Type 1 extreme value distribution, this leads to an ordered logit model. The

probabilities of receiving each of the ratings conditional on Xi are given by:

                                     exp k3 - XiR  R
                   Pr YiR = 4 =
                                   1 + exp (k3 - XiR  R )
                                     exp k2 - XiR  R          exp k3 - XiR  R
                   Pr YiR     =3 =                        -
                                   1 + exp (k2 - XiR  R ) 1 + exp (k3 - XiR  R )
                                                                                                                (6)
                                     exp k1 - XiR  R          exp k2 - XiR  R
                   Pr   YiR   =2 =                        -
                                   1 + exp (k1 - XiR  R ) 1 + exp (k2 - XiR  R )
                                         exp k1 - XiR  R
                   Pr YiR     =1 =1-
                                       1 + exp (k1 - XiR  R )

    To test whether discrimination is present in the ratings, we examine whether the  R 's
corresponding to each of the race dummies are statistically different from zero (where whites
serve as the reference group). Selected coefficients from the ratings models are presented
415-9.
   40
      The extracurricular rating includes a rating of 5 which indicates a significant family or work responsibility.
Approximately 0.5% of applicants obtain this rating. For ease of exposition, we describe the ratings models
as if they all run on a 4-point scale. When we estimate the extracurricular rating model, we incorporate this
fifth category.


                                                        20
in Appendix Tables D5 and D6. For each rating, we present two models, one that is fairly
sparse in terms of controls and our full model that contains a broad array of applicant
attributes, including other ratings.41 We present both models to illustrate how the race
coefficients change as controls are added--information which can be used as a guide to
how unobservables correlate with race. Broadly speaking, the racial categories for African
American, Hispanic, and Asian American are statistically significant across most of the
ratings models. However, the magnitudes, signs, and patterns in the coefficients as controls
are added are quite different across Harvard's ratings.
       In our full model, the Asian American coefficient is positive and significant for three of
the ratings: the academic, extracurricular, and the alumni overall rating. But in each of
these cases the Asian American coefficient--and indeed all the race coefficients--is much
smaller in the specification in the full model than in the sparse model.42 A very different
pattern emerges for the personal and overall rating. In our preferred models of the personal
and overall rating, the Asian American coefficient is large and negative while the African
American coefficient is large and positive, with the gaps growing between the sparse and full
models. To put the magnitude of these coefficients in context, we calculate the change in the
probability of obtaining a 2 or better for an Asian American if we switch their race, all else
equal. If Asian American applicants were treated as African American (white) applicants,
their probability of obtaining a 2 or better on the personal rating would increase by 59%
(21%).43
       The large race coefficients in the estimated models for the personal and overall ratings
suggest that racial preferences are an important factor in the assignment of these ratings.
Further evidence that these coefficients arise from racial preferences can be seen in how
the coefficients change between our sparse and full models. Figure 2 illustrates how the
estimated racial gap between Asian American and African American applicants changes as
controls are added for the academic, extracurricular, personal, and overall ratings. For the
academic and extracurricular models, when we add controls the racial gap between these
  41
     Models with subsets of the controls can be found in Document 415-9 Tables B.6.1R­B.6.2R.
  42
     Although here we are referring to the base coefficient, the finding of a diminished effect of race holds for
any set of interactions as well.
  43
     See Table 6.1R in Document 415-9 for further details.



                                                       21
two groups shrinks towards zero. Note that, in our preferred ratings model, we interact race
with gender and disadvantaged status. As a result, we show the male/female range for the
estimated gap by disadvantaged status.
   A very different pattern emerges for the personal and overall ratings. For the personal rat-
ing, the estimated racial gap between Asian American and African American applicants ex-
pands significantly as more controls are added. This is especially true for non-disadvantaged
applicants who account for the vast majority of applicants. The expansion of the estimated
gap suggests that the race coefficients are picking up racial preferences. A similar pattern is
observed for the overall rating, where not only does the racial gap between Asian American
and African American applicants expand as controls are added, it actually reverses sign. In
the sparse model, Asian Americans receive higher overall ratings relative to African Amer-
icans, but when all the controls are added, Asian American applicants appear significantly
worse.
   Examining how the race coefficients change as we alter the set of controls speaks to the
relative strength of each group on the observable components in the model. This is useful
information, since economists often assume that selection on unobservables works in the
same direction as selection on observables. We take this idea one step further by evaluating
the average "observed" strength for each racial group across the various Harvard ratings. In
particular, we calculate the index of observables (except race and year) for each applicant
according to XiR ^ R -Xi,race
                       R
                               R
                              ^race   R
                                    -Xi,yr  R
                                           ^yr . We then subtract off the white mean and divide by
the variance. Finally, we average within each racial group, labeling this quantity the average
index. The average index measures how strong each group is on observable characteristics
associated with each rating relative to whites, while the race coefficients measure racial
preferences and differences in unobservable characteristics common within racial groups.
When the race coefficient and average index move in opposite directions, the case for race
playing a role in the rating--as opposed to just proxying for unobserved characteristics--is
strengthened. This pattern can only occur if either racial preferences are strong and/or
selection on observables works in the opposite direction as selection on unobservables.
   The race coefficients and average indices for all of Harvard's ratings are displayed in



                                               22
Appendix Table D7.44 In Figure 3 we graphically display the race coefficients and average
index for the academic, extracurricular, overall, and personal ratings. For the academic and
extracurricular ratings, the race coefficients have the same signs as the index of observables.
This suggests that if we were able to add even more controls, the race effects would likely
attenuate to zero. For example, in the case of academics, we exclude information related to
the number of AP exams, AP exam scores, and academic awards.45 We know from Table 1
that Asian Americans are stronger on AP exams, and are likely stronger on other unobserved
academic measures.46
       While the race coefficients in the academic and extracurricular ratings likely reflect selec-
tion on unobservables, this is not the case for the overall rating. The race-related coefficients
move in the opposite direction of the average index. African American and Hispanic appli-
cants are worse on the average index, while Asian American applicants are stronger. In fact,
the ordering of all the race coefficients and average index values is exactly opposite: the order
of the race coefficients from largest to smallest is African American, Hispanic, White, and
Asian American while the reverse pattern is seen in the average index. A conflicting pattern
between the race coefficients and the observable strength of each group is strong evidence
of racial preferences. Supporting this interpretation is the fact that Harvard acknowledges
that the overall rating incorporates racial preferences.47
       The personal rating shows the same pattern as the overall rating. African American and
Hispanic applicants receive large bumps in their personal ratings when controlling for all
other factors (including all the other ratings other than the overall rating), but are worse
on the average index. Asian American applicants, on the other hand, are penalized relative
to white applicants but are stronger on the observables that predict the personal rating.
Again, the ordering of the race coefficients and average indices by racial group is flipped.
  44
     The full sets of ratings model coefficients are available in Tables B.6.1R­B.6.4R of Document 415-9.
  45
     AP exam data is only available for the last two admissions cycles contained in the data.
  46
     The positive coefficient for Asian American applicants in the extracurricular rating model likely reflects
differences in the underlying activities that Asian Americans pursue, relative to whites, which are not cap-
tured by the model. For example, 45% (27%) of the primary extracurricular activities for white (Asian
American) applicants are sports-related, leaving more lines available on the college application for Asian
Americans to report non-sports related activities. Note that these numbers include ALDC applicants, see
Trial Exhibit DX 680.
  47
     See Document 421-9, pp. 259, 288 and 422.




                                                      23
This pattern strongly suggests that racial preferences play a large role in the personal rating,
similar to the overall rating. As a result, it is incorrect to include the personal and overall
ratings in an admissions model focused on estimating racial preferences unless the researcher
also calculated the effect of racial preferences through these ratings.
    While not displayed in Figure 3, there is also evidence that Asian American applicants
are discriminated against in the school support ratings and alumni personal rating. For
each of these ratings, the Asian American coefficient is negative and significant, while Asian
American applicants are stronger than white applicants on the index of observables. Since
the size of the racial penalty in each of these ratings is substantially smaller than for the
personal rating, we take a conservative approach and include these ratings in our preferred
admissions model. However, it is important to point out that, by controlling for the school
support and alumni personal ratings in all the other ratings models, we are stacking the
deck against finding evidence of discrimination. The fact that we still find strong evidence
of racial preferences in the overall and personal rating is all the more compelling.
    Going beyond selection on observables versus selection on unobservables, there is addi-
tional evidence that the personal rating is a tool to implement Harvard's preferences over
the composition of their admits. For example, in the personal rating model the interaction
between African American and female and African American and disadvantaged are signif-
icantly negative, implying racial preferences are muted for these two groups. The share of
applicants who are female or disadvantaged is significantly higher for African Americans
than for any of the other three major racial/ethnic groups, so if Harvard is interested in bal-
ancing within-race characteristics then we would see muted preferences for African American
applicants who were female or disadvantaged.48 The only other rating that has this pattern
is the overall rating, a rating that we know Harvard uses to directly implement preferences.
  48
     Table 3.1R of Document 415-9 shows descriptive statistics by racial/ethnic group, including share female
and share disadvantaged.




                                                     24
6        Discrimination in Harvard Admissions
The descriptive evidence related to admissions in conjunction with the ratings analysis sug-
gests that there is scope for discrimination against Asian Americans in the Harvard admis-
sions process. We now turn to estimating a model of Harvard's admissions decisions, focusing
in particular on measuring how being Asian American influences one's admissions outcome.
In the sections below, we present our preferred admissions model, discuss the estimated
Asian American penalty, and analyze the potential for omitted variable bias.


6.1       Admissions Model

The admissions data made available as part of the SFFA lawsuit cover six admissions cycles
and include hundreds of variables describing each applicant.49 It is not feasible to include
every variable in every year since there would be as many regressors as admits. In the
paragraphs that follow, we briefly discuss some of the key modeling choices that allow us to
capture admissions decisions and the role of race in a simple, yet accurate manner.
       The first key modeling decision is to pool the admissions data across years and estimate
a logit model with indicators for admissions cycle.50 The advantage of pooling the data is
greater statistical power for uncovering some of the intricate patterns in admissions choices
that are time-invariant. The drawback of the pooled model is that the relative importance
of various applicant attributes may change over time. For example, if Harvard seeks to
balance intended majors within each admissions cycle, then intended humanities majors are
more valuable in years when there are relatively few. The pooled model can accommodate
this variation through interactions between intended major and year. The question is which
applicant characteristics are likely to have time-varying impacts. Fortunately, during the
weeks and months that Harvard is making final admissions decisions, the admissions office
publishes statistics about the makeup of the current admitted class, as well as how these
numbers compare to previous classes. Admissions officers can use these "one-pagers" to
  49
     A similar discussion of our modeling approach is presented in Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom (2019b),
Section 4 and Appendix C.
  50
     The indicators for admissions cycle insure that in each year the average probability of admission matches
that of the data.



                                                     25
generate similarly constituted admit classes over time, even if the applicant pool is changing.
We use these "one-pagers" as guidance and include in our pooled regression interactions of
admissions cycle with applicant characteristics included in the "one-pagers" such as gender,
docket, intended major, and disadvantaged status.
      In addition to indicators for applicant race and the above interactions, we incorporate a
broad set of controls, including numerous measures of socioeconomic status, neighborhood
and high school attributes, and academic aptitude, among others. We also control for many
of Harvard's internal ratings, including the academic, extracurricular, athletic, the school
support measures, and the alumni interviewer ratings. For each rating, we create separate
indicator variables for rating levels from 1 to 5. We do not include either the overall rating
or the personal rating. The overall rating is specifically designed to incorporate admissions
preferences, including racial preferences, and is therefore an inappropriate control. Similarly,
the personal rating is excluded since, as we showed in the previous section, it is also influenced
by racial preferences.
      To allow for the possibility that racial preferences operate differently according to appli-
cant disadvantaged status and gender, we interact each of these indicator variables with race.
Arcidiacono (2005) shows that racial preferences for African Americans in admissions and
financial aid vary with whether the applicant is low income. Additionally, African American
applicants are disproportionately female (60%), so if Harvard is interested in gender bal-
ance within race, African American men may see larger preferences than African American
women. This is in contrast to the applicant pool as a whole, which is less than 50% female.51
We also interact race with indicators for early application status and missing SAT II aver-
age. The latter allows for differences in the distribution of missing scores by race since the
observed test score distributions differ by race.
      Our preferred model includes 128,422 applicants across the six admission cycles. This
sample is smaller than the sample of typical applicants discussed previously for three rea-
sons. First, neighborhood and high school characteristics are only available for domestic
applicants applying from within the US. Second, there is a small number of applicants who
lack both teacher ratings. Finally, applicants whose characteristics perfectly predict rejection
 51
      See Document 415-9, Table B.3.2R.


                                                 26
are excluded. The full set of controls for our preferred model is listed in Appendix A.


6.2       Estimates of the Asian American Admissions Penalty

A subset of the estimated parameters for our preferred admissions model is displayed in Ta-
ble 5.52 The coefficient on the Asian American indicator is negative and significant (-0.466),
indicating that, all else equal, Asian American applicants are penalized relative to white ap-
plicants. While the estimated Asian American penalty does not vary significantly with either
disadvantaged or early applicant status, it does vary by gender. The estimated coefficient
on the interaction between Asian American and female is positive and significant (0.229),
indicating that the Asian American penalty is smaller for female applicants.
       The other coefficients in the estimated admissions model are consistent with Harvard's
reader guidelines for evaluating applicants as well as their stated preferences for underrepre-
sented minority groups and disadvantaged students. Applicants who receive a two or better
on the academic, extracurricular, or personal ratings are significantly more likely to be ac-
cepted. Applicants who receive a four on any of these criteria see their chances of admission
diminished relative to receiving a three, though the effect on the athletic rating is an order
of magnitude smaller.53 The coefficients associated with being African American, Hispanic,
or disadvantaged are all large, positive, and statistically significant.54 Finally, conditional
on all other observed attributes, early action applicants are more likely to be admitted than
their regular admissions counterparts.
       The parameter estimates listed in Table 5 represent how Harvard values various charac-
  52
      Table D8 illustrates how the race-related parameters change as we build up the set of included applicant
attributes. While it is not possible to directly compare the magnitude of the coefficients across models (since
the variance of the unexplained portion of the admissions decision is shrinking and this tends to inflate
the estimated parameters) there are interesting patterns. For example, when we control only for race and
a handful of other demographic characteristics, the coefficient on the Asian American indicator is positive
and insignificant. This is consistent with the raw admit rates being similar for Asian American and white
applicants. However, when academic characteristics are added, the Asian American coefficient becomes
large and negative. This is consistent with Asian American applicants being much stronger in academics
and Harvard putting significant weight on academics in the admissions decision.
   53
      Obtaining a rating of five on the extracurricular and athletic rating is an indication of substantial activity
outside conventional extracurricular participation such as family commitments or term-time work. See the
2018 reader guidelines (Trial Exhibit P001).
   54
      The interactions of African American and Hispanic with disadvantaged status are negative and statis-
tically significant but the overall racial preferences for disadvantaged African Americans and Hispanics are
still large.


                                                        27
teristics among typical applicants. As discussed at length in Section 3, we exclude ALDC
applicants from the bulk of our analysis since there is both qualitative and quantitative
evidence that the admissions process works differently for this special set. For example,
recruited athletes have an advocate at the university outside of the admissions office, and
in the past the Dean of Admissions would review every legacy applicant--benefits typical
applicants do not receive.55 Harvard also appears to value applicant attributes differently
according to ALDC status. As evidence of this, Table 6 shows how the coefficients asso-
ciated with Harvard's academic and extracurricular rating change as LDC and recruited
athlete applicants are added to the estimation sample.56 The most striking change relative
to a model with only typical applicants is the penalty an applicant receives for obtaining
a 4 rating for either the academic or extracurricular rating. When ALDC applicants are
included, the penalties for receiving a 4 are much smaller, indicating that the academic and
extracurricular ratings are less important for these special groups. The broader point is
that if Harvard valued the attributes of typical and ALDC applicants similarly, there would
have been no change in the coefficients. The fact that the coefficients change so significantly
indicates that the appropriate way to estimate how Harvard values attributes among typical
applicants is to either interact ALDC status with all applicant attributes, or more simply,
exclude ALDC applicants.57
       The parameter estimates from our preferred specification that includes only typical ap-
plicants indicate the existence of an Asian American penalty. However, it is difficult to
understand the magnitude of the penalty from the coefficients alone. To put the magnitude
of the Asian American penalty in context, we pursue two strategies. First, using the esti-
mated coefficients, we can show how the probability of admission would change for Asian
  55
       See page 47 of Document 419-143 for an example of a coach advocating for her players with the admissions
office. See Golden (2006, p. 27) for a statement by Harvard's Dean of Admissions that he personally reviews
every legacy's application. For a discussion of the benefits universities receive from alumni and athletic
connections, see Meer and Rosen (2009a,b, 2010, 2012).
    56
       The admissions model that includes ALDC applicants is identical to our preferred model, except that
it includes separate indicators for recruited athlete, legacy, double legacy, child of faculty/staff, and dean's
interest list. These indicators are also interacted with race and admissions cycle. Coefficients are presented
in Table B.7.2R of Document 415-9 and Table 2 of Exhibit 287.
    57
       Note that even when ALDC applicants are added to estimation sample in an inappropriate fashion by
only incorporating ALDC indicators and interacting ALDC with race, the average marginal effect for being
Asian American across all applicants is still negative and significant at -0.80 (see Exhibit 287, paragraph 9
on p. 4).


                                                      28
American applicants if they had been treated as white applicants. Consider, for example, a
male, non-disadvantaged Asian American applicant with a baseline probability of admission
of X . The index of observables, Z , for this applicant according to the log odds formula is
given by
                                                        X
                                             Z = ln                                                       (7)
                                                       1-X
which is the inverse of the standard logit formula. If this applicant were instead white, we
would simply subtract the Asian American coefficient (-0.466) from the index so that the
new admissions index would be Z - (-0.466). The new admissions probability would then be
             exp(Z +0.466)
given by    1+exp(Z +0.466)
                            .   A similar calculation can be made for various combinations of gender
and disadvantaged status. The additional complication is that coefficients related to the
interactions between Asian American and gender and Asian American and disadvantaged
also need to be differenced out when applicable.
       Table 7 lists the the results of these transformation exercises. The first entry in the
table indicates that a non-disadvantaged, male, Asian American applicant with a baseline
probability of admission of 1.0% would be admitted at a rate of 1.58% if treated as a similarly
situated white applicant. This change reflects a 58% increase in the likelihood of admission.
For other combinations of gender and disadvantaged status, the Asian American penalty is
smaller.58 As the baseline probability of admission increases, the percentage point increases
are larger, but the percent increases are smaller: when the baseline admit rate is 25%, a
non-disadvantaged, male, Asian American applicant would be admitted at a rate of 34.69%
if treated as a similarly situated white applicant (a 39% increase).
       The transformation exercises indicate that there is significant heterogeneity in the Asian
American penalty according to gender, disadvantaged status, and the broader strength of
the applicant. The average penalty faced by Asian American applicants will depend on the
distribution of these characteristics in the applicant pool. Overall, the average marginal
effect associated with Asian American is -1.02 percentage points, or a penalty of 19% off the
base admit rate of 5.19%.59 In Table 8 we report the average marginal effect of being an
  58
     For example, a disadvantaged, female, Asian American applicant with a baseline probability of admission
equal to 1.0% would admitted at a rate of 1.1% if treated as a similarly situated white applicant.
  59
     See Table 8.2 of Document 415-9. Note that applicants who the model can predict perfectly are not
included in the calculation. When these applicants are included, the average marginal effect falls slightly to


                                                      29
Asian American applicant by admissions index decile.60 Because of how competitive Harvard
is and how well the model fits the data, the average marginal effects are highly skewed. Those
in the bottom 50% according to the admissions index have essentially no chance of being
admitted, a reflection of how well the model fits the data. Hence the marginal effect for
the bottom 50% of Asian American applicants is quite small at -0.02 percentage points, still
a substantial penalty given their base admit rate of 0.04%. The average marginal effect
rises with each decile with those in the top decile seeing an average marginal effect of 6.19
percentage points, or a penalty of 14%.


6.3     Personal Rating

A key set of controls in the estimated admissions model are the internal Harvard ratings
of applicants. However, we exclude two ratings from the model, the overall and personal
ratings. Harvard readers are explicitly allowed to incorporate an applicant's race in the
overall rating, and, as a result, it is an improper control if the purpose of the model is to
estimate racial preferences. In Section 5, we presented evidence that the personal rating is
significantly influenced by applicant race, and is thus also an improper control.
    We now include the personal rating in the model to see how much of the Asian American
penalty operates through it. Adding the personal rating still leaves a statistically significant
penalty of -0.54 percentage points which, given the admit rate for Asian American applicants
as a group, implies that Asian Americans would be 10% more likely to be admitted if treated
as similarly situated whites but keeping the bias in the personal rating. So even if one were
to assume--erroneously according to our analysis--that the personal rating was not biased, a
substantial Asian American penalty remains.61 A more reasonable interpretation is that the
reduction in the Asian American penalty shows how much of the penalty operates through
the personal rating, implying that the penalties through the personal rating account for a
-0.99%. We prefer the results excluding perfect predictions as race is only relevant for applicants who have a
chance of admission. Either way of calculating the marginal effect results in a statistically significant effect
at the 5% level.
  60
     The admissions index deciles are created by ranking Asian American applicants according to their
observable indexes; that is, taking the controls and multiplying by the coefficients of the preferred model.
  61
     The Asian American penalty is robust to a number of other modeling decisions. As we show in Appendix
B, the penalty only becomes insignificant when one make a series of questionable modeling choices, all of
which entail assuming there is no bias against Asian Americans in the personal rating.


                                                      30
little less than half of the total Asian American penalty.


6.4     Scope for Omitted Variable Bias

Our estimate of the Asian American admissions penalty at Harvard is based on a logit model
that includes more than 300 applicant characteristics. Included in these attributes are Har-
vard's internal ratings of applicants along a variety of dimensions, including extracurricular
activities, recommendations from high school teachers and counselors, and alumni inter-
views. Relative to previously published analyses of admissions decisions, the richness of the
available data is without rival.62 However, the possibility remains that the estimated admis-
sions penalty for Asian American applicants is not causal and instead reflects the impact of
unobserved attributes that are more common among Asian American applicants relative to
white applicants. The evidence presented in the following sections suggests this is unlikely.


6.4.1    Strength of Asian Americans on observables

While it is infeasible to directly test for omitted variable bias since the relevant attributes are
by definition unobserved, similar to our analysis of racial preferences in Harvard's ratings, we
can examine the average strength of each racial group based on their "observed admissions
index." If a group of applicants is strong on the observed attributes that predict admission,
they are likely to be strong on unobserved attributes that predict admission. Using our
estimated model, we construct an admissions index which assesses applicants' strengths
based on how their observed characteristics translate into a probability of admission, after
removing race and year effects. We then construct deciles of the admissions index, with higher
deciles associated with stronger observed characteristics. The results for Asian American and
white applicants are displayed in the first two columns of Table 9. Asian American applicants
are stronger, with 13.1% of Asian American applicants in the top decile and only 10.5% of
  62
     Various papers have explored the impact of race (Long, 2004) and legacy status (Espenshade and Chung,
2005; Hurwitz, 2011) on admissions decisions. Admissions models in these papers typically have access to
only a handful of applicant attributes and typically have to estimate their average impact across multiple
colleges. Bhattacharya, Kanaya, and Stevens (2017) focus on the impact of academic credentials on ad-
missions decisions using detailed data from a selective U.K. university. This paper is closest to ours in the
richness of the available data. However, the authors do not report the fit of their admissions models.




                                                     31
white applicants in the top decile; among the top two deciles, the Asian American share is
25.9%, while for whites it is 21.2%.63
       The result that Asian American applicants are stronger on the observable characteristics
associated with admissions is unsurprising given the incredible academic strength of this
group.64 However, Asian American applicants could be weaker along observed non-academic
dimensions. If this were the case, it would suggest that they might be weaker on unobserved
non-academic dimensions. It is not clear whether the unobservables are disproportionately
non-academic.65 But we can assess whether Asian American applicants are weaker on the
non-academic attributes related to admission. We construct a non-academic index by re-
moving those characteristics that are explicitly academic in nature (e.g., test scores, grades,
academic ratings) from the admissions index. Results are shown in the third and fourth
columns of Table 9. In each of the top 4 deciles there is a larger share of Asian American
applicants relative to white applicants. It is clear that, on non-academic measures, Asian
American applicants are at least as strong as white applicants.
       Included in the non-academic measures affecting admissions are certain attributes that
are likely to favor Asian American applicants, such as disadvantaged and first-generation
status. There are also non-academic attributes that likely harm the admissions chances of
Asian American applicants, such as geography.66 However, we can eliminate the impact of
these attributes and construct a non-academic admissions index consisting only of Harvard's
extracurricular, athletic, school support, and alumni ratings. The final two columns display
the results when we construct the admissions index in this manner, and we still find that
  63
      While the Asian American strength is clear using any decile comparisons, focusing on the top two deciles
is relevant because this is where most admitted students come from. For example, the results in Table 8 imply
that over 93% of Asian American admissions come from those in the top 20% of the observed admissions
index.
   64
      Table 5.3 of Document 415-8 shows that over 51% of the class would be Asian American if admissions
were based entirely on the academic index.
   65
      Despite the fact that our preferred model includes many academic measures, it is still likely that we fail to
capture all dimensions of applicant academic success. For example, academic-related attributes, such as AP
exams taken, AP scores, and academic awards such as winning the Harvard-MIT Mathematics Tournament
(HMMT) are excluded from the model. We know that Asian Americans are stronger on AP exams, and are
likely stronger on other unobserved academic measures.
   66
      Document 415-9 section 9.3 shows that dockets with a higher share of Asian Americans face a penalty.
This can result from Harvard valuing geographic diversity in combination with Asian Americans being so
competitive. A larger number of applicants are likely to come from areas that have higher shares of Asian
Americans.



                                                        32
Asian American applicants are just as strong, if not stronger than white applicants.


6.4.2       Model Fit

Further limiting the scope for omitted variable bias is how well our preferred model fits the
data. The Pseudo R2 --or McFadden's R2 --of our model is 0.56. While higher values of
this measure indicate a better model fit, it does not have the same interpretation as the
R2 used in linear models except when either (i) the model explains the data completely (in
which case they are both one) or (ii) the model only has an intercept term (in which case
they are both zero). The classic citation on the relation between the two R2 's, McFadden
(1979), suggests that 0.56 is well above what would be considered an excellent fit.67 But the
designation "excellent fit" is still not especially precise. To provide more evidence on the fit
of the model, we first consider how our Pseudo R2 translates into an R2 of the latent index
and then examine the accuracy of the admissions model.
       We can link the two R2 measures by returning to the underlying model of the admissions
process. Namely, when an applicant's latent index, Yi , exceeds some threshold  , they are
admitted. Denote the observed part of this index as AIi = Ai + Xi  , implying:


                                                Yi = AIi + i .                                               (8)


Following McKelvey and Zavoina (1975) and expanded upon by Veall and Zimmermann
(1996), we can calculate how much of the observables--as measured by AIi --explain the
(implicit) scoring of Harvard's applicants Yi . To calculate the implied R2 associated with
(8), we simulate AIi 's and i 's that are consistent with (i) an overall admit rate of 5.45% and
(ii) a Pseudo R2 of 0.56. The simulation of the 's entails draws from a logistic distribution
as that is what was used to generate the model estimates.
       What is unknown is the distribution of AIi .68 Assuming that the distribution of AIi
  67
       McFadden (1979), p. 307, states that
         Those unfamiliar with the 2 index should be forewarned that its values tend to be considerably
         lower than those of the R2 index and should not be judged by the standards for a "good fit" in
         ordinary regression analysis. For example, values of 0.2 to 0.4 for 2 represent an excellent fit.
The 2 referred to here later became known as McFadden's R2 , or the Pseudo R2 .
 68
    This distribution could be calculated using the underlying data. However, the information needed to do


                                                        33
follows a normal distribution and matching the overall admit rate and the Pseudo R2 of
the model results in an implied R2 of 0.8 for the latent index. However, the implied R2
will be sensitive to the distribution chosen for AIi . In Appendix C, we show that there is
additional information in the public reports that is helpful in recovering the distribution
of AIi . Incorporating this additional information suggests that an implied R2 of 0.8 is
conservative, though also relies on assumptions about the the tails of the distribution of AIi .
    We use a similar approach to calculate the accuracy of the admissions model which, as
we show in Appendix C, is less sensitive to the choice of the distribution of AIi . Namely,
given the distributions of AIi and i , we simulate admissions decisions and ask how well the
model predicts admissions decisions based on AIi alone. The accuracy for admits is then
what share of the 5.45% of simulated admits based on AIi and              i   are in the top 5.45% of
the AIi distribution. The accuracy for admits is over 64%, remarkably high given that only
5.45% of applicants are admitted.
    The exceptional fit of the model leaves only a limited amount of unobserved information.
Given that Asian Americans are stronger overall on variables that account for a substantial
amount of Harvard's admissions decisions, it would be remarkable if they were significantly
worse on the small portion of characteristics that are unobservable.



7     Conclusion
The perception that Asian Americans are discriminated against in elite college admissions
has led college consultants to "make them less Asian when they apply" (English, 2015).
Using data made public from the SFFA v. Harvard case, we show that this perception is
justified for almost all Asian American applicants.69
    The discrimination manifests itself both in a direct penalty in admissions, but also in an
Asian American penalty in some of Harvard's ratings. Asian Americans are stronger than
white applicants on the observables associated with each of the ratings with the exception
of the athletic rating, which was not modeled. Yet, on ratings like the personal and overall
so is not in the public record.
  69
     The exception is the less than 3% of Asian American applicants who are ALDC.



                                                  34
rating, Asian Americans receive lower ratings.70 For example, Asian Americans would see
20% higher odds of receiving a 2 or better on the personal rating if they were treated as
white applicants. These odds would almost double if they were treated as African American
applicants.
       These penalties against Asian Americans in the ratings also translate to penalties in
admissions. Using whites as a base, our preferred model shows an average marginal effect -1
percentage point for being Asian American. This implies a 19% penalty given the admission
rate for typical Asian Americans was slightly over 5% for the period we analyze. This
admissions penalty is likely an understatement for the following reasons: (i) Asian Americans
are stronger than whites on the observables associated with admission; and (ii) there is
evidence of bias against Asian Americans in some of the other ratings that are included in
the model.




  70
    At the same time, underrepresented minorities receive a bump on these ratings despite being substantially
worse on the observables associated with each of the ratings.

                                                     35
References
Agan, Amanda and Sonja Starr. 2018. "Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Racial Dis-
  crimination: A Field Experiment." Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (1):191­235. 2
Altonji, Joseph G. and Rebecca M. Blank. 1999. "Race and Gender in the Labor Market."
  In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3, chap. 48. Elsevier, 3143­3259. 2
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. "Selection on Observed
  and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools." Journal of
  Political Economy 113 (1):151­184. 6
Antonovics, Kate and Brian G. Knight. 2009. "A New Look at Racial Profiling: Evidence
 from the Boston Police Department." Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (1):163­177.
 2
Anwar, Shamena and Hanming Fang. 2006. "An Alternative Test of Racial Prejudice in
 Motor Vehicle Searches: Theory and Evidence." American Economic Review 96 (1):127­
 151. 2
Arcidiacono, Peter. 2005. "Affirmative Action in Higher Education: How do Admission and
  Financial Aid Rules Affect Future Earnings?" Econometrica 73 (5):1477­1524. 26
Arcidiacono, Peter, Esteban M. Aucejo, and Ken Spenner. 2012. "What Happens after
  Enrollment? An Analysis of the Time Path of Racial Differences in GPA and Major
  Choice." IZA Journal of Labor Economics 1 (1):5. 2
Arcidiacono, Peter, Josh Kinsler, and Tyler Ransom. 2019a. "Divergent: The Time Path of
  Legacy and Athlete Admissions at Harvard." Working paper, Duke University. 13
------. 2019b. "Legacy and Athlete Preferences at Harvard." Working paper, Duke Uni-
  versity. 3, 7, 12, 25, 49, 56
------. 2019c. "Recruit to Reject? Harvard and African American Applicants." Working
  paper, Duke University. 64, 65
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. "Are Emily and Greg More Employ-
  able Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination."
  American Economic Review 94 (4):991­1013. 2
Bhattacharya, Debopam, Shin Kanaya, and Margaret Stevens. 2017. "Are University Ad-
  missions Academically Fair?" Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (3):449­464. 5,
  31
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2017. "The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends,
  and Explanations." Journal of Economic Literature 55 (3):789­865. 5
Botelho, Fernando, Ricardo A. Madeira, and Marcos A. Rangel. 2015. "Racial Discrimination
  in Grading: Evidence from Brazil." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
  7 (4):37­52. 2

                                           36
Card, David and Stefano DellaVigna. 2020. "What Do Editors Maximize? Evidence from
  Four Economics Journals." Review of Economics and Statistics 102 (1):195­217. 6

Card, David, Stefano DellaVigna, Patricia Funk, and Nagore Iriberri. 2020. "Are Referees
  and Editors in Economics Gender Neutral?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (1):269­
  327. 6

Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Jonathan Guryan. 2008. "Prejudice and Wages: An Empirical
 Assessment of Becker's The Economics of Discrimination." Journal of Political Economy
 116 (6):773­809. 2

Document 415-8. 2017. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fel-
 lows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL
 https://docs.justia.com/cases/federal/district-courts/massachusetts/madce/
 1:2014cv14176/165519/415/1.html. Plaintiff Expert Witness Opening Report. 10, 14,
 19, 32, 51, 63

Document 415-9. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fel-
 lows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL
 https://docs.justia.com/cases/federal/district-courts/massachusetts/madce/
 1:2014cv14176/165519/415/2.html. Plaintiff Expert Witness Rebuttal Report. 5, 7,
 16, 19, 21, 23, 24, 26, 28, 29, 32, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 54, 60, 61, 62, 63,
 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73

Document 419-1. 2015.    In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President
 and Fellows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D.
 Mass).   URL https://www.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.mad.165519/
 gov.uscourts.mad.165519.419.1_2.pdf. Deposition of Marlyn McGrath. 8, 63

Document 419-141. 2017. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fel-
 lows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL
 https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/files/diverse-education/files/expert_
 report_-_2017-12-15_dr._david_card_expert_report_updated_confid_desigs_
 redacted.pdf. Defendant Expert Witness Opening Report. 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 63, 72, 73

Document 419-143. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fel-
 lows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL
 https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/files/diverse-education/files/expert_
 report_rebuttal_as_filed_d._mass._14-cv-14176_dckt_000419_037_filed_
 2018-06-15.pdf. Defendant Expert Witness Rebuttal Report. 28, 54, 55, 63,
 71

Document 421-9. 2017.     In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President
 and Fellows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D.
 Mass).     URL https://www.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.mad.165519/
 gov.uscourts.mad.165519.421.9_7_1.pdf. Deposition of William Fitzsimmons. 17,
 23, 54, 63


                                              37
Dorsey, J. Kevin and Jerry A. Colliver. 1995. "Effect of Anonymous Test Grading on Passing
 Rates as Related to Gender and Race." Academic Medicine 70 (4):321­323. 2

Edelman, Benjamin, Michael Luca, and Dan Svirsky. 2017. "Racial Discrimination in the
  Sharing Economy: Evidence from a Field Experiment." American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics 9 (2):1­22. 2

English, Bella. 2015. "To Get into Elite Colleges, Some Advised to `Appear Less
  Asian'."     Boston Globe URL https://www.bostonglobe.com/lifestyle/2015/
  06/01/college-counselors-advise-some-asian-students-appear-less-asian/
  Ew7g4JiQMiqYNQlIwqEIuO/story.html. Accessed February 14, 2020. 34

Espenshade, Thomas J. and Chang Y. Chung. 2005. "The Opportunity Cost of Admission
  Preferences at Elite Universities." Social Science Quarterly 86 (2):293­305. 5, 31

Espenshade, Thomas J., Chang Y. Chung, and Joan L. Walling. 2004. "Admission Prefer-
  ences for Minority Students, Athletes, and Legacies at Elite Universities." Social Science
  Quarterly 85 (5):1422­1446. 5, 6, 12

Exhibit 287. 2018.       In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fel-
  lows of Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL
  https://www.courtlistener.com/recap/gov.uscourts.mad.165519/gov.uscourts.
  mad.165519.512.2_4.pdf. Declaration outlining use of Bayes' rule to compute admissions
  probabilities of previous admits. 28, 49, 63

Figlio, David N. 2005. "Names, Expectations and the Black-White Test Score Gap." Working
  Paper 11195, National Bureau of Economic Research. 2

Fryer, Roland G. and Steven D. Levitt. 2004. "The Causes and Consequences of Distinctively
  Black Names." Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (3):767­805. 2

Fuchs,    Chris.    2019.       "After    Harvard    affirmative  action    deci-
  sion,     Asian      American  students    rethink      college  applications."
  NBC        News         URL    https://www.nbcnews.com/news/asian-america/
  after-harvard-affirmative-action-decision-asian-american-students-rethink-college-n107
  Accessed February 28, 2020. 3

Golden, Daniel. 2006. The Price of Admission: How America's Ruling Class Buys Its Way
 into Elite Colleges ­ and Who Gets Left Outside the Gates. New York: Crown Publishers.
 3, 28

Heckman, James J. 1998. "Detecting Discrimination." Journal of Economic Perspectives
  12 (2):101­116. 2

Hruby, Patrick. 2019. "`We've Come So Far': How Black QBs Defied a Racist Past to Become
  Football's Future." The Guardian URL https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2019/
  sep/20/black-quarterbacks-history-stereotypes. Accessed November 18, 2019. 10



                                            38
Hurwitz, Michael. 2011. "The Impact of Legacy Status on Undergraduate Admissions at
 Elite Colleges and Universities." Economics of Education Review 30 (3):480­492. 5, 31

Kim, Pan Suk and Gregory B. Lewis. 1994. "Asian Americans in the Public Service: Success,
  Diversity, and Discrimination." Public Administration Review 54 (3):285­290. URL http:
  //www.jstor.org/stable/976733. 10

Kinsler, Josh. 2011. "Understanding the Black-White School Discipline Gap." Economics
  of Education Review 30 (6):1370­1383. 7

Knowles, John, Nicola Persico, and Petra Todd. 2001. "Racial Bias in Motor Vehicle
 Searches: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Political Economy 109 (1):203­229. 2

Krauth, Brian. 2016. "Bounding a Linear Causal Effect Using Relative Correlation Restric-
  tions." Journal of Econometric Methods 5 (1):117­141. 6

Long, Mark C. 2004. "Race and College Admissions: An Alternative to Affirmative Action?"
  Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (4):1020­1033. 5, 31

McFadden, Daniel. 1979. "Quantitative Methods for Analysing Travel Behaviour: Some
 Recent Developments." In Behavioural Travel Modeling, edited by David A. Hensher and
 Peter R. Stopher, chap. 13. Croom Helm Ltd. 6, 33

McKelvey, Richard D. and William Zavoina. 1975. "A Statistical Model for the Analysis of
 Ordinal Level Dependent Variables." The Journal of Mathematical Sociology 4 (1):103­
 120. URL https://doi.org/10.1080/0022250X.1975.9989847. 33

Meer, Jonathan and Harvey S. Rosen. 2009a. "Altruism and the Child Cycle of Alumni
 Donations." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1 (1):258­286. 28

------. 2009b. "The Impact of Athletic Performance on Alumni Giving: An Analysis of
  Microdata." Economics of Education Review 28 (3):287­294. 28

------. 2010. "Family Bonding with Universities." Research in Higher Education 51 (7):641­
  658. 28

------. 2012. "Does Generosity Beget Generosity? Alumni Giving and Undergraduate
  Financial Aid." Economics of Education Review 31 (6):890­907. 28

Neal, Derek A. and William R. Johnson. 1996. "The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-
  White Wage Differences." Journal of Political Economy 104 (5):869­895. 7

Neumark, David. 2018. "Experimental Research on Labor Market Discrimination." Journal
  of Economic Literature 56 (3):799­866. 2

Oster, Emily. 2019. "Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evi-
  dence." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 37 (2):187­204. 6

Pope, Devin G. and Justin R. Sydnor. 2011. "What's in a Picture? Evidence of Discrimina-
  tion from Prosper.com." Journal of Human Resources 46 (1):53­92. 2

                                           39
Rehavi, M. Marit and Sonja B. Starr. 2014. "Racial Disparity in Federal Criminal Sentences."
  Journal of Political Economy 122 (6):1320­1354. 7

Tavernise, Sabrina and Richard A. Oppel Jr. 2020. "Spit On, Yelled At, Attacked: Chinese-
  Americans Fear for Their Safety." The New York Times URL https://www.nytimes.
  com/2020/03/23/us/chinese-coronavirus-racist-attacks.html. Accessed May 26,
  2020. 2

Trial Exhibit DX 002. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/D002.pdf. 2012
  Casebook. 9, 63

Trial Exhibit DX 016. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/D016.pdf. Har-
  vard Reading Procedures for Class of 2017. 53, 54, 63

Trial Exhibit DX 024. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/D024.pdf. 2012
  Casebook Discussion Guide. 53, 63

Trial Exhibit DX 680. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/D680.pdf.                   Pri-
  mary extracurricular activity by race. 23, 63

Trial Exhibit P001. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P001.pdf. Har-
  vard Reading Procedures for Class of 2018. 8, 13, 27, 53, 54, 63

Trial Exhibit P071. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P071.pdf. Har-
  vard Reading Procedures for Class of 2019. 53, 54, 63

Trial Exhibit P238. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P238.pdf. Email
  correspondence between admissions office personnel. 53, 63

Trial Exhibit P555. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P555.pdf. Office
  of Civil Rights Report. 16, 63


                                             40
Trial Exhibit P621. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P621.pdf. Rat-
  ings frequencies for baseline sample. 43, 63

Trial Exhibit P633. 2018. In Students for Fair Admissions, Inc. v. President and Fellows of
  Harvard College et al. Civil Action No. 14-14176-ADB (D. Mass). URL https://github.
  com/tyleransom/SFFAvHarvard-Docs/blob/master/TrialExhibits/P633.pdf. Har-
  vard Reading Procedures for Class of 2023. 8, 53, 54, 63

Veall, Michael R. and Klaus F. Zimmermann. 1996. "Pseudo-R2 Measures for Some Com-
  mon Limited Dependent Variable Models." Journal of Economic Surveys 10 (3):241­
  259. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-6419.1996.
  tb00013.x. 33

Yam, Kimmy. 2019. "Is Andrew Yang `Reclaiming' Stereotypes with Asian Jokes? Experts
  Say Not So Much." NBC News URL https://www.nbcnews.com/news/asian-america/
  andrew-yang-reclaiming-stereotypes-asian-jokes-experts-say-not-so-n1086241.
  Accessed February 5, 2020. 10




                                            41
Figures and Tables

  Table 1: Summary Statistics of White and Asian American Applicants and Admits

                                                          White                   Asian American
                                                Reject    Admit     Total     Reject   Admit      Total
 Panel A: Demographics
 Admitted                                         0.00    100.00     4.89      0.00    100.00      5.13
 Female                                          45.75    43.14     45.62     49.12    52.65      49.30
 Disadvantaged                                    5.94     14.61    6.36      10.26    21.86      10.85
 First-generation college                         4.29      4.05     4.28      7.98     9.65       8.07
 Applied for fee waiver                           8.00     12.15    8.20      12.88     18.39     13.16
 Applied for financial aid                       73.83    72.17     73.75     76.37     77.27     76.41
 Mother's education: MA or higher                37.86    46.24     38.27     37.63    44.78      38.00
 Father's education: MA or higher                46.36    52.38     46.65     54.89    59.60      55.13

 Panel B: Academic Preparation
 SAT1 math (z-score)                              0.12     0.56      0.15      0.41      0.77     0.43
                                                 (0.82)   (0.50)    (0.81)    (0.73)    (0.37)   (0.72)
 SAT1 verbal (z-score)                             0.31    0.72      0.33      0.31      0.74     0.33
                                                 (0.76)   (0.43)    (0.75)    (0.80)    (0.41)   (0.79)
 SAT2 avg (z-score)                               -0.01    0.58      0.03      0.32      0.81     0.35
                                                 (0.86)   (0.50)    (0.85)    (0.82)    (0.38)   (0.81)
 Standardized high school GPA (z-score)           0.17     0.50      0.18      0.21      0.52     0.22
                                                 (0.86)   (0.52)    (0.85)    (0.82)    (0.47)   (0.81)
 Academic index (z-score)                         0.16     0.76      0.19      0.39      0.91     0.42
                                                 (0.80)   (0.38)    (0.79)    (0.78)    (0.32)   (0.77)
 Academic index percentile                        0.52     0.75      0.53     (0.78)     0.83     0.63
                                                 (0.26)   (0.19)    (0.26)    (0.27)    (0.16)   (0.27)
 Number of AP tests taken                         4.08     5.91      4.16      5.60      7.50     5.68
                                                 (3.91)   (3.85)    (3.93)    (4.07)    (3.38)   (4.06)
 Average score of AP tests                        4.39     4.74      4.41      4.48      4.82     4.50
                                                 (0.59)   (0.34)    (0.58)    (0.56)    (0.28)   (0.55)
 N                                              54,768     2,814    57,582    38,343    2,072    40,415
Source: Table B.3.1R of Document 415-9.

Notes: Data restricted to typical (non-ALDC) applicants from the Classes of 2014­2019. Standard deviations
in parentheses.




                                                   42
Table 2: Shares and Admission Rates of Applicants by Academic Index Decile and Race

            Number of Applicants             Share of Applicants                    Admit Rate
 Decile   White     Asian American        White      Asian American        White     Asian American
 1         2,822          1,511             4.91            3.75            0.00           0.00
 2         4,404          2,045             7.67            5.07            0.39           0.20
 3         6,073          2,644            10.57            6.56             0.56          0.64
 4         6,359          3,020            11.07            7.49             1.82          0.86
 5         7,658          3,874            13.33            9.61             2.57          1.86
 6         5,924          3,614            10.31            8.97             4.20          2.49
 7         7,053          4,527            12.28           11.23             4.79          3.98
 8         6,478          5,316            11.28           13.19             7.53          5.12
 9         5,717          6,532             9.95           16.21            10.77          7.55
 10        4,963          7,225             8.64           17.92            15.27         12.69
Source: Authors' calculations from data presented in Table 5.1R of Document 415-9.

Notes: Share columns sum to 100 within each group. Data restricted to typical (non-ALDC) applicants
from the Classes of 2014­2019.




      Table 3: Share of Applicants Receiving a 2 or Better on Application Ratings

                         Rating                  White     Asian American
                         Overall                    4.43            4.84
                         Academic                  45.29           60.21
                         Extracurricular           24.35           28.23
                         Athletic                  12.79            4.81
                         Personal                  21.27           17.64
                         Teacher 1                 30.42           30.79
                         Teacher 2                 27.13           27.41
                         Counselor                 25.28           25.12
                         Alumni Personal           49.92           50.33
                         Alumni Overall            36.49           40.89
                        Source: Authors' calculations from data presented in
                        Trial Exhibit P621.

                        Notes: Those with missing ratings are coded as not
                        having received a 2 or better. Data restricted to typical
                        (non-ALDC) applicants from the Classes of 2014­2019.




                                                    43
                                                   Figure 1: Percent Receiving 2 or Better on Various Ratings by Race and Academic Index Decile


                                                                        Academic                                                     Personal
                                             100                                                           50


                                              80                                                           40


                                              60                                                           30


                                              40                                                           20
             Percent Receiving 2 or Better




                                              20                                                           10


                                               0                                                            0
44




                                                                      Extracurricular                                                 Overall
                                             50                                                            50


                                             40                                                            40


                                             30                                                            30


                                             20                                                            20


                                             10                                                            10


                                               0                                                            0
                                                   10   9    8    7      6      5       4   3    2   1           10     9    8   7   6     5        4   3   2   1
                                                                                                Academic Index Decile

                                                                      Group         Asian American       White        Hispanic   African American



     Source: Authors' calculations from Tables 5.4R, 5.6R and 5.7R of Document 415-9.
     Table 4: Asian American Ratings and Admit Rate in Top Decile of Academic Index, Compared to Other Race Groups in Top
     Decile

                                                               Comparison with Whites                            Comparison with African Americans                              Comparison with Hispanics
                             Asian American                          Pct Increase/      Lowest Decile                          Pct Increase/ Lowest Decile                              Pct Increase/ Lowest Decile
                              Rate in Top   Difference in             Decrease in           with      Difference in             Decrease in      with                Difference in       Decrease in      with
      Rating/Outcome            AI Decile   Top AI Decile            Top AI Decile       Higher Rate Top AI Decile             Top AI Decile Higher Rate             Top AI Decile      Top AI Decile Higher Rate
      Personal                     22.20               7.42               33.42                 6               24.77              111.57                3                12.01              54.10                5
      Counselor                    38.34                6.29               16.41                 9              10.90               28.44                9                 6.66              17.37                10
45




      Teacher 2                    41.90                5.21               12.44                10               8.86              21.15                 9                 7.84              18.71                10
      Teacher 1                    46.64                3.53                7.56                10               8.66               18.57                9                 2.83                6.07               10
      Alumni Personal              63.61               1.37                 2.15                10               9.87              15.52                 7                 7.44              11.70               10
      Alumni Overall               63.10                0.03                0.04                10               3.57                5.65                10                1.37                2.18               10
      Academic                     98.08               -0.92               -0.94               -10              -3.38               -3.45               -10               -2.81               -2.87              -10
      Extracurricular              37.98               -4.93              -12.99                -9               0.66                1.73                10               -8.77              -23.09               -8
      Admit                        12.69                2.58              20.34                10               43.37              341.70                4                18.62             146.74                6
      Overall                      12.93                2.71              20.95                10               34.04              263.34                5                14.44             111.71                8
     Source: Authors' calculations from Tables 5.2R and 5.4­5.7R of Document 415-9.

     Notes: All results are conditional on being in the highest academic index decile. Negative signs in front of deciles (in columns 4, 7 and 10) emphasize that Asian Americans perform better than the given group on that
     particular rating. Note that this is only ever true for the academic and extracurricular ratings.
         Figure 2: Estimated Ratings Gaps between Asian Americans and African Americans with Varying Number of Controls



                                                                              2.5
                                                                                                                                                               Not Disadvantaged

                                                                                                                                                                  Disadvantaged
                                                                                2




                                                                              1.5
                          Asian American - African American Coefficient Gap




                                                                                1




                                                                              0.5
46




                                                                                0




                                                                              -0.5




                                                                               -1




                                                                              -1.5

                                                                                         Academic          Extracurricular           Personal              Overall
                                                                               -2
                                                                                     Sparse   Preferred   Sparse    Preferred   Sparse    Preferred   Sparse       Prefrerred




     Source: Authors' calculations from results reported in Appendix Tables D5 and D6.

     Notes: Dots indicate coefficient estimates for a given rating and specification. Intervals represent the range between men and women by disadvantaged
     status. "Sparse" refers to a model with relatively few covariates (i.e. Model 1 in the results of Document 415-9); "Preferred" means the preferred
     model (i.e. Model 5 in the results of Document 415-9).
                                                                            Figure 3: Race Coefficients and Observable Indices by Harvard Ratings


                                                                                       Academic                                                    Personal

                                                              1.5

                                                              1.0

                                                              0.5

                                                              0.0
                 Index or Coefficient (Relative to Whites)




                                                             -0.5

                                                             -1.0

                                                             -1.5
47




                                                                                     Extracurricular                                               Overall

                                                              1.5

                                                              1.0

                                                              0.5

                                                              0.0

                                                             -0.5

                                                             -1.0

                                                             -1.5

                                                                    Asian American      Hispanic       African American     Asian American         Hispanic   African American


                                                                                                        Observables Index    Ordered Logit Coef.



     Source: Authors' calculations from Table B.6.11R of Document 415-9.

     Notes: "Observables Index" refers to the predicted linear index of observables (i.e. Xi ^ R ) after removing race and year effects. "Ordered Logit Coef."
     refers to the coefficient on race from the ordered logit model of the given Harvard rating.
                     Table 5: Selected Coefficients, Preferred Admissions Model

 African American              3.772   Academic index               0.673   Disadvantaged × Year=2015          -0.041
                             (0.105)                              (0.189)                                     (0.157)
 Hispanic                      1.959   AI Sq. × (AI>0)             0.108    Disadvantaged × Year=2016          -0.263
                             (0.085)                              (0.106)                                     (0.165)
 Asian American               -0.466   AI Sq. × (AI<0)             -1.236   Disadvantaged × Year=2017          -0.240
                             (0.070)                              (0.219)                                     (0.171)
 Missing                      -0.379   Female × Humanities          0.070   Disadvantaged × Year=2018          -0.496
                             (0.122)                              (0.110)                                     (0.175)
 Year=2015                    -0.875   Female × Biology            -0.132   Disadvantaged × Year=2019          -0.541
                             (0.277)                              (0.096)                                     (0.165)
 Year=2016                    -0.701   Female × Phys Sci           -0.101   Early × Year=2016                  -0.304
                             (0.287)                              (0.136)                                     (0.128)
 Year=2017                    -0.528   Female × Engineering         0.062   Early × Year=2017                  -0.171
                             (0.290)                              (0.111)                                     (0.126)
 Year=2018                    -1.102   Female × Math               0.028    Early × Year=2018                  0.241
                             (0.298)                              (0.154)                                     (0.127)
 Year=2019                    -1.142   Female × Comp Sci           0.284    Academic Rating=4                  -3.990
                             (0.289)                              (0.202)                                     (0.626)
 Female                        0.163   Female × Unspecified         0.215   Academic Rating=2                   1.425
                             (0.110)                              (0.251)                                     (0.090)
 Disadvantaged                 1.660   Female × African Am.        -0.099   Academic Rating=1                   4.094
                             (0.138)                              (0.114)                                     (0.156)
 First generation             -0.014   Female × Hispanic            0.117   Extracurricular Rating=5            1.147
                             (0.167)                              (0.104)                                     (0.215)
 Early Action                  1.410   Female × Asian Am.          0.229    Extracurricular Rating=4           -1.301
                             (0.104)                              (0.082)                                     (0.393)
 Waiver                        0.697   Female × Missing             0.074   Extracurricular Rating=2            1.990
                             (0.063)                              (0.146)                                     (0.082)
 Apply for Financial Aid       0.343   Disadv × African Am.        -1.577   Extracurricular Rating=1            4.232
                             (0.101)                              (0.143)                                     (0.169)
 Humanities                    0.206   Disadv × Hispanic           -0.582   Athletic Rating=5                   0.761
                             (0.137)                              (0.133)                                     (0.087)
 Biology                      -0.031   Disadv × Asian Am.          0.144    Athletic Rating=4                  -0.182
                             (0.128)                              (0.119)                                     (0.038)
 Physical Sciences             0.027   Disadv × Missing            -0.035   Athletic Rating= 2                  1.368
                             (0.173)                              (0.222)                                     (0.114)
 Engineering                  -0.082   Early × African Am.          0.039   >= 2 Acad. and Extra.              -0.143
                             (0.149)                              (0.152)                                     (0.088)
 Mathematics                  -0.276   Early × Hispanic            0.031    >= 2 Acad. and Athletic            -0.149
                             (0.192)                              (0.139)                                     (0.116)
 Computer Science             0.191    Early × Asian Am.           -0.048   >= 2 Extra. and Athletic           -0.446
                             (0.274)                              (0.100)                                     (0.101)
 Unspecified                  -1.297   Early × Missing             0.192
                             (1.146)                              (0.162)
                                         N = 128, 422 & Pseudo R2 = 0.56
Source: Model 5 in Table B.7.1R of Document 415-9.

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The excluded categories are: white (race), 2014 (year), social sciences
(major), and a rating of 3 for academic, extracurricular, and athletic ratings. A full list of controls is available in
Appendix A.


                                                       48
   Table 6: Inclusion of ALDC Applicants Distorts Effect of Other Admissions Criteria

                                  Typical     Typical     Typical % Increase % Increase
                                              & LDC       & ALDC with LDC with ALDC
 Academic Rating=4                 -3.990      -2.426          -1.184           64.5%        237.1%
 Academic Rating=2                  1.425       1.206           1.209           18.2%         17.8%
 Academic Rating=1                  4.094       3.806           3.787            7.6%          8.1%
 Extracurricular Rating=4          -1.301      -0.952          -0.171           36.7%        662.1%
 Extracurricular Rating=2          1.990        1.689          1.646            17.8%         20.9%
 Extracurricular Rating=1          4.232        3.795          3.726            11.5%         13.6%
Source: Data presented in Table 2 of Exhibit 287.

Notes: This table also appears in Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom (2019b) as Table 12.


Table 7: Probability of Admission (%) for an Asian American if Treated Like a White
Applicant

                                                         Baseline Probability (%)
                    Group                               1.00    5.00    10.00    25.00
                    Asian, male, not disadvantaged      1.58    7.74    15.04    34.69

                    Asian, female, not disadvantaged    1.26    6.25    12.34    29.70

                    Asian, male, disadvantaged          1.37    6.77    13.29    31.51

                    Asian, female, disadvantaged        1.10    5.46    10.87    26.78
                   Source: Calculations based on coefficients listed in Table 5 and
                   formula given in Equation (7).



          Table 8: The Asian American Penalty at Different Admissions Deciles

     Admissions Index                     Admission Prob.       Admission Prob.      Pct. Increase if
     Decile             Marginal Effect     w/ Penalty            no Penalty        Penalty Removed
     5 and Below            -0.02%             0.04%                0.06%                40.24%
     6                      -0.13%             0.32%                0.44%                39.81%
     7                      -0.31%             0.77%                1.08%                39.98%
     8                      -0.78%             2.03%                2.82%                38.63%
     9                      -2.45%             7.01%                9.46%                34.98%
     10                     -6.19%             41.68%               47.87%               14.84%
   Source: Table 9.1 of Document 415-9.

   Notes: Admissions index decile refers to the ranking of applicants by their estimated admission
   index (i.e. the controls times their coefficients), absent race and admissions cycle.



                                                   49
Table 9: Distribution of White and Asian American Applicants (%) by Strength on Observed
Factors Affecting Admission

                                                  Non-Academic           Non-Academic Ratings
                     Admissions Index            Admissions Index          Admissions Index
     Decile       Asian American    White    Asian American     White   Asian American     White
     5 or lower        38.1          45.8          46.6          48.0         43.9          45.7
     6                 11.3          11.1          10.4          10.6         11.3          10.5
     7                 12.0          11.2          10.7          10.4         10.6          10.9
     8                 12.8          10.7          10.9          10.4         11.1          10.8
     9                 12.8          10.7          11.0          10.3         11.7          10.8
     10                13.1          10.5          10.4          10.3         11.3          11.3
    Source: Tables 7.3R, 7.4R, and 7.5R of Document 415-9.

    Notes: Numbers indicate the percentage of applicants within each cell. Each column sums to
    100.
    Decile refers to the ranking of applicants on the given dimension by their estimated admissions
    index, absent race. The admissions index includes all covariates in the admissions model except
    race and the admissions cycle. The non-academic admissions index excludes test scores, grades
    and academic ratings from the admissions index. The non-academic ratings admissions index
    excludes all admissions model covariates except the following Harvard ratings: extracurricular,
    athletic, school support, and alumni ratings.




                                                  50
A      Admissions Controls
The list below describes the full set of variables we include in each of our admissions models.
Our preferred specification is Model 5. This list comes from Figure 7.1 of Document 415-8,
with additional information reported in Section 8.1 of Document 415-9.

    · Model 1: Race/ethnicity, female, disadvantaged, application waiver, applied for fi-
      nancial aid, first generation college student, mother's education indicators, father's
      education indicators, year effects, docket-by-year effects, early action, intended major

    · Model 2: Model 1 plus SAT math,* SAT verbal,* SAT2 average,* missing SAT2 average
      times race/ethnicity, converted GPA,* academic index,* academic index squared times
      academic index greater than zero, academic index squared times academic index less
      than zero, flag for converted GPA=35 (* indicates variable was z-scored)

    · Model 3: Model 2 plus female times intended major, female times race/ethnicity,
      race/ethnicity times disadvantaged, race times early action

    · Model 4: Model 3 plus College Board variables on the characteristics of applicant high
      schools and home neighborhoods (many are interacted with an indicator for whether
      the state is an SAT majority state), whether the mother or father is deceased, whether
      a parent attended an Ivy League university (other than Harvard), whether a parent
      attended graduate school at Harvard, the type of high school the applicant attended,
      an indicator for rural, an indicator for being a permanent resident, and year inter-
      acted with indicators for disadvantaged, first-generation, early action, financial aid,
      permanent resident, intended major, flag for converted GPA=35, and missing SAT2
      average

    · Model 5 (Preferred): Model 4 plus indicators for each category of the academic, ex-
      tracurricular, athletic, teacher 1, teacher 2, counselor, alumni personal, and alumni
      overall ratings, interactions with missing alumni overall rating and race/ethnicity, in-
      dicators for whether the applicant had each possible combination of a two or better on
      Harvard's academic, extracurricular, and athletic profile ratings, indicators for whether


                                              51
the applicant had two or three 2's or better on their school support measures, and an
indicator for whether the applicant had 2's or better on both of the alumni ratings




                                      52
B      The Robustness of the Asian American Penalty
The results from our preferred admissions model indicate large and statistically significant
penalties against Asian American applicants. In this section, we investigate the robustness
of this finding. More precisely, we show how the estimated Asian American penalty changes
when we alter the set of control variables and move from a pooled to a yearly admissions
model.


B.1      Additional Controls

In addition to excluding controls that are directly a function of race, we also exclude con-
trols that are measured inconsistently or are already captured by other variables included
the model. A prime example of this is parental occupation. In the database made available
as part of the SFFA v. Harvard, parental occupation is available through the Common Ap-
plication using either a Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) code or a Common Application
code. The use of the two codes varies across cycles and the categories within each occupation
code change over time.71 In addition to the lack of consistency, there is little evidence that
parental occupation matters beyond helping to determine whether an applicant is disadvan-
taged. While parental occupation is included on an applicant's summary sheet, it does not
appear to be an important part of the evaluation process. For example, the reader guidelines
for 2017 (Trial Exhibit DX 016), 2018 (Trial Exhibit P001), 2019 (Trial Exhibit P071), and
2023 (Trial Exhibit P633) never discuss parental occupation, but do discuss scores, ratings,
interviews, GPA, disadvantaged status, etc.72 Additional evidence on the inconsequential
impact of parental occupation comes from Trial Exhibit DX 024, a discussion guide for the
2012 casebook. This guide walks readers through 12 pseudo applications and discusses key
features of each application and admissions outcomes. Across the 12 applicants and 12
pages of discussion, parental occupation is never discussed beyond one mention of a parent
  71
     See Appendix Table D9 for evidence on the inconsistency of the parental occupation variables.
  72
     Further evidence that parental occupation is unimportant comes from Trial Exhibit P238. This document
shows an internal email conversation among Harvard employees early in the admissions cycle for the Class
of 2017. The following is a direct quote from the email, "RMW just noticed that parent2 employer field not
showing up on the reader sheets. Turns out I had cut it by accident...Though if they're only just noticing
this now, I do wonder how important it is or how carefully they're paying attention."



                                                   53
being blue-collar.73 For these reasons, we exclude parental occupation from our preferred
model. For similar reasons, we exclude an applicant's intended career. This is a variable
that varies considerably across admissions cycles and--since we already account for intended
major--seems unnecessary.74
       However, Document 419-141 advocates including both of these variables. For the oc-
cupation controls, Document 419-141 harmonizes the reported parental occupation codes
by mapping Common Application codes to major and minor groups in the BLS-Standard
Occupational Classification System. Major and minor groups are then combined into broad
occupational categories. There are 24 occupational classifications for mothers and fathers,
with little explanation for the chosen groupings. For example, business executive, business
and financial operations, and other management are included as separate categories. Low
skill is separate from construction and protective service. Further evidence that the occu-
pation variables are not especially informative is that the second most common occupation
among both mothers and fathers is "Other" (see pp. 178­179 of Document 419-141).
       While we believe the occupation category and intended career variables are unreliable and
superfluous, we test the robustness of our preferred model to their inclusion.75 When occu-
pation and intended career are added to the preferred model, the marginal effect associated
with Asian American is -0.75% and statistically significant at the 5% level.76 While smaller
than our preferred model estimates, it still indicates a large penalty for Asian American
applicants relative to white applicants.77
  73
     Parental occupation is discussed in deposition testimony as a tool to infer disadvantaged status. See p.
201 of Document 421-9 ("Q. How does Harvard determine whether or not an applicant is socioeconomically
disadvantaged? A. ...We also have information at the outset about the parents' educational and professional
backgrounds."); p. 59 of the deposition of Christopher Looby ("Q. What types of information would you
assess in trying to determine whether you should code an applicant as disadvantaged? ... A. Could be parent
jobs.") [Document 419-143, fn. 56].
  74
     See Appendix Table D10 for information on how intended career varies by admissions cycle. Intended
career is also never discussed in the reader guidelines for 2017 (Trial Exhibit DX 016), 2018 (Trial Exhibit
P001), 2019 (Trial Exhibit P071) or 2023 (Trial Exhibit P633).
  75
     Adding these 64 variables to the model increases the total number of controls by more than 15%.
  76
     See Table 8.2N in Document 415-9.
  77
     Even if we include the personal rating, parental occupation, and intended career, the Asian American
marginal effect is -0.34% and statistically significant at the 5% level (see Table 8.2N in Document 415-9). If
Asian Americans were treated like similarly situated white applicants their admission probability would rise
by 7%.




                                                     54
B.2     The Fragility of a No Discrimination Result

In Section B.1 we used our preferred specification as a baseline, and examined how changes
from this baseline alter the estimated admissions penalty against Asian Americans. An alter-
native approach is to start from a baseline specification that makes a number of questionable
modeling decisions to achieve an insignificant Asian American penalty and explore how sim-
ple and reasonable alterations from this baseline lead to changes. The broader point is that,
while our preferred specification is quite robust, an alternative specification that finds no
penalty is quite fragile.


B.2.1    Pooled Models

We begin by exploring the sensitivity of a pooled admissions model that is capable of gener-
ating a small and insignificant Asian American penalty. This is the pooled model advocated
for in Document 419-141, and is quite different from our preferred specification. For the
full details see Section 5 of Document 419-141. Here, we focus on versions of this model
that exclude ALDC applicants, but it is important to note that Document 419-141 and
Document 419-143 never estimate an admissions model excluding this special set. As we
illustrated earlier in Section 3, it is inappropriate to include these applicants unless indica-
tors for ALDC are interacted with all the other applicant attributes. A simpler approach is
simply to exclude them.
   The key differences between the pooled model in Document 419-141 and our preferred
pooled specification are: (i) the exclusion of interactions between race and disadvantaged
status; (ii) inclusion of the personal rating; and (iii) inclusion of parental occupation. While
these three differences will be our primary focus, there are other relevant differences between
the models. The pooled admissions model in Document 419-141 includes indicators for in-
tended career and a full set of indicator variables for all profile ratings combinations and
excludes interactions between race and gender, race and missing SAT II scores, and inter-
actions between admissions cycle and disadvantaged, first-generation, early action, financial
aid, permanent resident, intended major, flag for converted GPA=35, and missing SAT2
average. While we believe these additional differences are also potentially problematic, we



                                              55
do not study them in detail.
   Appendix Table D11 shows how the estimated Asian American penalty is affected by the
modeling choices associated with points (i), (ii), and (iii) above. The first row shows that it is
possible to construct a pooled admissions model that yields no statistically significant Asian
American penalty. The remaining rows show that changing any of the three questionable
modeling choices results in a statistically significant Asian American penalty. Moreover,
altering all three components essentially leads to a result that is almost identical to our
preferred specification. Thus, the other differences between our preferred model and the
pooled model in Document 419-141 have a relatively minor impact.
   While we have already discussed at length the concerns regarding the personal rating
and parental occupation, it is worth discussing briefly why it is appropriate to interact race
and disadvantaged status. An interaction between race and disadvantaged status makes
sense when disadvantage has a different effect for different races. There is clear evidence
that while Harvard gives African-American applicants a large preference, it does not give
disadvantaged African-American students any preference for being disadvantaged (see Table
9 of Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom, 2019b). Thus, the effect of being disadvantaged is
different across racial lines. So long as African Americans are used in the estimation of the
model, the model requires these interaction terms. If the interaction terms are excluded, it
significantly weakens the effect of disadvantage as an explanatory term. Since more Asian
American applicants than white applicants are disadvantaged, the weaker effect of disadvan-
taged status in turn weakens the distinctions between white and Asian American applicants,
thus tending to conceal the magnitude of discrimination against Asian American applicants.


B.2.2    Yearly Models

While Document 419-141 estimates a pooled admissions model, the preferred approach in
Document 419-141 is one that estimates admissions preferences separately by year. The
structure of the yearly models is essentially identical to the pooled model in terms of included
controls. The benefit of the yearly approach is it allows for variability in the impact of
applicant attributes over time. The cost is reduced statistical power and the potential for
model overfitting. Approximately 2,000 applicants are admitted each year, and the yearly

                                               56
models will contain well over 200 variables each. In contrast, the pooled model includes
approximately 350 variables, but there are more than 11,000 admits across cycles.
      One important difference between the pooled and yearly models in Document 419-141 is
the inclusion of total work hours and indicators for an applicant's primary extracurricular
activities. The reason these variables are excluded from the pooled model is that they are
only available for applicants to the Classes of 2017­2019. However, the decision to use the
detailed extracurricular activities in this particular manner is odd. Data on extracurricular
activities come from applicants listing each activity they participated in, the years in which
they participated in this activity, the hours per week and weeks per year they participated in
the activity, and whether their participation was during the school year or outside the school
year. Each of the activities is assigned to one of 29 categories (e.g., work, academics, musical
instruments). Document 419-141 defines a primary activity as an activity the applicant lists
in the first or second activity field of her application. Additionally, the primary activities
are collapsed into one of twelve groups in a somewhat arbitrary manner. More importantly,
the level of participation of the activity is done only for the work category, where total work
hours are calculated over the course of the applicant's high school career. This distorts the
analysis in two ways. First, it overemphasizes the weight that work is given in the process,
as work activities are only the eighth most popular activity listed for whites.78 Second,
white applicants work significantly more hours than Asian American applicants. Yet there
are many activities where Asian American applicants invest substantially more hours than
white applicants.
      As a result, when we investigate the robustness of the yearly models, we consider two
cases. First, we look at the case where we take the extracurricular activities defined in
Document 419-141 at face value. Second, we define our own set of extracurricular controls.
Rather than use the activity groupings proposed by Document 419-141, we use the original
29 activity categories when constructing indicators for each of the first two listed activities.
Instead of using the total hours of work over the course of the applicant's high school career,
we consider broader groupings of categories and measure participation both by counting the
number of grades in which the applicant participated in each activity and indicating whether
 78
      See Document 419-141 Appendix D, Exhibit 66.


                                                     57
the applicant's total accumulated hours in a category was above the median for those who
had any positive hours in the category. Making these adjustments more precisely accounts
for the impact of extracurricular activities on admissions decisions.
   Similar to the pooled model robustness exercise, we are interested in whether a finding of
an insignificant Asian American penalty using the baseline yearly model in Document 419-
141 is robust to: (i) the exclusion of interactions between race and disadvantaged status;
(ii) inclusion of the personal rating; and (iii) inclusion of parental occupation. Appendix
Table D12 indicates that the finding of no Asian American penalty is not robust. In the first
column we present the estimated Asian American penalty when we employ the extracur-
ricular variables as constructed in Document 419-141. The marginal effects reported are a
weighted average of the year-specific estimates. We find that the magnitude of the estimated
penalty in the yearly model is similar to the pooled model when we interact race and dis-
advantage. However, the result is not statistically significant. Excluding the personal rating
or parental occupation leads to a large and statistically significant Asian American penalty.
In the second column, we estimate the yearly model from Document 419-141, but use the
corrected extracurricular measures. In this case, the Asian American penalty is statistically
significant when any of (i), (ii), or (iii) are addressed. The final column of the table are the
results from the pooled specification and show that the estimated magnitude of the penalty
is largely unaffected by moving to the yearly model.
   The weighted averages reported in Appendix Table D12 mask important heterogeneity
in the size and significance of the Asian American penalty across admissions cycles. In
Appendix Table D13 we provide the year-by-year estimates of the Asian American penalty
for the baseline specification in Document 419-141, as well as the robustness checks related
to disadvantaged status, the personal rating, and parental occupation. In all models we use
the extracurricular variables as defined in Document 419-141. For every specification, the
estimated penalty is negative in all years except 2019. This pattern is interesting since this
is the only admissions cycle to occur after the SFFA lawsuit was filed. The final row of
the table reports the average marginal effect across admissions cycles excluding 2019. Here
we find that, even when we add to the baseline model race interacted with disadvantaged
status, the Asian American penalty is large and statistically significant. When we make all


                                              58
the model adjustments and exclude 2019, the Asian American penalty is 20% larger than in
the corresponding yearly specification including 2019 (-0.90 from row (5) from Table D12).
   This section has shown that being able to find no significant Asian American penalty
among typical applicants to Harvard requires making a number of questionable modeling
choices. If any of these decisions are reversed, a statistically significant Asian American
penalty appears. This lack of robustness is in sharp contrast to our preferred specification,
where altering one of these modeling choices does not alter the main finding.




                                             59
C         Model Fit
In this section, we describe how information in the public domain helps us more precisely
estimate the underlying distribution of the index of applicant observables, AIi . To pin down
the shape of the observable index distribution, we rely on the observed admit rates across
deciles of the true AIi distribution for Asian Americans. These admit rates are presented in
Table 9.1 of Document 415-9.
       We build off the simple approach described in the text by drawing an initial index for
each applicant from a standard normal distribution. Given the initial draw, applicants are
sorted in deciles. We then add flexibility by assuming the true underlying distribution of
observables is a weighted sum of the initial draw, its square, its square interacted with
whether the value was positive, and its exponential. The predicted admit rates for decile k
                                                 exp(AIik )
are then calculated as the average of           1+exp(AIik )
                                                               for all i applicants in decile k . The weights
on the various components of the distribution are estimated using the method of simulated
moments, matching the predicted admit rates by decile to the observed distribution of admit
rates across deciles for Asian American applicants.
       Table C1, located at the end of this section, illustrates that the estimated flexible distri-
bution precisely matches the observed Asian American admit rates across the deciles of the
admissions index. For comparison purposes we also show how well a standard normal and
log-normal distribution match the data. While the normal distribution does fairly well, the
log-normal struggles to match admit rates in the left tail of the distribution.
       To calculate the implied R2 assuming that AIi is distributed according to the estimated
flexible distribution, we complete the following steps.

    1. With the underlying distribution of AIi known, take draws from this distribution (using
         its parameter estimates obtained from the method of simulated moments estimation
         described above) and draw       i 's   from a logistic distribution.79 Assign the highest NA
         values of AIi +   i   to match the total number of admits to Harvard.

    2. Calibrate a logit model of the simulated admissions decisions from the previous step
  79
    Implicit in this step is an assumption that the distribution of AIi for the population has a similar shape
to the distribution of AIi for Asian Americans.


                                                        60
         on AIi and a constant such that the overall admit rate and the Pseudo R2 match the
         actual Harvard data and the admissions model from Document 415-9.

         The coefficient on AIi will be larger (smaller) than one if the variance for Asian Amer-
         icans is smaller (larger) than the variance for the populations as a whole.

   3. Compute the implied R2 of the model, which is the fraction of variance in AIi +                    i

         explained by AIi :

                                                   V ar (AIi )
                                            R2 =
                                                 V ar (AIi + i )
                                                    V ar (AIi )
                                               =                2
                                                 V ar (AIi ) + 3


       The implied R2 under the flexible distribution for AIi is 0.89. It is important to note that
this value is a bit misleading. The increase in the R2 of our flexible distribution relative to
the normal distribution comes from the left tail of the distribution: those who have virtually
no chance of being admitted.
       While the R2 of the latent index is sensitive to the tails of the distribution, this is
not true of accuracy. Assuming AIi is normally distributed results in an accuracy rate for
admits of 64.07%; using the flexible distribution results in an accuracy of 64.09%.80 The
overall accuracy rate is 96.08% and 96.09%, respectively. Note that an admissions model
with no controls would lead to an overall accuracy rate of 90%.81




  80
     The accuracy rate for admits is calculated as the share of the 5.45% of simulated admits based on AIi
and   i are in the top 5.45% of the AIi distribution.
  81
     An admissions model with no controls would randomly assign 5.45% of applicants as admits and 94.55%
as rejects. The accuracy rate would then be given by 94.55% × 94.55% + 5.45% × 5.45% = 90.05%.


                                                   61
Table C1: Predicted and Actual Asian American Admit Rates by Admission Index Decile

                               Distribution of Latent Admissions Index
                     Decile    Actual     Normal     Flexible    Log-normal
                 Bottom 5       0.04        0.05        0.04         0.77
                        6       0.32       0.34        0.33          1.28
                        7       0.77       0.79        0.76           1.7
                        8       2.03       2.10        2.03           2.6
                        9       7.01       6.97        7.01          5.56
                       10       41.68      41.69       41.68         41.87
                Notes: Actual refers to Table 9.1 of Document 415-9. Decile
                refers to the decile of the Asian American admissions index. Nor-
                mal and Log-normal refers to the distribution of the admissions
                index. Flexible uses a normal distribution as well as the follow-
                ing transformations of the normal distribution: the square, the
                square interacted with the value being above zero, and the ex-
                ponential. We obtained by Method of Simulated Moments the
                weights on these transformations that match to the actual distri-
                bution.




                                               62
D    Supporting Figures and Tables

                           Table D1: List of Legal Documents Used

    Document                 Description
    Document 415-8           Plaintiff's expert witness opening report
    Document 419-141         Defendant's expert witness opening report
    Document 415-9           Plaintiff's expert witness rebuttal report
    Document 419-143         Defendant's expert witness rebuttal report
    Document 419-1           Deposition of Harvard Admissions Director Marlyn McGrath
    Document 421-9           Deposition of Harvard Admissions Dean William Fitzsimmons
    Exhibit 287              Declaration of plaintiff's expert witness
    Trial Exhibit DX 002     2012 Harvard admissions reader casebook
    Trial Exhibit DX 016     Class of 2017 application reading procedures
    Trial Exhibit DX 024     2012 Harvard admissions reader casebook discussion guide
    Trial Exhibit DX 680     Primary extracurricular activity by race
    Trial Exhibit P001       Class of 2018 application reading procedures
    Trial Exhibit P071       Class of 2019 application reading procedures
    Trial Exhibit P238       Email correspondence between admissions office personnel
    Trial Exhibit P555       Office for Civil Rights Report (1990)
    Trial Exhibit P621       Ratings frequencies for baseline sample
    Trial Exhibit P633       Class of 2023 application reading procedures




                                             63
Table D2: Share Receiving a 2 or Better on Academic and Extracurricular Ratings by
Academic Index Decile and Race

            Decile     White    African American       Hispanic    Asian American
           Panel A: Academic Rating
              1       0.11         0.02                  0.03            0.00
              2       0.41         0.08                  0.05            0.54
              3       1.91         0.96                  0.68            1.36
              4       9.14         6.07                  4.45            7.98
              5      26.26        23.08                  17.04           26.36
              6      50.19        48.43                  43.83           51.08
              7      68.37        68.54                  64.28           71.46
              8      82.73        80.37                  79.63           86.16
              9      93.30        93.37                  91.47           95.12
             10      97.16        94.70                  95.26           98.08
           Average     45.32            9.18             16.75           60.21

           Panel B: Extracurricular Rating
              1      11.41          9.02                  9.27           12.97
              2      16.35         13.75                 12.73           15.99
              3      20.14         18.86                 15.86           18.57
              4      22.02         23.27                 18.74           21.59
              5      23.83         22.85                 20.65           23.67
              6      25.08         26.38                 23.31           25.51
              7      26.64         27.42                 27.61           28.34
              8      27.31         27.91                 24.63           29.78
              9      30.45         32.65                 28.94           34.92
             10      33.04         38.64                 29.21           37.98
           Average     24.38           15.56             16.84           28.27
          Source: Authors' calculations from data presented in Table 5.4R of Document
          415-9. Data restricted to non-ALDC applicants from the Classes of 2014­2019.

          Notes: Portions of this table also appear in Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom
          (2019c) as Table 5.




                                               64
Table D3: Share Receiving a 2 or Better on Personal and Alumni Personal Ratings by
Academic Index Decile and Race

            Decile     White    African American       Hispanic    Asian American
           Panel A: Personal Rating
              1       8.11          9.49                 8.48            8.01
              2      12.58        15.75                  13.16           12.91
              3      16.25        23.35                  17.77           13.46
              4      18.62        28.95                  20.39           14.24
              5      20.40        33.89                  25.60           15.69
              6      22.72        35.04                  28.41           16.46
              7      22.59        40.00                  30.03           18.11
              8      26.10        39.57                  32.20           17.93
              9      28.23        40.31                  30.24           20.87
             10      29.62        46.97                  34.21           22.20
           Average     21.29           19.01             18.69           17.65

           Panel B: Alumni Personal Rating
              1      26.33       30.96                   26.29           28.13
              2      33.72       39.83                   33.42           32.03
              3      39.77       46.84                   38.59           36.35
              4      44.27       55.56                   43.86           40.66
              5      48.43       59.98                   50.32           44.24
              6      51.84       62.20                   54.50           46.96
              7      54.08       69.89                   56.90           51.93
              8      58.20       67.48                   62.44           53.78
              9      62.20       70.92                   62.89           57.46
             10      64.98       73.48                   71.05           63.61
           Average     49.79           42.79             41.25           50.21
          Source: Authors' calculations from data presented in Table 5.6R of Document
          415-9. Those with missing ratings are excluded from the calculations. Data
          restricted to non-ALDC applicants from the Classes of 2014­2019.

          Notes: Portions of this table also appear in Arcidiacono, Kinsler, and Ransom
          (2019c) as Table 5.




                                               65
Table D4: Share Receiving a 2 or Better on School Support Ratings by Academic Index
Decile and Race

             Decile    White     African American      Hispanic    Asian American
            Panel A: Teacher 1 Rating
               1       7.76          7.75                8.85            7.41
               2      13.42         13.97               13.87            14.18
               3      19.00         19.38               20.03            16.98
               4      23.87         25.06               23.60            21.03
               5      26.39         29.65               30.19            23.00
               6      32.41         36.42               31.94            26.59
               7      34.64         40.22               35.62            30.22
               8      39.72         46.63               37.68            33.09
               9      44.92         47.45               43.60            39.73
              10      50.17         55.30               49.47            46.64
            Average     30.46          17.15            21.60            30.84

            Panel B: Teacher 2 Rating
               1       6.20          5.46                6.42            6.55
               2      10.24         11.50               11.00            11.69
               3      15.46         16.98               17.77            13.80
               4      21.21         22.41               20.81            18.01
               5      23.31         31.55               25.54            20.26
               6      27.53         35.43               28.97            24.29
               7      31.04         35.06               32.77            26.18
               8      36.66         39.88               37.32            29.67
               9      41.47         42.86               38.59            36.15
              10      47.11         50.76               49.74            41.90
            Average     27.16          14.83            18.86            27.44

            Panel C: Counselor Rating
               1       4.64         4.88                 5.72            5.76
               2       8.99        10.86                10.15            9.19
               3      14.49        16.72                14.83            12.25
               4      18.49        20.31                17.32            14.93
               5      22.06        26.42                21.06            17.84
               6      25.59        32.87                25.26            22.61
               7      29.24        35.73                30.35            24.96
               8      34.39        38.04                34.15            27.69
               9      39.16        43.88                34.32            33.88
              10      44.63        49.24                45.00            38.34
            Average     25.29          13.86            16.49            25.16
           Source: Authors' calculations from data presented in Table 5.5R of Document
           415-9. Those with missing ratings are excluded from the calculations. Data
           restricted to non-ALDC applicants from the Classes of 2014­2019.

                                               66
                            Table D5: Academic, Extracurricular, and School Support Ratings, Selected Coefficients

                                                    Academic            Extracurricular            Teacher 1              Teacher 2              Counselor
                                               Sparse    Preferred    Sparse     Preferred    Sparse    Preferred    Sparse      Preferred   Sparse    Preferred
      African American                          -1.685     -0.006      -0.503      -0.217      -0.606      0.012      -0.551        0.104     -0.577      0.164
                                               (0.019)    (0.043)     (0.023)     (0.044)     (0.024)    (0.048)     (0.026)      (0.051)    (0.026)    (0.052)
      Hispanic                                  -0.944     -0.112      -0.302      -0.146      -0.289     -0.023      -0.256        0.024     -0.289     0.017
                                               (0.017)    (0.037)     (0.021)     (0.036)     (0.021)    (0.037)     (0.023)      (0.039)    (0.023)    (0.040)
      Asian American                             0.614      0.136       0.246       0.171      -0.048     -0.159      -0.086       -0.203     -0.054     -0.095
                                               (0.014)    (0.031)     (0.015)     (0.026)     (0.015)    (0.026)     (0.016)      (0.028)    (0.016)    (0.028)
      Missing                                   0.318       0.082      0.133        0.077      -0.015     -0.080      -0.063       -0.115     -0.048     -0.116
                                               (0.023)    (0.051)     (0.025)     (0.043)     (0.025)    (0.043)     (0.026)      (0.046)    (0.027)    (0.047)
      Female                                    -0.272      0.116      0.207        0.021      -0.001      0.093      -0.027        0.085      0.032     0.034
                                               (0.011)    (0.034)     (0.012)     (0.031)     (0.012)    (0.032)     (0.013)      (0.035)    (0.013)    (0.035)
      Disadvantaged                             0.131       0.048      0.372        0.202       0.430      0.188       0.453        0.278      0.451     0.168
                                               (0.020)    (0.046)     (0.024)     (0.045)     (0.024)    (0.045)     (0.026)      (0.048)    (0.026)    (0.049)
      Female X African American                             0.097                   0.216                 -0.068                   -0.096                -0.012
67




                                                          (0.045)                 (0.046)                (0.051)                  (0.056)               (0.056)
      Female X Hispanic                                    -0.051                   0.079                  0.007                   -0.053                 0.003
                                                          (0.042)                 (0.042)                (0.044)                  (0.047)               (0.048)
      Female X Asian American                              -0.068                   0.002                  0.033                    0.056                 0.000
                                                          (0.037)                 (0.031)                (0.031)                  (0.034)               (0.034)
      Female x Missing                                     -0.066                   0.010                  0.006                    0.062                 0.098
                                                          (0.063)                 (0.053)                (0.054)                  (0.057)               (0.059)
      Disadv X African American                            -0.120                   0.106                  0.122                   -0.053                 0.009
                                                          (0.061)                 (0.062)                (0.066)                  (0.072)               (0.072)
      Disadv X Hispanic                                    -0.262                   0.076                 0.093                    -0.033                0.186
                                                          (0.060)                 (0.060)                (0.061)                  (0.066)               (0.068)
      Disadv X Asian American                              -0.092                  -0.073                  0.017                    0.002                 0.126
                                                          (0.061)                 (0.057)                (0.057)                  (0.061)               (0.062)
      Disadv X Missing                                     -0.008                   0.020                  0.041                   -0.075                -0.128
                                                          (0.111)                 (0.103)                (0.104)                  (0.112)               (0.116)
      Observations                             142728      136208     142728      136208      136958     130733      115618       110195     134341     128288
      Pseudo R Sq.                              0.161       0.565      0.041       0.128       0.03       0.142       0.029        0.137      0.046      0.185
      Major, Dockets, Waiver, Early               Y           Y          Y           Y          Y           Y           Y            Y          Y          Y
      Academics, Nbhd/School, Ratings             N           Y          N           Y          N           Y           N            Y          N          Y
     Source: Tables B.6.1R and B.6.2R of Document 415-9. Data restricted to non-ALDC applicants from the Classes of 2014­2019.

     Notes: Standard errors below each coefficient in parentheses. "Sparse" means a model with relatively few covariates (Model 1 in the tables in Document 415-9);
     "Preferred" means the preferred model (Model 5 in the tables in Document 415-9).
                               Table D6: Personal and Overall Ratings, Selected Coefficients

                                                       Personal           Alumni Personal               Overall             Alumni Overall
                                                 Sparse     Preferred     Sparse    Preferred     Sparse     Preferred     Sparse    Preferred
      African American                            -0.108       0.682      -0.132        0.236      -0.821       1.503      -0.664        0.126
                                                 (0.025)     (0.053)     (0.021)      (0.041)     (0.019)     (0.038)     (0.020)      (0.040)
      Hispanic                                    -0.075       0.279      -0.111        0.062      -0.237       0.922      -0.358        0.001
                                                 (0.023)     (0.044)     (0.019)      (0.034)     (0.016)     (0.030)     (0.019)      (0.033)
      Asian American                              -0.346      -0.398      -0.010       -0.181       0.160      -0.136       0.232        0.160
                                                 (0.018)     (0.034)     (0.014)      (0.025)     (0.012)     (0.022)     (0.014)      (0.024)
      Missing                                     -0.237      -0.347       0.019       -0.129       0.095      -0.086      0.187         0.165
                                                 (0.029)     (0.056)     (0.023)      (0.041)     (0.020)     (0.036)     (0.023)      (0.040)
      Female                                      0.170        0.161       0.177        0.240      -0.017       0.117      -0.027       -0.094
                                                 (0.014)     (0.039)     (0.011)      (0.032)     (0.010)     (0.027)     (0.011)      (0.031)
      Disadvantaged                               0.754        0.553      0.172        -0.075      0.603        0.743       0.191        0.068
                                                 (0.026)     (0.052)     (0.022)      (0.044)     (0.019)     (0.038)     (0.021)      (0.043)
      Female X African American                               -0.239                   -0.066                  -0.163                   -0.085
                                                             (0.057)                  (0.045)                 (0.040)                  (0.044)
68




      Female X Hispanic                                       -0.015                   -0.021                  -0.013                   -0.014
                                                             (0.051)                  (0.041)                 (0.035)                  (0.040)
      Female X Asian American                                  0.095                    0.053                   0.040                   -0.062
                                                             (0.040)                  (0.031)                 (0.026)                  (0.030)
      Female x Missing                                         0.118                    0.034                   0.011                   -0.041
                                                             (0.069)                  (0.054)                 (0.045)                  (0.052)
      Disadv X African American                               -0.324                    0.101                  -0.684                   -0.066
                                                             (0.073)                  (0.061)                 (0.053)                  (0.059)
      Disadv X Hispanic                                       -0.048                    0.174                  -0.353                   -0.077
                                                             (0.070)                  (0.060)                 (0.051)                  (0.058)
      Disadv X Asian American                                  0.058                    0.087                   0.100                   -0.060
                                                             (0.067)                  (0.056)                 (0.048)                  (0.054)
      Disadv X Missing                                        0.068                    0.078                   -0.155                   -0.071
                                                             (0.123)                  (0.101)                 (0.088)                  (0.098)
      Observations                               142728      136208      111524       108054      142701      136183      111524       108054
      Pseudo R Sq.                                0.06        0.289       0.012        0.341       0.059       0.331       0.035        0.375
      Major, Dockets, Waiver, Early                Y            Y           Y            Y           Y           Y           Y            Y
      Academics, Nbhd/School, Ratings              N            Y           N            Y           N           Y           N            Y
     Source: Tables B.6.3R and B.6.4R of Document 415-9. Data restricted to non-ALDC applicants from the Classes of 2014­2019.

     Notes: Standard errors below each coefficient in parentheses. "Sparse" means a model with relatively few covariates (Model 1 in the tables in
     Document 415-9); "Preferred" means the preferred model (Model 5 in the tables in Document 415-9).
            Table D7: The Role of Observed and Unobserved Factors in Racial/Ethnic Differences in Component Scores

                                                    Extra-                                                         Alumni       Alumni
                              Overall     Academic curricular          Teacher 1     Teacher 2      Counselor      Personal     Overall Personal

      Average Index Z-score (relative to White)
      African American -1.129         -1.237    -0.663                   -0.759         -0.722        -0.849        -0.253       -0.637      -0.374
      Hispanic            -0.712      -0.791    -0.427                   -0.451         -0.415        -0.514        -0.191       -0.421      -0.268
      Asian American      0.120        0.259     0.109                    0.142          0.116         0.049         0.027        0.073       0.020
69




      Coefficients (White     is normalized to zero)
      African American         1.503     -0.006      -0.217               0.012         0.104          0.164         0.236       0.126       0.682
      Hispanic                  0.922    -0.112      -0.146              -0.023         0.024          0.017        0.062        0.001       0.279
      Asian American           -0.136     0.136       0.171              -0.159         -0.203        -0.095        -0.181       0.160       -0.398
     Source: Table B.6.11R of Document 415-9.

     Notes: The average index Z-score is calculated by taking the variables in the preferred ratings models absent race and admissions cycle and
     multiplying them by their corresponding coefficients from the ratings models. Then, the mean for white applicants is subtracted and we divide
     by the standard deviation. Finally, we take the averages for each racial group (note that mechanically this is zero for whites). Coefficients refer
     to the base race coefficients in the ratings models.
                    Table D8: Selected Coefficients, Admissions Models

                                         (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)
 African American                        0.531        2.417     2.671      2.851       3.772
                                       (0.040)      (0.050)   (0.074)    (0.078)     (0.105)
 Hispanic                               0.425        1.273      1.286     1.339       1.959
                                       (0.039)      (0.044)   (0.063)    (0.067)     (0.085)
 Asian American                          0.057       -0.434    -0.565     -0.378      -0.466
                                       (0.032)      (0.035)   (0.052)    (0.055)     (0.070)
 Missing                                0.012        -0.283    -0.348     -0.330      -0.379
                                       (0.054)      (0.057)   (0.093)    (0.099)     (0.122)
 Female                                 -0.044        0.254     0.228      0.271       0.163
                                       (0.025)      (0.027)   (0.064)    (0.088)     (0.110)
 Disadvantaged                          1.183        1.257      1.497     1.606       1.660
                                       (0.042)      (0.048)   (0.071)    (0.108)     (0.138)
 First Generation                       -0.004        0.174     0.161     -0.018      -0.014
                                       (0.052)      (0.059)   (0.059)    (0.127)     (0.167)
 Early Action                           1.616        1.456      1.371     1.348       1.410
                                       (0.032)      (0.035)   (0.055)    (0.084)     (0.104)
 Waiver                                 -0.153       0.484     0.499       0.387       0.697
                                       (0.041)      (0.047)   (0.046)    (0.049)     (0.063)
 Applied for Financial Aid              0.054        0.073      0.057     0.114       0.343
                                       (0.032)      (0.033)   (0.034)    (0.081)     (0.101)
 Academic index                                      2.011      1.937      1.930       0.673
                                                    (0.137)   (0.136)    (0.142)     (0.189)
 AI Sq. × (AI>0)                                     0.268      0.339      0.390      0.108
                                                    (0.078)   (0.079)    (0.082)     (0.106)
 AI Sq. × (AI<0)                                     -0.950    -0.926     -0.933      -1.236
                                                    (0.167)   (0.165)    (0.171)     (0.219)
 N                                    142,728       142,700   142,700    136,061    128,422
 Pseudo R Sq.                          0.078         0.260     0.262      0.283      0.556
 Demographics                            Y             Y         Y          Y          Y
 Academics                               N             Y         Y          Y          Y
 Race and Gender Interactions            N             N         Y          Y          Y
 HS and NBHD Variables                   N             N         N          Y          Y
 Ratings (excluding Personal)            N             N         N          N          Y
Source: Data presented in Table B.7.1R of Document 415-9.

Notes: All models include year indicators and year interactions. Standard errors reported below
each coefficient in parentheses.


                                               70
Table D9: Mother's and father's occupations vary in non-credible ways

                                          Admissions Class
                              2014    2015 2016 2017 2018             2019
   Mother's Occupations
                  Other 1266 4703 4339 4280 5666 5958
            Homemaker 3476 4292 3967 4042 4629 3847
            Unemployed 1449 2350 2274 2360 10     9
               Low Skill. 1097 37   18  12   24   20
          Self-Employed     0  991 989 928 1076 1138

   Father's Occupations
                  Other 1593 4608 4268 4587 4941 5663
             Homemaker 44       56   50   61  101   71
            Unemployed 963 1493 1390 1300      5     8
               Low Skill. 1098 42    33   34   15   27
          Self-Employed     0  2134 2148 2108 2335 2432
  Source: Data presented in Table 3.2N of Document 415-9.

  Notes: Construction of occupation categories described in Document 419-143.




                                      71
               Table D10: Intended Career varies in non-credible ways

                                            Admissions Class
                              2014     2015  2016    2017    2018             2019
        Academic        1,723            25          19       15     2,247      13
        Arts             846            331         321      284      390      283
        Business        2,189          2,385       2,486    2,556   1,918     2,906
        Communications   695            741         634      528      229      491
        Design           283            161         131      101       82      105
        Government      1,604          1,785       1,695   1,683     1,610   1,617
        Health           234             95          85      107    4,944       96
        Law             2,093          1,963       1,787   1,639      708     1,484
        Library           63              0           0       0        0         0
        Medicine        6,254          6,185       5,879    5,863      3      5,977
        Religion          42              2           0       1        0         0
        Science         3,268          5,242       5,437    5,519    9,182   7,394
        Trade              2              7           8       7        6        9
        Social Service   339             41          51       47       0        52
        Teaching         167            660         598      598       17      514
        Other            445           1,275       1,210    1,223     231     1,857
        Undecided       1,821          5,022       4,614   4,887     3,537   3,661
        Unknown          121             87          82       55      102      101
        Total          22,189         26,007      25,037   25,113   25,206   26,560
       Source: Data presented in Table B.4.1N of Document 415-9.




 Table D11: Is a Pooled Model that finds no Asian American Penalty Robust?

                                                              Average Marginal Effect
 (1)   Baseline pooled model from Document 419-141                      -0.22%
 (2)   Interact race and disadvantaged                                 -0.32%*
 (3)   Exclude personal rating                                         -0.65%*
 (4)   Exclude parental occupation                                     -0.37%*
 (5)   Combine (2), (3), & (4)                                         -0.95%*
Source: Data presented in Table 4.1N of Document 415-9. *=statistically different from zero
at the 95% level. Marginal effects are calculated without perfect predictions.

Notes: All models exclude ALDC applicants.




                                             72
        Table D12: Is a Yearly Model that finds no Asian American Penalty Robust?

                                                           Yearly with      Yearly with
                                                        Document 419-141     corrected
                                                         extracurriculars extracurriculars         Pooled
 (1)   Baseline model from Document 419-141                     -0.18%               -0.24%        -0.22%
 (2)   Interact race and disadvantaged                          -0.29%              -0.36%*       -0.32%*
 (3)   Exclude personal rating                                 -0.56%*             -0.62%*        -0.65%*
 (4)   Exclude parental occupation                             -0.39%*             -0.47% *       -0.37%*
 (5)   Combine (2), (3), & (4)                                 -0.90%*             -0.98%*        -0.95%*
Source: Data presented in Table 4.2N of Document 415-9. *=statistically different from zero at the 95% level.
Marginal effects are calculated without perfect predictions.

Notes: All models exclude ALDC applicants.




                 Table D13: Yearly estimates of the Asian American Penalty

                                  (1)                    (2)               (3)            (4)           (5)
                         Document 419-141    Interact   No Personal                  No Parental      (2), (3),
                             Baseline     Disadvantaged   Rating                     Occupation       and (4)
 2014                           -0.31%                  -0.38%           -0.79%         -0.69%        -1.23%
 2015                           -0.33%                  -0.41%           -0.74%         -0.60%        -1.07%
 2016                           -0.02%                  -0.16%           -0.72%         -0.34%        -1.12%
 2017                           -0.23%                  -0.30%           -0.34%         -0.32%        -0.64%
 2018                           -0.57%                  -0.71%           -0.97%         -0.75%        -1.33%
 2019                           0.37%                   0.22%             0.19%         0.34 %        -0.03%
 Avg. without 2019              -0.29%               -0.39%*             -0.71%*       -0.54%*        -1.08%*
Source: Data presented in Table 4.3N of Document 415-9. *=statistically different from zero at the 95% level.
Marginal effects are calculated without perfect predictions.

Notes: All models exclude ALDC applicants.




                                                   73
