                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ORIGINAL SIN AND THE GREAT DEPRESSION

                                       Michael D. Bordo
                                    Christopher M. Meissner

                                      Working Paper 27067
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27067


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




Helpful comments from seminar and conference participants at the Monetary and Financial
History Conference Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the 2015 World Economic History
Conference (Kyoto), UC Davis, UC Berkeley, and the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary
Research are acknowledged. Alain Naef provided significant feedback. We thank Barry
Eichengreen and Wilfried Kisling for generous help with data and sources and Sara Cochrane and
Humberto Martinez Beltran for research assistance. Corresponding author: Christopher M.
Meissner, University of California, Davis One Shields Avenue Davis, CA 95616 email:
cmm@ucdavis.edu. Neither author has any financial conflicts of interest. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael D. Bordo and Christopher M. Meissner. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Original Sin and the Great Depression
Michael D. Bordo and Christopher M. Meissner
NBER Working Paper No. 27067
April 2020
JEL No. F31,F34,N10,N2

                                          ABSTRACT

Was foreign currency denominated debt a determinant of exchange rate and monetary policy
during the Great Depression? Policy makers of the day thought so. High-frequency bond price
data show depreciation was associated with elevated risk premia on public debt. We also show
that foreign currency debt was a determinant of exchange rate policy during the Great
Depression. The gold standard heightened exposure to global shocks and prolonged the Great
Depression. Why then did countries hesitate to jettison the monetary technology? Multiple factors
have been identified in the literature ranging from economic and political considerations to social
preferences for monetary stability. We find that foreign currency debt and trade patterns, both
shaped by history and geography, had a significant impact on these choices and hence on
economic stability. The effect is likely to be about half as large as the output gap in determining
exchange rate policy.


Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Christopher M. Meissner
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
cmmeissner@ucdavis.edu
         Original Sin and the Great Depression*

                                          Michael D. Bordo
                                    Rutgers University & NBER


                                      Christopher M. Meissner
                             University of California, Davis & NBER



                                       This Draft: April 22, 2020



          ABSTRACT: Was foreign currency denominated debt a determinant of exchange
          rate and monetary policy during the Great Depression? Policy makers of the day
          thought so. High-frequency bond price data show depreciation was associated with
          elevated risk premia on public debt. We also show that foreign currency debt was a
          determinant of exchange rate policy during the Great Depression. The gold standard
          heightened exposure to global shocks and prolonged the Great Depression. Why then
          did countries hesitate to jettison the monetary technology? Multiple factors have
          been identified in the literature ranging from economic and political considerations
          to social preferences for monetary stability. We find that foreign currency debt and
          trade patterns, both shaped by history and geography, had a significant impact on
          these choices and hence on economic stability. The effect is likely to be about half
          as large as the output gap in determining exchange rate policy.


1. Introduction

        A leading view of the Great Depression holds that devaluation strongly stimulated
recovery (Eichengreen, 1992). Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) and Campa (1990) argued that



*
 Helpful comments from seminar and conference participants at the Monetary and Financial History
Conference Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the 2015 World Economic History Conference (Kyoto), UC
Davis, UC Berkeley, and the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research are acknowledged. Alain Naef
provided significant feedback. We thank Barry Eichengreen and Wilfried Kisling for generous help with data
and sources and Sara Cochrane and Humberto Martinez Beltran for research assistance. Corresponding author:
Christopher M. Meissner, University of California, Davis One Shields Avenue Davis, CA 95616 email:
cmm@ucdavis.edu.

                                                    1
economic recovery in the 1930s depended crucially upon devaluation. Countries that delayed
going off gold had weaker output growth, lower exports, and lower investment rates.

       The costs of the hard gold peg were seemingly higher than the benefits of exit.
Nevertheless, exit from the gold standard was remarkably slow for many countries. Only a
small number of financially weak commodity-exporting nations had devalued in the two
and a half years between early 1929 and September 1931. Great Britain waited until
September 1931 to devalue. The US did so only in 1933. France, Switzerland, Belgium and
the Netherlands waited even longer. Many other countries followed either Britain or the US
examples. Why did countries wait to go off the gold standard? Why did some countries
follow the leaders off gold and then re-peg their currencies to these leaders if fixed exchange
rates constrained monetary policy?

       Was it simply that the economic orthodoxy of the time largely frowned on the
instability generated by devaluation? After all, devaluation could lead to inflation, tariff
retaliation, financial mayhem and default. Bordo and Redish (1990) emphasized that
devaluation entailed a potential loss of credibility. Research by Simmons (1994), Wolf
(2008), and Wandschneider (2008) has explored the comparative determinants of
devaluation in the 1930s. The emphasis is on the balance of payments, trade relations,
political economy and economic ideology. These papers mainly discussed devaluation in
terms of its macroeconomic effects, while Wolf (2008) and Wandschneider (2008) considered
bilateral trade relationships. Different from most of the previous research, we emphasize the
currency denomination of debt as a constraint on exchange rate policy.

       Indeed it appears currency denomination of debt has so far escaped a cross-country
comparative quantitative analysis. While some of the country case studies have addressed
the issue, the comparative quantitative literature largely has not. This is strange because
historically, governments, firms, banks and households frequently contracted repayment of
debt in gold or in a fixed amount of foreign currency, much as is the case today. The
implications of these types of debt contracts for exchange rate policy and the balance of
payments have yet to be thoroughly examined in the context of the comparative outcomes
during the Great Depression. Most work to date considers the balance of payments to be a
function of the general stance of monetary policy.

       Currency denomination of debt was in fact paramount based on our reading of a
range of secondary sources and contemporary sources. We illustrate this by showing that



                                              2
financial markets in London and New York recognized depreciation as problematic for
repayment of foreign currency debt.

       To show this, we use the sudden devaluation of sterling in mid-September 1931 as a
natural experiment to gauge the impact of nominal exchange rate changes on sovereign
borrowing costs. Using weekly and daily data on bond yields, currency denomination of
debt, and exchange rates, we find that markets penalized devaluation for debtors obliged
to re-pay in strong currencies. Higher bond yields compensated investors for the heightened
risk of default. In sum, currency risk was transformed into default risk.

       In light of this, we also analyze exchange rate policy through the lens of a simple
static theoretical model developed by Bénassy-Quéré (1996). The model shows how foreign
currency debt and trade linkages affect desired exchange rate fluctuations. We estimate
the structural equilibrium relationship from this model which relates exchange rate
movements and the main components of the balance of payments.

       We find that governments tended to limit exchange rate movement between 1925
and 1938 against those currencies in which their debt was denominated. Trade also plays a
role. This observation partially rationalizes why some countries opted to devalue but to
continue pegging to sterling after 1931 whilst others, those carrying greater US dollar debt,
were more inclined to follow the dollar and US monetary policy. The marginal impact of
higher foreign currency debt is comparable to the effect of the output gap after 1928. The
implication then is that the timing of the recovery from the Great Depression depended in
a significant way on exposure to foreign currency debt as well as the severity of the
downturn.

       The negative effects of depreciation in the face of foreign currency debt were
emphasized heavily in the East Asian financial crisis. Recent events in Europe in the Global
Financial Crisis have also paid some attention to this issue. Hard currency debt and financial
instability were also a feature of the Great Depression. Despite the ubiquitous and recurrent
nature of the problem, external debt issued and payable in foreign currency is not
traditionally emphasized as a significant constraint or problem in the 1930s.

       This is odd considering that League of Nations and United Nations data, which we
rely on in this study, reports that the average ratio of foreign public debt to total public
debt for a large set of countries was close to 60% in 1930. Eichengreen and Hausmann (2005)
argue that foreign currency debt is usually imposed on countries regardless of their
credibility or fiscal reputation. They call this original sin. As we discuss below, the record

                                              3
is slightly more nuanced, yet these debt contracts do not seem to correlate with many
macroeconomic observables and are mainly a feature imposed by international capital
markets on nearly all borrowers. For our purposes, this helps us credibly identify the impact
of foreign currency debt on exchange rate policy. Moreover, the particular currency of
denomination seems to be strongly related to historical political and economic connection
and to geography.

       Theoretical work by Céspedes, Chang, and Velasco (2003) suggests that devaluation
can have negative output effects when foreign currency debt makes up a significant fraction
of the total, when leverage is high, and when the responsiveness of exports to depreciation
is low. Consistent with this, our preliminary examination of data from the 1930s suggests
that the higher the share of foreign currency debt to total debt, the longer nations waited
to devalue. In some sense this rationalizes how, even if the gold standard was ultimately a
detriment to recovery, why policy makers were hesitant to devalue. It also sheds light on
the path countries followed subsequent to devaluation. Why did countries choose to
continue pegging to one currency or another if they had already abandoned the idea of the
gold standard and its constraints on monetary policy?

       Our conclusion is that foreign currency debt was an important constraint on
exchange rate policy throughout the 1930s. Once major nations, which themselves did not
suffer from original sin devalued, or debt had been eliminated via repayment or even default,
emerging markets were somewhat more liberated from the constraints of the gold exchange
standard. In the meantime, nations maintained exchange rate stability against the
currencies in which their debt was denominated exacerbating the downturn. The "public
good" or externality associated with devaluation and monetary policy by leading nations is
a key to understanding global economic downturns like the Great Depression.



2. Currency Mismatch in the Global Economy

       Countries, banks, firms, and households frequently borrow in foreign currency rather
than in domestically issued currency. This is not always their choice. Eichengreen and
Hausmann (2005) dubbed this phenomenon original sin. Advanced and low income countries
alike borrow in foreign currency. Historically, and even at present, only a handful of leading
and large countries are able to issue debt on international markets payable in their own
currency. Although many countries issue debt domestically payable in local currency,
foreign debt is still most often denominated in foreign currency. Even today, although the

                                              4
issue has abated somewhat, it has not completely disappeared (McCauley, McGuire and
Sushko, 2015 and Alfaro, Asis, Chari and Panizza, 2019).

        What drives this feature of the data? Flandreau and Sussman (2005) suggest size
and liquidity are sufficient to escape original sin. In the late 19th century, Russia, a financial
basket case, and Austria-Hungry with a highly volatile exchange rate, were able to issue in
domestic currency. France and Great Britain were the only other countries able to do so.

        Oppositely, many countries with sound fiscal and monetary policy reputations are
prone to original sin (Eichengreen and Hausmann, 2005). Australia, Canada, and the United
States all suffered from original sin (Bordo, Meissner and Redish, 2005). Apparently
financial development and sound public finance are not sufficient to eliminate gold clause
debt or foreign currency borrowing.

        We are mainly concerned in this paper with government bond issues on the leading
capital markets of London and New York. Government bonds listed on the New York stock
exchange were universally payable in US dollars at the legal parity at time of issue. If the
local currency depreciated against gold, and even if the dollar were to be devalued, investors
expected to be repaid in a fixed amount of gold--namely 1 ounce of gold for every $20.67
of principal or interest payable.

        In London, matters were slightly more complicated. We rely on detailed information
about individual bond issues provided by The Stock Exchange Official Intelligence. This
source reveals that nearly all bonds issued in London were payable in sterling when payable
in London. The Economist (26 September, 1931 p. 571) noted that Germany's Dawes loans
and the Young Plan debt as well were "issued in this country on a sterling basis". For the
British colonies and the greater Commonwealth, all issues in London were payable in
sterling. After sterling's devaluation in September 1931, it was a matter of debate whether
Australian and New Zealand debt was meant to be paid in British sterling or local pounds. 1
Ultimately it is was determined that London-issued debt was payable in British sterling.

        For several leading countries, public debt was made payable in British sterling when
issued in London. The Economist (26 September, 1931, p. 571) noted that, "...A number of
sterling overseas loans have been made on a gold basis, the principal and interest being

1
  Drummond (p. 103 1981) notes: "In all three countries (Australia, New Zealand and South Africa) ordinary
people and even financiers were inclined to believe that a pound is a pound regardless of provenance." The
surrounding discussion relates to the actual price of British sterling in terms of local sterling which diverged
from parity. We discuss this further below.

                                                       5
payable in other currencies at a fixed rate of exchange, based on the gold parity of sterling."
But more often than not, the Stock Exchange Official Intelligence reveals that bonds carried
a clause that allowed coupons and principal to be paid at "sight" exchange rates (against
London) in various continental markets (e.g., Paris, Berlin, Amsterdam, Hamburg, Geneva)
or the home market. Danish and Swedish bonds were often issued in multiple currencies
including sterling. Investors or debtors had a choice of currency in which to be paid or in
which to pay. The impact on the burden of debt would then depend on whether investors
required repayment at the "highest" exchange rate possible (very likely) and exchange rates
on the markets listed on the bonds. Another type of bond includes those cross-listed in
New York and London. Any such bond had the option to be paid in New York in US gold
dollars ($20.67/oz.) at the choice of the bond-holder.

       Foreign currency public debt data for the interwar period was compiled by the
United Nations (1948). 2 These data list the outstanding principal of public debt payable or
denominated in various currencies (largely sterling and dollars). 3 Figure 1 shows the foreign
currency debt-to-exports ratio in 1928 for a sample of the countries with usable data in
United Nations (1948). Most foreign currency debt in 1928 was payable in US dollars or
British sterling. The range of foreign debt to export ratios was 0 (USA and Turkey) to
above 3.3 for Portugal and Panama. The median was 0.91, and the mean was 1.16. The
interquartile range was 1.07 with a 25th percentile of 0.45 and a 75th percentile of 1.52.

       Effective exchange rate volatility was limited for most countries between 1926 and
1929. Between 1929 and 1935 exchange rate movements were often extreme. These
fluctuations had a significant impact on the value of foreign debt expressed in the local
currency. In 1929 our dataset shows that Denmark had 43 percent of its foreign debt
denominated in USD, 10 percent in GBP and the remainder mostly in Swedish kronor.
Figure 2 for Denmark between 1928 and 1934 shows the rise in foreign and total debt
expressed at current exchange rates relative to debt values at official exchange rate parities
in percentage terms. We also plot the percentage deviation of the kronor price of one US
dollar relative to its initial parity of 1928. Exchange rate depreciation of over 70% by
1932/33 was associated with a 55% increase in the kronor value of foreign debt and a 30%
rise in the value of total debt. Figure 3 and Figure 4 show similar results for Norway and
Chile. For Chile, which experienced massive depreciation, foreign debt measured in local


2
  We thank Barry Eichengreen and his co-authors Livia Chiu and Arnaud Mehl for making the digitized
version of these data available to us. We say more about these data below.
3
  This particular source is not specific about whether debt was payable at a fixed exchange rate or not.

                                                   6
currency was 3 times higher by 1935 than it had been in 1930. Clearly, exchange rate
fluctuations, even for relatively advanced countries like Denmark and Norway, had the
capacity to complicate public finances.

         In the British Empire, exchange rate movements were monitored and frequently
discussed. Australia, a commodity exporter, had already devalued relative to gold parity
(and sterling) from October 1930 by 8.5%. In January, 1931, the Australian pound had
depreciated by 30% against sterling relative to 1928 and to its historical one-to-one parity.
Australia's balance sheet in 1928 was composed of sterling liabilities to the tune of £5 per
person and exports totaling £25 per person (Commonwealth Bureau of Census and
Statistics, 1934 p. 885). Imperial banks held a quantity of sterling reserves to manage their
currency markets. Policy makers noted that "export prices...had declined by the end of 1931
to about 32 percent of the 1927-28 level...while at the same time remained fixed in
sterling...import prices fell very much less than export prices....(and) total cessation of
oversea long-term loans" (Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics, 1932 p. 885). It
was noted that sterling's depreciation in September 1931 led to a "corresponding reduction
in the real burden of interest payments by Australian governments." (Ibid. p. 887). However
Australia reacted almost immediately by devaluing relative to gold by the same amount as
Britain so as to keep the Australian pound pegged to sterling but with a roughly 30%
premium relative to the old gold parity. Intense austerity and a default on domestic
bondholders featured in Australia's policy response. There was ultimately no default on
foreign debt. The Premier of New South Wales' motion in early 1931 to suspend overseas
interest payments until such time that interest on debt could be re-negotiated down was
rejected by the Premiers' conference.

         In New Zealand, matters were much the same, although policy was slightly more
cautious than in Australia in terms of devaluation. From January 1931 the New Zealand
pound had been devalued by about 10% against sterling. This was the premium maintained
until 1934. Like in Australia, it was noted that the fall in export prices (expressed in home
currency) after 1927/28 led to a rise in the burden of payment of interest of 60% as of
1931/32. (New Zealand, 1932). New Zealand mulled over a number of policy responses
including exchange control and further devaluation but little action was taken prior to
January 1933 when the country opted for a 25% devaluation against sterling (Drummond,
1981).

         In a response to a contemporary government-sponsored report on public finances,
A.D. Park replied that "New Zealand is linked with Great Britain by strong ties of

                                             7
sentiment, trade and debt, and it would be inadvisable to make any permanent change in
the basis of New Zealand currency without full discussion of the matter with the British
authorities." He also suggested that "...intentional depreciation of the currency would
undoubtedly have a much greater (negative) effect on our credit." (New Zealand, 1932 p.
39).

       Drummond (1981) also highlights the implications of sterling debt for currency policy
in other major economies of the British Empire such as Canada, India, and South Africa.
In Canada, following sterling's devaluation, the question, again, was whether to un-tether
the Canadian dollar from the gold parity. T.B. Macaulay, a business leader recommended
an immediate depreciation of 20-25% against gold (and the US dollar). However, Prime
Minister Bennett, was intensely worried about the cost of repaying foreign debt in terms of
local currency Drummond (1981). In September 1931 the Prime Minister wrote, "I feel sure
that those who recommend this country to go off [the] gold standard do so without
recognition of the obligations payable by this country in New York, to say nothing of the
obligations of private industries and corporations." (Drummond, 1981 pp. 60-61). Bordo
and Redish (1990) analyzed the Canadian debt position in the early 1930s finding small
"flow" losses from valuation effects and depreciation. Their paper concluded that Canada
maintained exchange rate stability due to concerns about credibility. Bordo and Redish
(1990) did not analyze the importance of trade flows and stability in the balance of
payments which is an alternative hypothesis.

       In India, beset by falling export revenue, major political uncertainty and the ever-
present "home charges" (i.e., payments to the UK denominated in sterling such as interest
on debt and civil servant pensions), exchange rate policy was paramount. India carried a
sterling debt of roughly £350 million (roughly £1.66 per person), had sterling outlays of
£30 million per year and possessed roughly £42 million of reserves. Markets feared a
depreciation and default "...but the India Office would not hear of a fall in the rupee".
(Drummond, 1981, p. 34) As melodramatic as that might sound, India ultimately held the
line by pegging to sterling at the pre-September 1931 rate of 1 pound 6 shillings. Exchange
controls helped prevent a disastrous outflow of speculative capital and loss of reserves.

       In other countries, similar dynamics applied. With the onset of the Great Depression,
the burden of public debt increased for many reasons: exchange rate movements, falling
incomes and price levels, lower exports and plummeting commodity prices. Debt default
was not un-common in the period amongst many South American nations. In addition,
Germany and others suspended, and then postponed, reparations payments after the Hoover

                                              8
Moratorium of 1931 and the Lausanne Conference later in 1932. Allies also suspended
repayments of official wartime obligations. While the economic crisis in general took a toll
on capacity to re-pay, exchange rate movements were always a key concern for those
countries trying to manage their debt and capital markets priced debt accordingly.
Appendix B shows the year in which countries defaulted on sovereign repayments, if any,
and the year they exited the gold standard. Countries that defaulted before they left the
gold standard waited an average of 2.6 years before going off the gold standard. Countries
that went off gold first waited an extra 1.5 years to default. Other countries defaulted and
de-pegged at the same time. A majority (32 of the 60 countries listed here) never defaulted
in this period.



3. Capital Markets, Bond Yields and the Exchange Rate

       In this section we explore exchange rate movement as a determinant of sovereign
default risk. It is clear that policy makers and markets were aware of the de-stabilizing
impact on public finances of a weakened exchange rate. Gauging the market's reaction to
exchange rate changes is naturally complicated. One simple approach would be to correlate
the yield spread of a benchmark long-term, internationally issued bond with domestic
exchange rate movements. Such a naïve regression of the bond spread on the exchange rate
could be problematic. Other economic forces and shocks driving both the exchange rate and
default risk could bias an estimate of the elasticity of the bond yield to the exchange rate.

       To deal with these endogeneity issues, we use the British devaluation of sterling
which was publicly announced on Monday September 21st, 1931 as an exogenous driver of
exchange rates. The exact timing and magnitude of the overnight devaluation against gold
was largely unanticipated by markets despite the fact that the British economy and financial
system had been under strain throughout 1931. Accominotti (2009) notes that even as early
as October 1929 there was "world-wide concern". The Macmillan report, published in 1930,
also featured opinions from several influential economists that devaluation of sterling would
eventually be required. Keynes was not amongst them, proposing instead tariffs, export
bounties and other policies to increase domestic demand. Many, including Montagu
Norman, believed that sterling's international position would be damaged due to a
devaluation. Experts recognized that external liabilities like allied war debts, payable in US
gold dollars, would increase in value with devaluation (Cairncross and Eichengreen, 1983)



                                              9
        Nevertheless the decision to devalue was taken on Friday September 19 by the Bank
of England's deputy governor in response to an acceleration of gold reserve losses during
the week and a failure to secure more international credit (Einzig, 1932). Formal approval
was given by parliament on 21 September. Bank of England governor Montagu Norman, en
route to England from Canada on a steamship, was sent the coded radio message over the
weekend "Old Lady Goes off on Monday". He allegedly mis-understood this message to be
in reference to his mother's vacation and upon arrival in the UK on 23 September was in
shock to hear the news (Boyle, 1967).

        In the days and weeks immediately following the devaluation, many countries'
exchange rates were determined largely by this British policy choice and pre-determined
factors. Consequently, a near ideal data set for cleanly estimating the elasticity of bond
yields with respect to a surprise depreciation is an event study of bond yields around the
time of the British devaluation. 4

        The bond market's reaction to the exchange rate is a function of at least three factors.
The first is a currency risk/default risk channel. For debt issued and payable in a particular
international currency such as sterling, an appreciation against sterling would tend to lower
default risk compared to a currency that depreciated. The second is a macroeconomic
channel, one which contemporary observers were well aware of in 1931. Appreciation leads
to lower exports, deflation, a rise in the burden of internal debt, the erosion of export
profitability etc. These issues were highlighted in discussions of the impact of the new
British exchange rate policy in The Economist (September 26, 1931 p. 571). Appreciation
might be expected to raise bond yields in this case. Finally, a "market effect" or demand
effect is in play. Bondholders of sterling debt, upon announcement, might be inclined to sell
these assets in favor of bonds payable in gold or in currencies that were expected to stay
high relative to sterling whether listed in New York, London or the continent. 5 Of course,
expectations about exchange rates due to local changes in policy come into play as we move
away from 21 September, 1931.

        We summarize these three factors and their likely impact on bond prices in a 2 x 2
matrix in Table 1. Columns in the matrix relate to exchange rate policy: peg to sterling or


4
  Bordo, Meissner and Weidenmier (2009) followed a similar approach in the 1870s when France demonetized
silver. They found that countries that stayed on a silver standard had higher bond yields on gold clause debt
relative to gold standard countries.
5
  "The prices of the gold loans were, of course, marked up this week in terms of sterling, except in those cases
where default had already been committed or was expected." The Economist (e.g., September 26, 1931 p. 571)

                                                      10
continue pegging to gold (i.e. appreciate against sterling). Other courses of action existed
such as depreciation against the pound or managed floating with a devaluation (against
gold) somewhere between gold parity and a full peg to sterling. Countries and dependencies
in the British Empire generally pegged to sterling. South Africa however engineered a 10%
and then a 17% appreciation against its par values with sterling while Canada appreciated
by 10% against sterling in 1931/32. France, the US and Belgium amongst others continued
pegging to gold in the weeks after 21 September, 1931. The rows in the matrix correspond
to the currency denomination of debt: payable in sterling vs. payable in currency (e.g., US
dollars) at the historical gold parity. This two-way division is much closer to capturing the
realm of possibilities. Default for liquidity or solvency reasons is a missing feature of this
simple model.

        Based on the possibilities from Table 1 we run event-study regressions of the
following form on weekly bond yield data



                     ln(Yieldbit ) =  + 1 (gold clause × gold standard × post  ) +
                               2 (gold clause × sterling peg  × post  ) +
3 (gold standard × post  ) + 4 (sterling peg  × post  ) + 5 (gold clause × post  ) +  +  + 



where  denotes a bond,  indexes a country,  indexes a week, gold clause is an indicator
equal to one if a bond is payable in a currency still maintaining a gold peg, gold standard
is an indicator equal to one if a country has not devalued the exchange rate from the gold
parity, sterling peg is an indicator equal to one if a country maintains a peg to sterling,
post  is an indicator equal to one in the weeks following the British devaluation of sterling
which occurred on 21 September, 1931,  is a set of bond fixed effects,  is a set of week
fixed effects and  is a possibly heteroscedastic, mean zero, finite variance error term.

        We interpret 1 as the relative impact on bond yields for gold standard countries
with gold clause debt in the wake of the British devaluation. This is an effect measured
relative to countries that either devalued against sterling or which did not devalue against
gold as much as sterling (i.e., the managed floaters). We expect this coefficient to be
negative if the foreign exchange effect is strong enough. In other words, this is consistent
with a view that markets priced debt higher when the exchange rate held steady against
gold.


                                             11
        Similarly, 2 measures the impact on bond yields of gold clause debt when a country
chose to peg to sterling after 21 September, 1931 relative to other floating countries. A
positive coefficient is consistent with the idea that markets predicted a higher chance of
default due to the increased burden of debt repayment due to a depreciation of roughly 20%
against gold. In addition, the interactions between gold adherence and the post-9/21 period
and the sterling bloc-post indicator control for the macroeconomic channel. If 4 is negative
this implies that strong devaluation against gold would lower default risk, separate from
the FX channel.

        The interaction between the gold clause indicator and the post-event dummy
controls for the market effect that might have favored gold debt over sterling debt, even for
floating countries, in a context of the British devaluation. Time dummies control for market
wide portfolio re-allocations and the bond fixed effects allow for country and currency
repayment differences in yield levels across bond types throughout.

3.1 Weekly Data

        We compile weekly data on bond prices from the set of colonial and sovereign bond
issues listed in every Saturday issue of The Economist between 1 August, 1931 and October
17, 1931. Bond prices refer to closing prices on the Wednesday before publication (i.e.,
Wednesday 29 July for the August 1 issue). The London sample comprises 46 long-term
bonds for 26 countries and 9 British dependencies. We also add a small sample of 15 more
bonds for 7 countries from the New York market available from the New York Times. We
used the highest closing price in the New York Times for each bond and the listed coupon
rate.

        The Economist also lists exchange rates and coupon interest rates. We calculate
current yields (coupon yield divided by bond price) for each bond listed. In addition we
compile the foreign currency clauses for each London bond from the Stock Exchange Official
Intelligence. These are coded following the discussion above on currency denomination of
debt. All New York debt was payable in gold dollars at the official parity of $20.67/oz. of
gold.

        The pre-event window in the bond market is the eight weeks prior to the sterling
devaluation of 21 September, 1931. The post-event window is the six weeks after this
devaluation.




                                             12
       We use countries that did not peg to gold or sterling as a comparison group. As
mentioned above, there were four categories of countries: those which pegged to sterling,
those which pegged to gold, those which devalued relative to gold but not by as much as
sterling and those which underwent further devaluation and depreciation or appreciation
beyond Sterling's decline in value. The latter category comprises few countries in our sample
(Brazil, Mexico, and Argentina). A peg to sterling requires the nominal exchange rate with
the pound not to have appreciated against sterling more than 3.5% and not to have
depreciated by more than 1%. A gold peg requires that the nominal exchange rate against
sterling to have appreciated by between 17% and 26% in each of the post period weeks.
Floaters and falling regimes are those falling outside of these ranges (3.5% to 17%
appreciation or a depreciation beyond 1%).

       One key issue is whether exchange rate movements are uncorrelated with the ongoing
economic shock. Empire countries, and eventually several Scandinavian countries, followed
Britain and maintained long-standing pegs with the notable exception of South Africa.
Many of these countries devalued against gold and then re-pegged to sterling at slightly
depreciated nominal exchange rates.

       Other countries, some of which imposed exchange controls, largely stuck to gold or
limited the amount of the depreciation. Exchange control countries could and did ration
exchange so as to maintain an over-valued exchange rate, at least in the short-run. Given
that countries mostly fell in line along colonial obligations, we assume that the exchange
rate movements in the short-run were largely unaffected by other economic shocks affecting
market perceptions of public finances. Still, longer-run expectations about the economy and
exchange rate policy may be at play.

3.2 Event Study Results: Weekly Data

       Table 2 shows results for regressions based on our event study regression equation.
We explore results for two samples: London bonds only and New York and London bonds.
In all specifications, gold country yields dropped by an average of 11 log points relative to
the comparison group of floating countries that also had gold debt. Maintaining a strong
exchange rate against sterling gave the market reassurance that debt was more likely to be
repaid on time and in full.

       On the other hand, countries following Great Britain off gold and depreciating their
exchange rates by about 20% (relative to gold parity) paid a penalty of 15 log points in
New York relative to floating countries. In London, these bonds were apparently treated

                                             13
differently than in New York. A smaller premium, or rise, in yields is apparent, of about 5
log points when focusing only on the London market. This coefficient is not significant when
we include the Gold Clause-post indicator likely because there are very few gold bonds in
London for non-gold countries in our sample.

        The bottom line from Table 2 is that policy makers were right to be worried about
exchange rate movements against gold when debt was payable in gold currency. 6
Depreciation and valuation effects could increase the net outflow of capital weakening the
balance of payments. Such pressure would undoubtedly be met with expectations of greater
difficulty in maintaining either debt repayment or exchange rate commitments. We now
turn to an exploration of how policy makers re-acted in the face of these markets.



3.2.1 Event Study Results: Daily Data

        We also explore an event study design using daily data. Data cover 28 days and
include each day for which the Financial Times reported data between September 7, 1931
and October 8, 1931. The pre-event window includes the 12 days of data up to Saturday
9/19/1931. The post-event window encompasses 15 days beginning with Tuesday
9/22/1931. We omit Monday 9/21/1931. The sample encompasses 45 countries and 160
bonds from the New York and London markets. We omit bonds that are in default according
to the Stock Exchange Official Intelligence.

        Our specification remains largely the same as that for the results in Table 2. There
are no countries that devalue against gold more than sterling did in this sample. The
baseline comparison group includes countries that devalued against gold by less than sterling
but depreciated against gold by more than 2 percent. We classify sterling peggers as those
that devalued after 9/21 and were within +/- 4 log points of the pre-event log sterling
exchange rate in the post-event window. The sample includes very few sterling pegs with
gold debt (3 Australian bonds and 2 British bonds all listed in New York).

        Table 3 shows results for our daily regressions. Countries that stayed on the gold
standard and with gold-debt, experienced an extra 13 log point decline in bond yields
(column 3) relative to the comparison group. The market channel is visible in column 3 too


6
  We used the log of the bond price, the percentage spread with the British consol as a reference yield, and
the level of the spread as alternative dependent variables. All results are qualitatively consistent with those
reported here.

                                                      14
and suggests gold debt, even when payable by a country with a floating currency was less
risky or in higher demand relative to sterling-denominated debt. Finally, a macro effect is
visible. Countries devaluing and pegging to sterling witnessed an extra reduction in yields
of about 8 log points.

        We also estimate a fully flexible model for the event study allowing for separate
coefficients on the gold clause debt-gold standard interaction term for each period. The
treatment group in this model is the group of countries which were always on gold after
sterling's devaluation in the post-event window. The comparison group in this sample is
strictly the group of countries that maintained a sterling peg throughout the post-event
window and had debt payable in gold. We eliminate 9/21/1931 from the sample and use
9/19/1931, the first lagged date from the event as the reference point. 7

        After sterling's devaluation, gold countries see an immediate drop in their bond yields
by about 10 log points. Over the following two weeks, yields declined by another 10 log
points relative to sterling countries. Figure 5 shows coefficients and 95% confidence intervals
for each period. The results are similar to those in Table 2 and 3. In addition, there is no
evidence of a pre-trend for countries that would eventually maintain the gold standard
during the event window. Our bottom line is that markets perceived gold-denominated debt
to be a larger burden for countries that devalued against gold.



4. Exchange Rate Policy and Foreign Currency Debt

        According to recent quantitative assessments of exchange rate policy in the 1930s, a
large number of factors influenced policy makers' decisions. Pioneering research by Simmons
(1994) highlighted political economy and balance of payments issues. In a nearly exhaustive
analysis, Nikolaus Wolf (2008) studied the hazard rate of quitting the gold standard. He
considered the net international investment position, monetary policy credibility, trade
network and alliance effects, and the political constraints that affected how balance of
payments adjustment might be effected. In addition, the severity of the depression measured
by the extent of deflation and presence of financial crises also were considered. Eichengreen
and Irwin (2010) also showed that trade policy and exchange rate policy acted as
substitutes, so that tariffs acted to insulate a gold standard country from global shocks.
While previous studies like Wandschneider (2008), Wolf and Yousef (2007), and Wolf (2008)

7
 Results for Figure 5 and in Table 3 cluster standard errors at the country level. Results are robust to two
way clustering on the country and bond level.

                                                     15
have emphasized a multitude of factors, one issue that has not been examined in depth is
the currency denomination of debt.

       We follow an in depth exploration of what happens when the current account balance
is the main focus of policy makers. The simple economics of the current account shows that
exchange rate policy is paramount. Although net exports increase with (real) depreciation
to the degree the Marshall-Lerner condition is satisfied, net interest payments abroad are
increasing one-for one with the percentage depreciation in the exchange rate in the presence
of foreign currency debt. The trade-off for achieving a target for the balance of payments
depends on trade networks as well as the denomination of foreign currency debt.

4.1 The Balance of Payments and Exchange Rates: Theoretical Model

       Bénassy-Quéré (1996) presents a simple and intuitive model of the optimal exchange
rate peg with the tradeoffs highlighted above. We follow her approach and interpret it in
the context of the Great Depression. The model asks: what should a small-open economy
do with its exchange rate when both the trade balance and debt service are important? We
consider the three country version of the model. There are two large countries as potential
anchors (e.g., the US and Great Britain). A small-open economy makes a choice about its
exchange rate. Debt can be denominated in either US dollars/gold or in sterling. Trade with
the two large countries (or these currency blocs) accounts for all trade flows. For our
purposes, we will consider a short-run where the real and nominal exchange rate coincide.
We also assume away strategic responses by studying the policy of a small-open economy.
The model is static.

       First assume that the small country aims to stabilize the current account, , around
an objective,   by choosing the appropriate exchange rates against the US and Great
Britain. The current account equals the sum of net exports and debt service. The objective
function is then



                                   min  = [ () -   ]2                           (1)
                                     

       The current account is simplified to the following expression which is the sum of the
trade balance and debt service payments:



                                  () =  -  + 0                                (2)


                                            16
Where  is the logarithm of the real effective exchange for trade flows,  is the logarithm
of the real effective exchange rate for foreign debt payments,  is the ratio of exports to
GDP,  is the sum of the (absolute values) of the export and import elasticities minus 1,
and  is the ratio of foreign debt service to GDP.

       Define the real effective exchange rates for trade flows () and debt () as
                                         = $ $ + £ £

                                      = $ $ + £ £


Where  ( = $, £) is defined as the log of the (real) exchange rate against the dollar or
pound (local currency per unit of foreign currency),  is the share of trade by
currency/country and  is the share of debt payments in currency  . Using the fact that
$ + £ = 1, $ + £ = 1, and £$ (the sterling price of a US dollar) equals $ - £ it is easy
to show that the optimal depreciation against the US dollar when the pound depreciates by
1% against the US dollar is given by:



                                    $    £ - £                                 (3)
                                       =       .
                                    £$    - 



       Expression (3) implies that when there is no foreign debt ( = 0) or when the
                                                                  $
currency share of debt is matched to the trade flows (£ = £ ),        = £ . For instance, If
                                                                 £$

all trade is with Great Britain, and all debt is denominated in pounds, then the optimal
response to a 1% depreciation of the pound versus the dollar is to maintain a peg with
sterling. The local currency would of course then depreciate against the dollar by the same
amount as sterling.

       Now continue to assume all debt is denominated in pounds, but trade with Great
Britain is less than 100%. In this case, some appreciation against the pound is allowed in
inverse relation to the share of trade with Britain. A country with a very low British trade
share, (i.e., a very high US trade share), would peg closer to the dollar, appreciating
significantly more against the pound.

       The former cases might be empirically relevant for Empire countries like Australia
and New Zealand. Roughly 42.5% of Australia's trade was with Great Britain, the rest being

                                             17
mainly with other gold standard countries. Meanwhile 90% of public foreign debt according
to our data was denominated in GBP. The model predicts that countries like Australia and
New Zealand would depreciate much more against the dollar than the pound. Still, for
reasonable values of the economic variables of interest, the model tends to predict such
countries would appreciate against sterling. This however is counterfactual to historical
events. Both Australia and New Zealand pegged closely to sterling after September 1931.
Clearly, as indicated in the Report of the Economic Committee in New Zealand (New
Zealand, 1932) internal debt and employment mattered. Appreciation against sterling would
have required further deflation. One way to combat unemployment and high debt burdens,
while helping export interests would of course have been greater inflation.

       The model should best be seen to provide predictions in comparative terms. Australia
and New Zealand certainly pegged closer to sterling than other nations. Countries like those
in Scandinavia, Canada, and Japan had trade and debt shares that were more closely
matched. Canada and Japan having a significant amount of US dollar and gold clause debt
(Bordo and Redish, 1990).       Such countries are predicted to "split the difference"
depreciating by a smaller amount against the dollar (than Australia and New Zealand) and
thereby appreciating somewhat more against the pound. A country with trade flows
concentrated in one country, and debt with another, trades off the exchange rate impact on
trade with its impact on debt repayments. Many countries in Latin America could be seen
in this light.

       Generally speaking, higher shares of GBP-denominated debt or higher shares of
British trade are associated with closer pegging to the pound. Figure 6 shows some examples
of how the model works. In Figure 3 we assume  = 0.25, the sum of trade elasticities  =
1.4, and the share of foreign debt in GDP  = 0.1. We allow both the share of trade with
Great Britain and debt denominated in GBP to vary between 0 and 1. Each plotted line
specifies trade or debt shares with Great Britain. For instance, the top line holds the trade
share with Great Britain constant at 100% and allows the debt share in GBP to vary along
the x-axis between 0 and 100%. The y-axis plots the changes against the pound for a 1%
depreciation of the pound against the dollar. Negative values are appreciations and positive
values are depreciations against the pound. The x-axis plots either the trade share with the
UK or the share of debt denominated in GBP or both as indicated in the legend.

       For example, assume a 100% trade share with the UK, depreciation against the
pound is smaller as the debt share in GBP increases. Now suppose all debt is denominated
in dollars and all trade is with Great Britain as the top line in Figure 3 illustrates. Then

                                             18
the model predicts a strong depreciation against the dollar by 1.4% and a smaller
depreciation against the pound of 0.4%. Higher exports to Britain offset the rise in dollar
debt re-payment. This stabilizes the balance of payments by stabilizing the effective
exchange rate. As the share of debt denominated with Great Britain increases, the country
pegs closer to sterling. Two other versions of the model vary the trade share with the UK
but hold the GBP debt share at 50% or 100%. Both of these show that movement against
the pound declines as the trade share with Great Britain rises. In general, given a fixed level
of trade with Great Britain, a higher debt share denominated in GBP implies less movement
against the pound and vice versa. 8

        We provide three tests of this model. The first is a quasi-structural estimation of
expression (3). We assume the sum of the trade elasticities minus 1 is 1.4 which is a
benchmark chosen by Bénassy-Quéré (1996 p. 59). Otherwise we use observable data to
construct an empirical version of expression (3). We focus only on 1932 when the pound
depreciated by roughly 20-25% following the policy action in September 1931. This allows
us to have a clean, one time-depreciation of the pound versus the dollar as it comes before
any policy change in terms of the gold standard in the US. The model predicts a larger
movement against the dollar for a country's exchange rate as the right-hand side increases,
and it also predicts a smaller change against sterling as the right hand side ratio increases.

        The second and third tests are reduced form tests. First we regress the absolute
change in the nominal exchange rate against the ratio of trade with Great Britain to GDP,
the ratio of GBP debt outstanding to exports and the interaction of these two variables to
control for the non-linearities of the model. We also include controls for the ratio of trade
to GDP, foreign debt service as a share of GDP, and the change in (log of) reserves in the
vector  . All variables are lagged by one year to avoid simultaneity bias. Since the dependent
variable is bounded below by zero, we run Poisson PPML regressions in the cross section
for 1932 of the following form:


                  ,      ()      ,   ()
    ln(,)  = exp  
                   
                     + 1 
                          
                             + 2 
                                  
                                   ×
                                     
                                         +   +                                                                     (4)




8
  Also note that when    , that is, when trade is nearly balanced against debt re-payment the optimal
response is indeterminate. In this case, exchange rate variations have offsetting effects on the trade flows and
debt repayments.

                                                      19
       Where , represents trade for country c with Great Britain,  is GDP for country c in
year t, and  is an error term.

       The third test uses a broader panel sample and studies the absolute value of the
movement for a country c in the (nominal) exchange rate against both the pound and the
US dollar. The model is similar to the previous model, except now we are able to include in
come specifications country fixed effects as well as year fixed effects which control for
common shocks. Instead of only looking at GBP debt and trade with Great Britain we allow
trade to be with country  ( = GB, USA). This model is expressed as


                                     ()                      ()
     ln()  = exp     + 1   + 2    ×   +   +  +   + .
                                
                                                                                                    (5)
                                                                   




We also control in  for the change in the log of gold and foreign exchange reserves, the
change in the log ratio of total exports to imports (i.e., the trade balance), the ratio of trade
to GDP, the ratio of debt service to GDP, and the percentage deviation of GDP per capita
in year t from GDP per capita in 1928. Debt default was common during the Depression
which would have alleviated pressure on the balance of payments. We include an interaction
between the debt variable and a default indicator as well as the un-interacted default
indicator to control for this. Finally, country fixed effects are in the vector  and  is
an error term.



4.2 Data

       We rely on debt data compiled by the United Nations (1948) which listed the amount
of public foreign debt denominated in each currency converted to local currency at "par"
exchange rates. These were converted to US dollars at constant exchange rates by Chiu,
Eichengreen, and Mehl (2014). We rely on the data set assembled by Chiu et. al. (2014)
which involve some additions to the United Nations data. These data, and how they were
assembled and processed, are thoroughly discussed by Chiu et. al (2014).

       A number of caveats must be issued. Cross-country comparability in data reporting
and recording is always a worry. The United Nations statisticians attempted to make data
as comparable as possible. Data issued in a foreign currency is allocated to the foreign debt
column because it is presumably purchased by foreigners. If domestic residents purchased


                                               20
foreign currency debt, the UN or local authorities may not have recorded this debt as foreign
debt. The opposite holds for domestic currency debt. The amounts involved would appear
to be small. In Norway in 1940, domestic holding of foreign currency debt and foreign
holding of domestic currency debt involved roughly 3% of total outstanding debt (United
Nations, 1948 p. 107).

        Many countries also included complicated exchange rate clauses allowing discretion
in the currency of re-payment. Detailed descriptions on several bonds from the Stock
Exchange Official Intelligence indicate that sometimes exchange rates were fixed at
statutory rates but other times they were not. This latter issue could lead to mis-
measurement of the shares of foreign currency debt. Most of these issues would have arisen
after the devaluations and currency instability of 1931. In our first tests, we use data from
1931 -- before exchange rate changes complicated the recorded data and re-payment options.

        United Nations (1948) collected data for up to 35 countries and colonies. The sample
of countries for which we have data on both GBP and USD debt grows from 23 in 1925 to
31 in the 1930s. We dis-regard debt denominated in currencies besides the pound and dollar.
The total amount of debt outstanding issued in other currencies averaged 7.9 percent of
total foreign currency debt as listed in the United Nations (1948) between 1925 and 1938.
The total sample of countries used in our regressions is between 11 and 15 depending on
specification because of missing control variables. 9

        United Nations (1948) also included some information on debt service (interest and
redemptions) on foreign debt for selected countries.          Exchange rates are also listed in the
United Nations source, although we also cross-checked these data and filled in missing
values with those provided by David S. Jacks (private communication) and those used in
Bordo, Eichengreen, Klingebiel and Martinez-Peria (2001). Data on bilateral trade shares
come from Jacks, Novy and Meissner (2008).

        Default dates are from Reinhart and Rogoff (2011). We account for default on war
reparations as well as default or non-payment of inter-allied debt. Default on these debts
began in 1931 with the Hoover Moratorium. Since these standstills had repercussions for
the balances of payments we record them as defaults. Reserve data are from Bordo et. al.
(2001) and where missing from the League of Nations (various years) as well as Bank for
International Settlements (1932).

9
 The countries included are: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Japan, New
Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Switzerland, Uruguay.

                                                  21
4.3 Results

        Figure 7 and Figure 8 show two tests of the structural model. Here we regress the
log change of the exchange rate against the US dollar and the absolute value of the log
change of the exchange rate against sterling on the ratio featured on the right hand side of
(3). The sample is for 1932, the year following sterling's devaluation. Figure 7 shows the
actual values and the regression line for the nominal depreciation against the US dollar in
1932 for 13 countries/colonies. The model predicts a positive relationship with a coefficient
of one. The coefficient of 0.49 in this regression is lower than predicted. The
heteroscedasticity robust standard error is 1.82 (p-value = 0.096). The R-squared is 0.23.
Attenuation bias is a concern given the quality of the data, especially the information on
debt service. We recognize the issues of the small sample here.

        Figure 8 shows the absolute value of the actual and predicted changes against sterling
between 1931 and 1932. The predicted negative relationship is evident. 10 The coefficient in
the regression of the absolute change in sterling against the dollar is -0.38 with a
heteroscedasticity robust standard error of 0.13 (p-value = 0.012). The R-squared of the
regression is a surprisingly high 0.57.

        Table 4 shows five different reduced form cross-section models for 1932 following the
regression equation (4) above. The dependent variable is the absolute change in the log of
the exchange rate (local currency per pound sterling) between 1931 and 1932. Control
variables are lagged by one year back to 1931. The sample in columns 1-3 includes 11
countries for which all control variables, including reserves, are available. 11 Columns 4 and
5 add three more countries (Japan, New Zealand, Uruguay) which had missing debt service
data as a check on the robustness of the results.

        The general prediction is that a country would peg closer to the pound when trade
or debt linkages were higher ceteris paribus. Results in all columns are consistent with this
idea. Both trade with Great Britain and more sterling debt seem to have increased the


10
   Here the model predicts a negative relationship since a peg to the dollar would necessarily imply an
appreciation against the pound equal in percentage points to sterling's depreciation against the dollar. This
depreciation was 25 log points in 1932. A predicted peg to sterling implies a 25 log point depreciation against
the dollar.
11
   The 11 countries are: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Norway,
Portugal, Switzerland.

                                                      22
desirability of a sterling peg. While the un-interacted sterling debt variable has a positive
coefficient in columns 2 and 3, the interaction term suggests that for 9 out of 11 of the
countries the marginal effect is negative based on their observed ratios of trade to GDP
with Great Britain. All of these results are qualitatively robust to running a linear regression
instead of the Poisson model.

        Results for the panel data set are presented in Table 5. 12 This table uses the (absolute
values of) the annual changes against both the US dollar and sterling as the dependent
variable. Countries can now appear twice in the sample in a given year. Both the bilateral
trade ratio and the bilateral debt-to-exports ratio are negatively associated with movements
in the bilateral exchange rate. Although the interaction term is positive in this specification,
the total effect is negative, as predicted by the model, for just over 70% of the sample (70%
of observations have a ratio below the threshold of 0.083).

        Columns 4, 5, and 6 include country fixed effects. Column 4 repeats the specification
of column 3 without country fixed effects. Column 5 includes a control for the percentage
change in GDP per capita between the current year and 1928, the peak of the global business
cycle. Column 6 drops the largest countries which also are coded as defaulting (France, UK,
Germany and the US).

        Trade and debt are negatively related to the absolute levels of the changes in the
exchange rate. The coefficient on the interaction term between default and currency
denomination of debt is positive and significant in columns 4, 5, and 6. It is small and not
significant in the first three columns. The positive coefficient implies that defaulting, or
implementing a standstill, allowed for larger changes in the exchange rate relative to
countries which actively re-payed their foreign currency obligations. The change in reserves
is negative and statistically significant suggesting that a large loss in reserves would
complicate maintaining a continued peg. The change in the trade balance is not statistically
significant. In column 5 we find that the GDP gap from 1928 is negatively associated with
exchange rate movement implying that a larger contraction is associated with a larger
exchange rate movement. The marginal effect of the GDP gap is about twice as big as the




12
  These regressions include 13 countries: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
France, Japan, Norway, Portugal, Switzerland, and the UK.


                                                    23
impact of foreign currency debt.13 While foreign currency debt and trade relations mattered,
so did the size of the decline in aggregate demand.

        Figure 9 shows the residual scatter plot of the (absolute value of the) change in the
exchange rate relative to the bilateral debt ratio from a linear regression. The negative
relationship between foreign currency debt and exchange rate movement is evident in this
large sample.



5. Conclusion

        With the outbreak of the Great Depression, nearly every country in the world was
forced to decide whether to maintain an orthodox monetary regime or to attempt restoring
domestic demand by devaluing. Markets also priced default risk into foreign currency or
gold denominated debt when countries devalued. Policy makers in the 1930s were well
aware of the fact that depreciation could have a very negative impact on the ability to
service external debt. Officials in Australia noted the budgetary benefits of lower interest
payments when sterling was devalued in September 1931 (Commonwealth Bureau of Census
and Statistics, 1939). They also argued in August 1931, prior to sterling's devaluation, that
a hypothetical devaluation of the Australian pound against sterling would aggravate the
government deficit.

        In September 1931, the UK's Treasury gifted Commonwealth nations like Australia
with a devaluation of sterling. This offered the best of both worlds. Such countries could
maintain their peg allowing for stability of the balance of payments. At the same time, the
devaluation relative to gold worked to improve internal balance. Other countries weren't so
fortunate and stayed locked into gold much longer. Why?

        Two important channels that connected nations' monetary choices were trade and
debt. Historical ties shaped trade and investment connections. The choice to devalue in the
1930s also depended on monetary policy in the key creditor nation.                          The currency
composition and amount of debt mattered for the choice to devalue, but was dependent on
the actions of other nations. Leaving the gold standard was significantly more palatable
after Sterling's devaluation of 1931 and even more so after the US devaluation of 1933.

13
  The marginal effect is calculated after standardizing the data. A one standard deviation rise in foreign
currency debt is associated with a fall in the dependent variable equal to 2.28 standard deviations at the
mean of the bilateral trade variable. A one standard deviation decline in GDP per capita relative to 1928 is
associated with a rise of about 5.5 standard deviations of the dependent variable.

                                                     24
Whether a country could follow sterling off gold or had to wait for the dollar to break its
gold peg was in significant part related to historical and geographic fundamentals.

       Clearly the resolve to combat deflation and unemployment mattered, but these were
not the only considerations for policy makers in the early 1930s. We have shown evidence
consistent with the idea that the currency denomination of debt mattered for policy in the
1930s. Ceteris paribus, this factor was about half as strong on average as the output gap in
the early 1930s. In explaining why the Great Depression lasted so long compared to other
economic downturns, surely economic interdependence through the global economy must be
considered. This does not imply, of course that a policy of autarky would have been better.
Instead it signals the crucial significance of international cooperation and coordination in a
globalized economy.



References

Alfaro, Laura, Asis, Gonzalo, Chari, Anusha, and Panizza, Ugo. (2019). "Corporate debt,
firm size and financial fragility in emerging markets" Journal of International Economics,
118, pp. 1-19.

Bénassy-Quéré, Agnès. (1996). "Potentialities and Opportunities of the Euro as an
International Currency" CEPII Working paper no. 1996-09 July.

Bank for International Settlements. (1932). "The Gold Exchange Standard" Bank for
International Settlements. Monetary and Economic Department. C.B. 60.

Bordo, Michael D., Eichengreen, Barry, Klingebiel, Daniela, and MartinezPeria, Maria
Soledad. (2001). "Is the crisis problem growing more severe?" Economic policy, 16(32),
pp.52-82.

Bordo, Michael D. and Redish, Angela. (1990). "Credible Commitment and Exchange
Rate Stability: Canada's Interwar Experience" The Canadian Journal of Economics, 23
(2) pp. 357-380.

Bordo, Michael D., Meissner, Christopher M., and Redish, Angela. (2005). "How
`Original Sin' Was Overcome: The Evolution of External Debt Denominated in Domestic
Currencies in the United States and the British Dominions 1800-2000" in Other People's
Money: Debt Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies.



                                             25
Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann eds. pp. 122-153. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Bordo, Michael D., Meissner, Christopher M., and Weidenmier, Marc. (2009). "Identifying
the Effects of an Exchange Rate Depreciation on Country Risk: Evidence from a Natural
Experiment" Journal of International Money and Finance 28(6) pp. 1022-1044.

Boyle, Andrew. (1967) Montagu Norman: A Biography. London: Cassell.

Cairncross, Alec and Eichengreen, Barry (1983) "Sterling in Decline: The Devaluations of
1931, 1949, and 1967". New York: Routledge.

Céspedes, Luis F., Chang, Roberto, and Velasco, Andres. (2003). "IS-LM-BP in the
pampas." IMF Staff Papers, 50(1), pp.143-156.

Chiu, Livia., Eichengreen, Barry, and Mehl, Arnaud. (2014). "When did the dollar
overtake sterling as the leading international currency? Evidence from the bond markets."
Journal of Development Economics, 111, pp.225-245.

Drummond, Ian M. (1981). The floating pound and the sterling area, 1931-1939. New
York: Cambridge University Press.

Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics. (various years). Official Yearbook of the
Commonwealth of Australia Canberra: L.F. Johnston Commonwealth Government
Printer.

Eichengreen, Barry and Hausmann, Ricardo. (2005). Other People's Money: Debt
Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Eichengreen, Barry and Irwin, Douglas A. (2010). "The slide to protectionism in the
Great Depression: Who succumbed and why?" The Journal of Economic History, 70(4),
pp.871-897.

Einzig, Paul. (1932). The Tragedy of the Pound. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner &
Co.

Flandreau, Marc, and Sussman, Nathan (2005). "Old Sins: Exchange Clauses and
European Foreign Lending" in Other People's Money: Debt Denomination and Financial
Instability in Emerging Market Economies. Eichengreen, Barry and Hausmann, Ricardo,
(eds.) pp. 154-189. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


                                            26
Jacks, David S., Meissner, Christopher M. and Novy, Dennis. (2011). "Trade booms, trade
busts, and trade costs". Journal of International Economics, 83(2), pp.185-201.

League of Nations (various years) Statistical year book of the League of Nations. Geneva,
Switzerland: League of Nations, Economic and Financial Section.

McCauley, Robert N., McGuire, Patrick, and Sushko, Vladyslav. (2015). "Global dollar
credit: links to US monetary policy and leverage." Economic Policy, 30(82), pp. 187­229.

New Zealand. (1932). Report of the Economic Committee. Wellington, NZ: W.A.G.
Skinner, Govt. Printer.

Reinhart, Carmen M. and Rogoff, Kenneth S. (2011). "From Financial Crash to Debt
Crisis," American Economic Review, 101(5) pp. 1676-1706.

Simmons, Beth. (1994). Who adjusts? Domestic sources of foreign economic policy during
the interwar years. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Stock Exchange Official Intelligence. (1931). London: Spottiswoode, Ballantyne.

United Nations (1948). Public Debt, 1914-1946, Department of Economic Affairs,
(Lake Success, New York, 1948: United Nations).

The Economist (various issues).

The New York Times (various issues).

Wandschneider, Kirsten. (2008). "The stability of the interwar gold exchange standard:
Did politics matter?" The Journal of Economic History, 68(1), pp.151-181.

Wolf, Nikolaus. (2008). "Scylla and Charybdis: explaining Europe's exit from gold,
January 1928­December 1936". Explorations in Economic History, 45(4), pp.383-401.

Wolf, Holger C. and Yousef, Tarik. (2007). "Breaking the fetters: Why did countries exit
the interwar Gold Standard?" The New Comparative History: Essays in Honor of Jeffrey
G. Williamson, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp.241-65.




                                            27
Data Appendix A.1

Bonds for Event Study, weekly sample

This table lists the bonds included in the event study of weekly bond yields. We have all listed
Dominion, Colonial and Foreign bond yields from the weekly issues of The Economist published
between August and October, 1931. The Economist was published on Saturdays and listed bond
prices for the previous Wednesday. No information on high-low prices nor for bid-ask spreads is
given.

For yields we used the current yield (coupon/price) for all bonds. However, we used the "present
yield" given by The Economist for the two French bonds (4%s and 5%s) and for Canada's 4%s.
Chile, Turkey, Mexico, and Brazil were in default according to The Economist. We do not use data
on bond prices from these countries. To calculate bond spreads, we used the current yield on the
British consol.

To determine the currency of denomination or repayment we used the Stock Exchange Official
Intelligence for 1931. This source listed the contractual terms for a large number of bond issues for
these governments. We were able to locate all of the bonds listed in The Economist in this source.
When a bond was contractually payable at an exchange rate favorable to the debtor in a currency
including, but not limited to, the pound we labelled this as payable in GBP. Otherwise bonds were
payable in other currencies linked to gold.

 London Sample
 (The Economist)
 Country   Bond Description          Currency             Country   Bond Description      Currency

 AUS       AUS 5% 1945-75            GBP                  DNK       Danish 3%             GOLD
 CAN       Canada 4% 1940-60         GBP                  DZG       Danizg 6.5%           GBP
 LKA       Ceylon 6% 1936-51         GBP                  EGY       Egypt Unified 4%      GBP
 GHA       Gold Coast 4.5% 1956      GBP                  EST       Estonia 7% 1927       GBP
 KEN       Kenya 5% 1948-58          GBP                  FIN       Finland 6% 1923       GOLD
 NGA       Nigeria 5% 1950-60        GBP                  FRA       France 4% (British)   GOLD
 AUS       NSW 5% 1935-1955          GBP                  FRA       France 5%             GOLD
 NZL       NZ 5% 1946                GBP                  DEU       Germany 7%            GBP
           Queensland 5% 1940-                                      Germany 5.5% Stg.
 AUS       1960                      GBP                  DEU       Bonds 1930            GBP
           South Africa 5% 1945-                                    Greece 6%
 ZAF       1975                      GBP                  GRC       Stabilization Loan    GBP
           Straits Settlement 4.5%
 SGP       1935-1945                 GBP                  GRC       Greece 7% Refugee     GOLD
 ARG       Argentina 4% Reciss.      GOLD                 HUN       Hungary 7.5%          GBP


                                                 28
                                                                    Japan 5.5% 1935-
 AUT       Austria 6% 1923-1943      GBP                  JAP       1965                GOLD
           Austria 7% Int. Red. By
 AUT       1957                      GBP                  JAP       Japan 6% 1924       GOLD
 ARG       Buenos Aires Prov. 3.5%   GOLD                 MEX       Mexico 5% 1899      GOLD
 BEL       Belgium 7%                GOLD                 NOR       Norway 4% 1911      GOLD
 BGR       Bulgaria 7.5% Loan        GBP                  PER       Peru 7.5% 1922      GBP
 BRA       Brazil 5% Fund, 1914      GBP                  POL       Poland 7%           GOLD
 BRA       Brazil 6.5% 1927          GOLD                 THA       Siam 6% 1934-64     GBP
 CHL       Chili 6% 1929             GBP                  SWE       Sweden 3.5% 1908    GOLD
                                                                    Sao Paulo Coffee
 CHN       China 5% 1912             GBP                  BRA       7.5%                GOLD
 CHN       China 5% 1913             GOLD                 TUR       Turkey 4% Unified   GBP
 CZE       Czechoslovakia 8%         GBP                  URY       Uruguay 5% 1919     GOLD



The New York sample of bonds is listed below. All bond prices were from the prices published on
Wednesday between 7/29/1931 and 10/28/1931. A range of bond prices was given in the newspaper
according to different order volumes. We took the highest bond price available. All debt was payable
in 1931 in US dollars and since the dollar was still linked to the gold standard we coded this a
payable in "gold".



 New York Sample (New York Times)
 Country         Bond description                Currency
 AUS             AUS 4.5% 1956                   GOLD
 AUS             AUS 5% 1955                     GOLD
 BEL             BEL 6% 1955                     GOLD
 BEL             BEL 6.5% 1949                   GOLD
 CAN             CAN 4.5% 1936                   GOLD
 CAN             CAN 4% 1960                     GOLD
 CAN             CAN 5% 1952                     GOLD
 CHN             CHN 5% 1951                     GOLD
 DNK             DNK 4.5% 1962                   GOLD
 DNK             DNK 5.5% 1953                   GOLD
 DNK             DNK 6% 1942                     GOLD
 FRA             FRA 7% 1949                     GOLD
 FRA             FRA 7.5% 1941                   GOLD

                                                29
JAP   JAP 5.5% 1965   GOLD
JAP   JAP 6.5% 1954   GOLD
SWE   SWE 5.5% 1954   GOLD




                      30
Data Appendix A.2

Bonds and Data for Event Study, daily sample

This table shows all bonds available in the Financial Times. We used the Stock Exchange Official
Intelligence to determine the currency clause for each bond. Daily exchange rates are from Global
Financial Data. All bonds from New York (listed in bold) are payable in gold. All Mexican,
Honduran, and Turkish bonds are listed as in default in the Stock Exchange Official Intelligence
and excluded from the estimating sample.



 Country    Bond Description          Currency        Country   Bond Description          Currency
 ARG        ARGENTINE 4%              GBP
            RESCISSION                                RUS       RUSSIAN 5% 1906           GBP

 ARG        ARGENTINE (PORT           GBP
            OF CAPITAL) 5%                            FRA       SEINE 7% STER. BDS.       GBP

 ASA        S. AUSTL. 5% 1945-75      GBP                       SALVADOR 6%
                                                      SLV       BONDS                     GBP

 AUS        S. AUSTL. 6% 1930-40      GBP             BRA       SN. PAULO 6%              GBP

 AUS        AUS 4.75% 1940-1960       GBP                       SN. PAULO COFFEE
                                                      BRA       7%                        GOLD

 AUS        AUS 5% 1935-1945          GBP                       SN. PAULO COFF
                                                      BRA       7.5% BDS                  GOLD

 AUS        AUS 5% 1945-75            GBP             STR       STRAITS 4.5% 1935-45      GBP

 AUT        AUSTRIAN 6%               GBP             AUS       TASMANIA 5% 1932-42       GBP

 AUT        AUSTRIAN 7%               GBP             THA       SIAM 6%                   GBP

 BEL        BELGIAN 3% 1914           GBP             TUR       TURKISH 4% UNIFIED        GBP

 BEL        BELGIAN 7%                GOLD            GBR       GB Consols 2.5%           GBP

 BGR        BULGARIA 7%               GBP             URY       URUGUAY 3.5%              GBP

 BRA        BRAZILIAN 4%              GBP
            RESCISSION                                URY       URUGUAY 5% 1896           GBP

 BRA        BRAZILIAN 4% 1910         GBP                       UN. OF S.A. 5% 1933-
                                                      ZAF       43                        GBP

                                                 31
BRA   BRAZILIAN 4% 1911     GBP               UN. OF S.A. 5% 1945-
      LOAN                              ZAF   75                     GBP

BRA   BRAZILIAN 4% 1889     GBP               VICTORIA 4.75% 1940-
                                        AUS   60                     GBP

BRA   BRAZILIAN 5% 1903     GBP         AUS   VICTORIA 5% 1945-75    GBP

BRA   BRAZILIAN 5% 1913     GBP               VICTORIA 5.5% 1930-
                                        AUS   40                     GBP

BRA   BRAZILIAN 5%          GBP               W. AUSTL. 4.5% 1935-
      FUNDG1914                         AUS   65                     GBP

BRA   BRAZILIAN 5% 1895     GBP         AUS   W. AUSTL. 5% 1945-75   GBP

BRA   BRAZILIAN 5%          GBP               STHERN RHODESIA
      FUNDING                           ZWE   5%                     GBP

BRA   BRAZILIAN 6.5%        GOLD        ARG   ARGEN. 6% 1959         GOLD

CAN   CAN 3.5% 1930-50      GBP         AUS   AUSTL 4.5% 1956        GOLD

CAN   CAN 4% 1940-1960      GBP         AUS   AUSTL. 5% 1955         GOLD

ZAF   CAPE 3.5% 1929-1949   GBP         AUS   AUSTL. 5% 1957         GOLD

CHL   CHILEAN 4.5% 1886     GBP         AUS   BRISBANE 5% 1957       GOLD

CHL   CHILEAN 5% ANN. A     GBP         AUT   AUSTRIA 7% 1943        GOLD

CHL   CHILEAN 6% 1928       GBP         FRA   BORDE'X 6% 1934        GOLD

CHL   CHILEAN 7.5%          GBP         BEL   BELGIAN 6% 1955        GOLD

CHN   CHINESE 4.5% GOLD     GBP
      1896                              BEL   BELGIAN 7% 1955        GOLD

CHN   CHINESE 5% 1912       GBP         BGR   BULG. 7% 1967          GOLD

CHN   CHINESE 5%            GOLD
      pelt'rg.G.I. '13                  BRA   BRAZIL 6.5% 1957       GOLD

CHN   CHINESE 5% 1896       GBP         BRA   BRAZIL 7.5% 1952       GOLD

COL   COLOMBIAN 6%          GBP
      1913                              CAN   CANADA 5% 1952         GOLD



                                   32
CRI   COSTA RICA 5%          GOLD
      1911                               CHE   SWISS 5.5% 1945      GOLD

CZE   CZECHOSLOVAKIA         GBP
      8%                                 CHL   CHILE 6% 1961        GOLD

IDN   DUTCH EAST             GBP
      INDIES 5%                          CHL   CHILE 7% 1942        GOLD

IDN   DUTCH EAST             GBP               COLOMBIAN 6%
      INDIES 6%                          COL   1961                 GOLD

DEU   GERMAN 5.5%            GBP               CZECHOSLOVAKIA
                                         CZE   8% 1951              GOLD

DEU   GERMAN 7%              GBP         CUB   CUBA 5.5% 1953       GOLD

DEU   POTASH SYND. OF        GOLD              DUTCH EAST
      GERM. 7%                           IDN   INDIES 5.5% 1953     GOLD

DEU   WESTPHALIA 7%          GBP               DUTCH EAST
                                         IDN   INDIES 6% 1962       GOLD

DZG   DANZIG 7%              GBP               GERMAN 5.5%
                                         DEU   INT. 1965            GOLD

EGY   EGYPTIAN UNIFIED       GBP
      4%                                 DEU   GERMAN 7% 1949       GOLD

ESP   SPANISH 4%             GOLD              HEIDLBERG 7.5%
                                         DEU   1950                 GOLD

FIN   FINLAND 6%             GBP               DENMARK 5.5%
                                         DNK   1955                 GOLD

FRA   FRENCH WAR             GOLD
      LOAN 4% (brit. Iss.)               FIN   FINLAND 6% 1945      GOLD

FRA   FRENCH WAR             GOLD
      LOAN 5%                            FIN   FIN. MN. 6.5% 1954   GOLD

GRC   GREEK 4%               GBP
      MONOPOLY                           FRA   FRENCH 7% 1949       GOLD

GRC   GREEK 6% BONDS         GBP         FRA   FRENCH 7.5% 1941     GOLD



                                    33
GRC   GREEK 7%              GBP         GRC   GREEK 6% 1968       GOLD

GTM   GUATEMALA 4%          GBP         GRC   GREEK 7% 1964       GOLD

HND   HONDURAS              GBP         HTI   HAITI 6% 1952       GOLD

HUN   HUNGARIAN 7.5%        GBP               HUNGARY 7.5%
                                        HUN   1944                GOLD

HUN   HUNGARY               GBP               IRISH FREE STATE
      (C'NTIES) 7.5%                    IRL   5% 1960             GOLD

IRL   IRISH FREE STATE      GBP
      4.5% LAND BONDS                   ITA   ROME 6.5% 1952      GOLD

ITA   ITALIAN RENTES        GBP
      3.5%                              ITA   ITALIAN 7% 1951     GOLD

JAM   JAM 4.5% 1941-1971    GBP         JPN   TOKYO 5.5% 1961     GOLD

JPN   JAPAN 4% 1910         GBP         JPN   JAPAN 5.5% 1965     GOLD

JPN   JAPAN 4% 1899         GBP         JPN   JAPAN 6.5% 1954     GOLD

JPN   JAPAN 5% 1907         GBP               NORWAY 5.5%
                                        NOR   1965                GOLD

JPN   JAPAN 5.5% CONV.      GOLD        NOR   NORWAY 6% 1944      GOLD

JPN   JAPAN (TOKYO)         GBP
      5.5%                              NOR   NORWAY 6% 1952      GOLD

JPN   JAPAN 6% 1924         GBP         PER   PERU 6% 1961        GOLD

LKA   CEYLON 6% 1936-51     GBP         PER   PERU 7% 1959        GOLD

MEX   MEXICAN 5% 1899       GOLD        POL   POLAND 6% 1940      GOLD

MEX   MEXICAN 6%            GOLD
      TREAS. BDS.                       POL   POLAND 7% 1947      GOLD

NGA   NIGERIA 4% 1963       GBP         POL   POLAND 8% 1950      GOLD

AUS   N.S.W. 3% 1935        GBP         DEU   PRUSSIA 6.5% 1951   GOLD

AUS   N.S.W. 4.5% 1935-45   GBP         AUS   QUEENSL. 7% 1941    GOLD

AUS   N.S.W. 5% 1945-65     GBP         RDS   R.DO SUL. 8% 1946   GOLD


                                   34
AUS   N.S.W. 5.25% 1935-45   GBP               RUMANIAN 7%
                                         ROU   1959                 GOLD

NZL   N.Z. 3.5% 1940         GBP         FRA   SEINE 7% 1942        GOLD

NZL   N.Z. 4.5% 1948-58      GBP         BRA   S. PAULO 6% 1968     GOLD

NZL   N.Z. 5% 1946           GBP         BRA   S. PAULO 8% 1950     GOLD

PER   PERUVIAN CORP.                           SAX. P. W. 6.5%
      5% DEBENTURES                      DEU   1951                 GOLD

PER   PERUVIAN CORP.
      5% ORDINARY                        DEU   SAX.P.W. 7% 1945     GOLD

PER   PERUVIAN CORP.
      5% PF                              SRB   SERB. 7% 1962        GOLD

PER   PERUVIAN GOVT          GOLD
      6%                                 SRB   SERB. 8% 1962        GOLD

PER   PERUVIAN GOVT.         GBP
      7.5% (GUANO)                       SWE   SWEDEN 5.5% 1954     GOLD

POL   POLAND (1927) 7%       GOLD        GB    U.K. 5.5% 1937       GOLD

POR   PORTUGUESE 3%          GBP
      (1st srs)                          GB    U.K. FUND. 4%        GOLD

POR   PORTUGUESE 3%          GBP
      (3RD SERIES)                       GB    U.K. 5% WARLN        GOLD

AUS   QU'NSLAND 5% 1940- GBP
      60                                 URY   URUGUAY 6% 1960      GOLD

ROU   RUMANIAN EX. 4%        GBP               US. LIB. LOAN 3.5%
      1922                               USA   1932-1947            GOLD

ROU   RUMANIAN 4%            GBP
      CONS                               USA   U.S. 3.75% T. BDS    GOLD

ROU   RUMANIAN 7%            GOLD              U.S. LIB. LOAN
                                               4TH 4.25% 1933-
                                         USA   1938                 GOLD




                                    35
 ZAF         UN. OF S.A. 4% 1943-       GBP                        U.S. LIB. LOAN
             63                                       USA          4.5% 1932-1947          GOLD



Appendix B Sovereign Default

Here we provide a list of countries in default in the period. Note that we classify non-payment of
allied war debts or reparations as default.

Table B1 Countries that Defaulted After Going off the Gold Standard

Country                Year Default            Year off Gold         Difference
Austria                    1932                    1931                  1
Brazil                     1931                    1930                  1
Bulgaria                   1932                    1931                  1
Czechoslovakia             1932                    1931                  1
Germany                    1932                    1931                  1
Greece                     1932                    1931                  1
Hungary                    1932                    1931                  1
Paraguay                   1932                    1929                  3
Turkey                     1928                    1915                  13
United Kingdom             1933                    1931                  2
Uruguay                    1933                    1929                  4
Average Difference (w/o Turkey)                                         1.6



Table B2 Countries that Defaulted Before Going off the Gold Standard

Country            Year Default Year off Gold         Difference
Belgium                 1932            1935               3
Cuba                    1933            1934               1
Ecuador                 1929            1932               3
France                  1932            1936               4
Italy                   1932            1936               4
Mexico                  1928            1931               3
Panama                  1932            1933               1
Peru                    1931            1932               1
Poland                  1932            1936               4
Average Difference                                        2.67
                                                 36
Table B3 Countries that Defaulted in the Same Year as Going off the Gold Standard

Country               Year Default             Year off Gold
Bolivia                       1931                 1931
Chile                         1931                 1931
Colombia                      1932                 1932
Costa Rica                    1932                 1932
Guatemala                     1933                 1933
Nicaragua                     1932                 1932
Romania                       1932                 1932
United States                 1933                 1933



Table B4 Countries that did not Default but did Go off Gold

Country       Year off Gold     Country           Year off Gold   Country       Year off Gold
Argentina         1929          Malaysia               1931       Thailand       1932
Australia         1930          Netherlands            1936       Venezuela      1930
Canada            1931          New Zealand            1932       Danzig         1935
Denmark           1931          Norway                 1931       El Salvador    1931
Egypt             1931          Philippines            1933       Estonia        1933
Finland           1931          Portugal               1931       Latvia         1936
Honduras          1933          Salvador               1931       Luxembourg     1935
India             1931          South Africa           1932       Palestine      1931
Indonesia         1936          Spain                  1920       Yugoslavia     1932
Ireland           1931          Sweden                 1931
Japan             1932          Switzerland            1936




                                                  37
Figure 1 Average Ratio of Foreign Public Debt to Exports for 33 Countries, 1928



                           4.5


                               4


                           3.5


                               3
  Total Foreign Debt/Exports




                           2.5


                               2


                           1.5


                               1


                           0.5


                               0
                                               CHE




                                                                                                                                   BEL



                                                                                                                                                     CHL
                                                                                                                       AUT




                                                                                                                                                                             AUS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PAN
                                   USA




                                                                                                     THA
                                                                       CAN




                                                                                                                                                                                                     ZAF
                                                           CUB




                                                                                                                                                                       GBR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NZL
                                                                                                                                                                 POL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             POR
                                                                                                                                               NOR
                                                                                   ARG




                                                                                                                                                                                         URU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FRA
                                         TUR




                                                                                                                                         PER
                                                                                         COL
                                                                 DNK




                                                                                                                             CRI




                                                                                                                                                                                                           ROM
                                                                                                                                                                                               BOL
                                                     NIC




                                                                                               GUA


                                                                                                           JAP
                                                                             FIN




                                                                                                                                                           IND




                                                                                                                                                                                   BRA
                                                                                                                 DOM




                                                                                         USD Debt/Exports                    GBP Debt/Exports                    Other Curr. Debt/Exports



Notes: Data are from United Nations (1948). See text for a description of data.




                                                                                                                         38
Figure 2 The Impact of Exchange Rate Depreciation on Foreign Debt for Denmark, 1928-1934.

                     180


                     170


                     160


                     150
   Percent (x 100)




                     140


                     130


                     120


                     110


                     100


                     90


                     80
                           1928/29       1929/30         1930/31                          1931/32         1932/33         1933/34
                                                                       Fiscal year

                              KR/USD realtive to parity % x 100                      Forg. Debt as a % of Forg. Debt at parity x 100

                              Total Debt as a % of Total Debt at parity x 100




Notes: Figure shows the impact of the depreciation of the kronor on the value of Danish debt in
kronor. Data are from United Nations (1948). KR/USD is the exchange rate of the Danish crown
versus the US dollar. Foreign Debt and total debt at current exchange rates and at a fixed exchange
rate was calculated by the United Nations (1948).




                                                                           39
Figure 3 The Impact of Exchange Rate Depreciation on Foreign Currency Debt for Norway, 1928-
1940.

                           190



                           170



                           150
        INdex 1928 = 100




                           130



                           110



                            90



                            70



                            50
                                 1928   1929    1930     1931    1932    1933    1934      1935     1936     1937     1938     1939   1940
                                                                             Year


                                               KR/USD   KR/GBP          KR/FF           Total Debt at Current E/Total Debt at par




Notes: Figure shows the impact of the depreciation of the kronor on the value of Norwegian debt
measured in kronor. Data are from United Nations (1948). KR/USD is the exchange rate of the
Norwegian crown (kronor) versus the US dollar. Foreign debt in foreign currency and at par
exchange rates in kronor is given in the United Nations (1948). We use only the debt issued in GBP,
US dollars and French francs. We use exchange rates from David S. Jacks (personal communication)
to convert foreign currency to kronor at current exchange rates.




                                                                   40
Figure 4 The Impact of Exchange Rate Depreciation on Foreign Currency Debt for Chile, 1928-
1940.


                                     600




                                     500
        Percentage Deviation x 100




                                     400




                                     300




                                     200




                                     100




                                      0
                                           1928   1929   1930       1931   1932    1933   1934    1935     1936    1937    1938    1939     1940
                                                                            Year

                                           Peso/USD      Peso/CHF    Peso/GBP        Total Foreign Debt at Current E/Total Foreign Debt at Par




Notes: Figure shows the impact of the depreciation of the peso on the value of Chilean debt measured
in pesos. Data are from United Nations (1948). Peso/USD is the exchange rate of the Norwegian
crown (kronor) versus the US dollar. CHF is the Swiss franc, and GBP is pounds sterling. Foreign
debt in foreign currency is given in the United Nations (1948). Debt was issued in US dollars, pounds
sterling and in Swiss francs. We use exchange rates from David S. Jacks (personal communication)
to convert foreign currency to kronor at current exchange rates and at par. Par exchange rates are
given in United Nations and are equal to those prevailing in 1928.




                                                                            41
       Figure 5 Bond Spreads, Gold Clauses and Exchange Rate Policies, Weekly Data
: Impact on ln(yield) of gold-clause x gold std.


                                                   .1



                                                    0



                                                   -.1



                                                   -.2



                                                   -.3
             t





                                                         -12 -11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 1 2 3 4 5 6            7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                                                                          Days relative to 9/21/1931




Notes: Figures show the coefficients on the gold clause-gold standard indicator each day week
before and after 9/21/1931. The day 9/21/1931, the event date, is omitted from the sample and
9/19/1931 is a reference category. The dependent variable is the log of the bond yield, and
included controls are those in Table 3. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. 95%
confidence bands are shown.




                                                                                                42
Figure 6 Simulation of the Benassy-Quere Model with Different Trade and Debt Shares



                                    0.6



                                    0.4



                                    0.2



                                      0
                                           0                            0.25                               0.5                           0.75                         1
  dln (LCU/GBP | dln(GBP/USD = 1)




                                    -0.2



                                    -0.4



                                    -0.6



                                    -0.8



                                     -1



                                    -1.2



                                    -1.4



                                    -1.6
                                                                               %Share of Trade with UK, % Share of Foreign Debt in GBP

                                               Trade Share UK = Debt Share             Debt Share UK = 1           Trade Share UK = 1           Debt share UK = 0.5



Notes: Graph shows predicted exchange rate change against the pound for the model explored in
Section 4. The model is parameterized as per the text. Each line holds either the share of debt
denominated in GBP or the share of trade with Great Britain constant while allowing the other
share to vary along the x-axis. One line labelled (Trade Share UK = Debt Share) allows both shares
to move together between 0 and 1. The y-axis shows the predicted change of the local currency
against the pound in percentage terms (x 100) for a 1 percent depreciation of sterling against the
dollar. Negative values are appreciations against the pound. A movement of 0 against sterling is a
peg to sterling.




                                                                                                   43
Figure 7 Change in the USD Exchange Rate against the Policy Rule


                      .8
      Change 1931-32 in e, e = ln(LCU/USD)
                                      .6




                                                                                   Australia
                                                 Japan
                             .4




                                                                 Norway
                                                                                                   New Zealand

                                                             Portugal             Denmark
                 .2




                                                                                Finland
                                                                     Canada

                                                   Switzerland
                                                     Belgium      Argentina
         0




                                                           Uruguay
                      -.2




                                                 Brazil

                                             0              .2                .4             .6   .8             1
                                                                               Structural Term




Notes: This chart shows the bivariate OLS regression of the change in the (log of) the US
dollar exchange rate (local currency per US dollar) against the policy rule from the
theoretical model described above and a constant. The policy rule is a function of the
trade share, trade elasticities, debt shares etc. See the text for a description.




                                                                                    44
Figure 8 Change in the GBP Exchange Rate against the Policy Rule


                                                     .4
       Absolute change 1931-32 in e, e = ln(LCU/GBP)

                                                              Japan
                                             .3



                                                              Brazil

                                                                Switzerland
                                                                  Belgium
                                 .2




                                                                                Canada
                                                                        Uruguay
                                                                             Argentina
                                                                           Norway
                       .1




                                                                                             Denmark
                                                                                           Finland
                                                                          Portugal
                                                                                                              New Zealand
                                                                                             Australia
              0             -.1




                                                          0              .2              .4             .6   .8             1
                                                                                          Structural Term




Notes: This chart shows the bivariate OLS regression of the absolute value of the change in
the GBP exchange rate (local currency per GBP) against the policy rule from the theoretical
model described above and a constant. The policy rule is a function of the trade share, trade
elasticities, debt shares etc. See the text for a description.




                                                                                              45
Figure 9 Change in Absolute Value of the Nominal Exchange Rate against GBP or USD
versus Foreign Currency Debt



                                                                            Argentina
                    .4
      Absolute % change e vs GB or USA




                                                      Portugal
                                                                            Brazil
                                                                  BelgiumFrance Argentina
                                                                                Belgium                        Portugal

                                                                           France Switzerland
                            .2




                                              Australia                    FranceBrazil
                                                                                Brazil Finland
                                                                                      Belgium
                                              Portugal                           France
                                                                         SwitzerlandFrance
                                                                                      Denmark
                                                                                     Belgium
                                                                     Denmark
                                                                    United  Netherlands
                                                                             Argentina
                                                                             States
                                                                               Brazil Finland
                                                                              Switzerland     Norway
                                           Australia                           Netherlands
                                                                              Netherlands
                                                                           Canada    Norway
                                                                                  Netherlands
                                                                                Netherlands
                                                                                       Finland
                                                                                       United   States                       Australia
                                                                      Brazil
                                                           United KingdomCanada Switzerland
                                                                                 Switzerland
                                                                                          Brazil                 Portugal
                                              Portugal
                                               Australia Portugal                 Switzerland
                                                                           Argentina
                                                                            Brazil
                                                                             NorwayArgentina
                                                                                   Norway United
                                                                                     Denmark
                                                                                  Belgium         States
                                                                              NorwayBelgium
                                                                                 France
                                                                                 Netherlands
                                                                                    Norway
                                                                                     France
                                                                                       Japan
                                                 Australia               Canada
                                                                     Belgium Japan
                                                                            United Netherlands
                                                                                    Belgium
                                                                                     Kingdom
                                                                                    Norway
                                                                                Netherlands
                                                                                      Canada
                                               Australia
                                                     Portugal        France Brazil
                                                                           Japan
                                                                        FranceNorway  Belgium
                                                                                  Argentina
                                                Portugal
                                                Portugal                 United
                                                                             Denmark
                                                                           Finland
                                                                         France
                                                                     Belgium     Canada
                                                                                  States
                                                                                 Netherlands
                                                                                     Japan
                                                                                 Brazil
                                                                            Canada
                                                                                 Norway Belgium
                                                                                 Switzerland       Brazil
                                                                                                     Australia
                                             Australia                   France
                                                                          Canada
                                                                      France   Denmark
                                                                             Denmark
                                                                           Denmark
                                                                               Canada
                                                                          Finland      Canada
                                                                                    Netherlands
                                                                                   Netherlands
                                                                              Switzerland
                                                                                 Netherlands
                                                                                 Finland
                                                                                   Canada
                                                                                     United
                                                                               Netherlands
                                                                                Netherlands
                                                                                  CanadaNorway
                                                                                           United
                                                                                             Kingdom
                                                                                        Belgium
                                                                                       Netherlands
                                                                                         Denmark
                                                                                    France
                                                                                    Switzerland     States
                                                                                                United  KingdomPortugal
                                              Australia
                                                 Portugal         United    Finland
                                                                         Netherlands
                                                                          States
                                                                             United
                                                                           France
                                                                         Norway
                                                                         United
                                                                         Finland
                                                                          Finland     States
                                                                                 Finland
                                                                                  Belgium
                                                                               Canada
                                                                                  States
                                                                        Switzerland
                                                                                Netherlands
                                                                                 Netherlands
                                                                             United Netherlands
                                                                                          United
                                                                                          United
                                                                                        Denmark
                                                                                      Norway
                                                                                          Australia
                                                                                        United
                                                                                          Norway
                                                                                      Kingdom      States
                                                                                                  Kingdom
                                                                                                  Portugal
                                                                                                Kingdom   Portugal
                                                                                                           Portugal            Australia Australia
                                             Australia
                                                  Portugal          Brazil   Norway
                                                                             Canada
                                                                       Belgium   Denmark
                                                                                  Switzerland
                                                                               Canada    Denmark
                                                                                       Denmark
                                                                                       Switzerland
                                                                                         United  States
               0




                                                     Portugal
                                                Australia           Belgium
                                                              Australia
                                                                   Brazil  Norway
                                                                             Denmark
                                                                         United
                                                                          Norway
                                                                       Brazil
                                                                            Norway    Norway
                                                                                  Canada
                                                                                Norway
                                                                                United
                                                                                Switzerland
                                                                             Norway   Denmark
                                                                                 Brazil
                                                                                  States
                                                                                 Finland Kingdom
                                                                                   BelgiumDenmark
                                                                                        Brazil
                                                                                          Finland
                                                                                        Japan
                                                                                    Finland
                                                                                 Switzerland
                                                                                      NorwayAustralia
                                            Australia Portugal
                                               Australia                 Argentina
                                                                         Brazil
                                                                          Japan Brazil
                                                                               United
                                                                             Brazil
                                                                          Finland       Kingdom
                                                                                     Belgium
                                                                                   Norway
                                                                                       Norway
                                                                                  Netherlands
                                                                                   Brazil
                                                                                  Switzerland
                                                                                   Canada
                                                                                United
                                                                               Argentina Kingdom           Portugal  Australia
                                              Portugal
                                                   Portugal                  Argentina
                                                                             Canada
                                                                             Denmark
                                                                          Norway     CanadaFinland
                                                                                         Brazil
                                                                                       Canada
                                                                                    Netherlands
                                                                                    Japan
                                                                                       Switzerland
                                                                                    Brazil
                                                                                  Norway      United
                                                                                           Brazil     States             Portugal
                                                  Portugal
                                                    Australia    Belgium
                                                                       Denmark
                                                                         Denmark
                                                                        Finland        Belgium
                                                                                  Canada
                                                                             Netherlands
                                                                                     Argentina
                                                                                  Finland
                                                                                        France
                                                                              Switzerland
                                                                              Netherlands  France
                                                                                            Portugal
                                                                                         Denmark Portugal
                                                                                            France
                                                                           Norway
                                                                         United Netherlands
                                                                                  France
                                                                                       Belgium
                                                                                       Argentina
                                                                              Netherlands
                                                                                   France
                                                                                    Brazil   United
                                                                                     Argentina
                                                                           Switzerland
                                                                                   Canada
                                                                                       Canada
                                                                                    Netherlands
                                                                                  States
                                                                                  Argentina
                                                                                Netherlands
                                                                                     Denmark   France States
                                                                                                           Australia                           Austra
                                                                        Norway  Switzerland
                                                                             Japan
                                                                                 United
                                                                            Argentina
                                                                               Argentina
                                                                               Switzerland
                                                                         Finland     Switzerland
                                                                                     Argentina
                                                                                NorwayArgentina
                                                                                          KingdomFrance France                                Portuga
                                                                     Belgium
                                                                           France
                                                                             Switzerland
                                                                          France
                                                                         Denmark   Brazil
                                                                                 Switzerland
                                                                                    Argentina
                                                                                       Brazil
                                                                                     Belgium                                       Australia
                                                                                                                            Portugal
                                                                                                                      Portugal
                                                                             Brazil Finland
                                                                                         Belgium
                                                                               Netherlands
                                                                          France
                                                                            Brazil  Belgium
                                                                                     Brazil
                                                                                Belgium
                                                                               Argentina
                                                                                Argentina
                                                                                    Belgium
                                                     Portugal            Norway
                                                                         United  Netherlands
                                                                                     Netherlands
                                                                                  States                   France      Portugal              Australia
                                                                                  Switzerland
                                                                        France Brazil Switzerland          Portugal
                                                                      France
                                                                                   Belgium
                    -.2




                                                                    France

                                             -2                               0                      2                                         4
                                                                              Bilateral Debt/Exports
                                         coef = -.01458985, (robust) se = .00212307, t = -6.87




Notes: This figure shows the bivariate relationship between the currency denomination of
debt and the exchange rate. The model is estimated by OLS, and includes all controls of
the models in Table 4.




                                                                                         46
Table 1 Bond Prices as a Function of Currency Denomination of Debt and Exchange Rate Policy



                                        Peg to pound                        Peg to Gold
                                FX channel: Default risk -no      FX channel: Default risk
                                change. Yield -no change.         lower, lowest among all
                                                                  entries. Yield - fall
                                Macro channel: devaluation
Bond payable in sterling only   from gold parity ­ lower          Macro channel: higher risk.
                                revenue risk. Yield ­ fall        Yield - rise

                                Market effect: rise in sale of    Market effect: rise in sales of
                                sterling bonds, increased         sterling bonds, increased
                                demand for gold debt. Yield -     demand for gold bonds Yield
                                rise                              ­ rise
                                FX channel: Default risk          FX channel: A) Default risk
                                higher than before and highest    no change, same as entry
                                among all 4 entries. Yield-       (1,1). Yield - no change. B)
                                rise                              Some risk country will go off
                                                                  gold. Yield- rise
                                Macro channel: devaluation
                                is good for the economy. Yield    Macro channel: higher risk,
 Payable in USD/FF/GOLD
                                ­ fall                            chance of improvement Yield
                                                                  ­ rise
                                Market effect: Increased
                                demand for these bonds to         Market effect: Yield ­ fall
                                earn gold coupons. Yield ­ fall




Notes: This table considers the currency denomination of a sovereign bond and the exchange
rate policy for a country. The matrix explores three potential channels for each
denomination-policy combination. "Yield" refers to the bond yield. We use the simple
current yield (Coupon divided by price) to measure yields.


                                               47
 Table 2 Event Study of Bond Yields and the Sterling Devaluation, Weekly data

                                                                           London and New York
                                       London Market Only                        Markets
                                      (1)          (2)                      (3)          (4)

 Gold Clause x Gold peg x post      -0.12***           -0.10**            -0.12***          -0.09**
                                      [0.03]            [0.04]              [0.03]           [0.03]
Gold Clause x Sterling peg x post      0.05             0.07*              0.13**          0.16***
                                      [0.03]            [0.04]              [0.05]           [0.05]
        Gold peg x post                0.02              0.00                0.02              0.00
                                      [0.03]            [0.03]              [0.03]           [0.03]
       Sterling peg x post          -0.08***          -0.10***            -0.07***         -0.10***
                                      [0.02]            [0.02]              [0.02]           [0.02]
       Gold Clause x post                               -0.03                                 -0.04
                                                        [0.03]                               [0.03]
    New York market x post                                                 0.05*             0.07**
                                                                           [0.03]            [0.03]

        Observations                 556               556                  763              763
            R2                       0.55              0.55                 0.59             0.60
      Number of Bonds                 41                41                   56               56
     Number of Countries              31                31                   31               31


 Notes: Regressions are by OLS. The dependent variable is the log of the current yield of a number
 of bonds. We include fixed effects for each bond and date fixed effects. The sample is each
 Wednesday between 7/29/1931 and 10/28/1931. Each bond is identified with a currency of
 repayment and a country/colony. Robust, standard errors clustered at the country level are in
 brackets. *** p-value < 0.01; ** p-value < 0.05; * p-value < 0.10.




                                                 48
 Table 3 Event Study of Bond Yields and the Sterling Devaluation, Daily data

                                                                              London and New York
                                           London Market Only                       Markets
                                                 (1)                           (2)          (3)

 Gold Clause x Gold peg x post                   -0.13**                      -0.13**          -0.09**
                                                  [0.06]                       [0.05]           [0.04]
Gold Clause x Sterling peg x post                   ---                         0.04             0.07
                                                                               [0.07]           [0.07]
        Gold peg x post                             0.02                        0.02             0.00
                                                   [0.03]                      [0.03]           [0.03]
       Sterling peg x post                       -0.06***                     -0.06**         -0.08***
                                                   [0.02]                      [0.03]           [0.03]
       Gold Clause x post                            ---                                       -0.07**
                                                                                                [0.03]
    New York market x post                            ---                    0.20***           0.23***
                                                                              [0.04]            [0.05]

         Observations                             2,562                       4,191            4,191
             R2                                    0.42                       0.46             0.46
       Number of Bonds                              96                         160              160
      Number of Countries                           37                         45               45


 Notes: Regressions are by OLS. The dependent variable is the log of the current yield of a number
 of bonds. We include fixed effects for each bond and date fixed effects. The sample is daily data
 between 9/7/1931 and 10/8/1931 or 28 days when data were reported. We omit the day of sterling's
 devaluation, 9/21/1931, from the estimating sample. Each bond is identified with a currency of
 repayment and a country/colony. Robust, standard errors clustered at the country level are in
 brackets. *** p-value < 0.01; ** p-value < 0.05; * p-value < 0.10.




                                                 49
Table 4 Determinants of the Absolute Change in GBP Exchange Rates, 1932



                                          (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)              (5)

Bilateral Trade/GDP                    -17.70***   -13.72***    -18.22***   -12.77***      -17.68***
                                         [2.90]      [1.46]       [2.20]      [4.89]          [2.74]
Bilateral Debt/Exports                   -0.19      0.33***      0.34***     -0.24**        -0.35***
                                         [0.11]      [0.07]       [0.06]      [0.12]          [0.13]
Bilateral Trade/GDP x Bilateral                    -16.64***    -15.24***                   2.46***
Debt/Exports
                                                     [1.60]       [1.43]                     [0.63]
Change in ln(reserves)                                          -0.42***
                                                                  [0.09]
Trade/GDP                               3.12***      2.53***     3.40***       1.43         2.03***
                                         [0.77]       [0.52]      [0.49]      [1.02]         [0.52]
Foreign debt service/GDP                16.50**     26.18***       6.86      21.21**        16.09**
                                         [7.58]       [4.05]      [5.14]      [8.85]         [8.06]




Observations                              11           11          11           14               14

Notes: Dependent variable in the regression is the absolute change in the logarithm of the GBP
exchange rate (local currency units per GBP) between 1932 and 1931. Estimation is by Poisson
PPML. Robust standard errors are in brackets. *** p-value < 0.01; ** p-value < 0.05; * p-value < 0.10.




                                            50
Table 5 Absolute Changes in Bilateral Exchange Rates against the US and GB, 1925-
1939, Panel Models



                                       (1)           (2)     (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)

Bilateral Trade/Y                    -5.44***   -6.22***   -6.25***   -5.71***   -5.24***   -5.58***
                                       [1.54]     [1.62]     [1.53]     [1.22]   [1.16]       [1.13]
Bilateral Debt/Exports               -0.44***   -0.45***   -0.47***   -0.72***   -0.63***   -0.76***
                                       [0.10]     [0.13]     [0.12]     [0.10]   [0.09]       [0.11]
{Bilateral Debt/Exports} x Default      0.01      -0.07      -0.08     0.55***   0.44**      0.64***
                                       [0.25]     [0.27]     [0.27]     [0.16]   [0.19]       [0.21]
Default                                0.51*      0.50*     0.50**      -0.45    -0.69*       -0.51
                                       [0.28]     [0.25]     [0.25]     [0.41]   [0.39]       [0.42]
[Debt (j)/Exports] x [Bilateral
Trade/GDP]                           4.71***     5.37***   5.73***    8.16***    6.56***    8.40***

                                      [0.86]      [1.26]     [1.07]     [1.14]   [0.89]       [1.46]
Trade/GDP t-1                         -0.23        0.08       0.14      -0.55    0.41         -0.28
                                      [0.35]      [0.35]     [0.36]     [0.75]   [0.60]       [1.03]
Foreign Debt Service/GDP              15.32        9.89       9.95     -13.43    -31.66*     -24.51*
                                     [11.51]     [13.40]    [13.95]    [12.73]   [17.40]     [14.78]
Chg. ln (reserves)                              -0.90***   -0.99***   -0.94***   -0.64***   -0.86***
                                                  [0.16]     [0.20]     [0.22]   [0.22]       [0.26]
Chg. ln (Ex/Im)                                              -0.81      -0.64    -0.99*       -0.24
                                                             [0.53]     [0.49]   [0.56]       [0.34]
 % Change in GDP per capita since
                                                                                 -3.49***
1928
                                                                                 [1.09]

Observations                           296           296     296       296         294       255
Number of Countries                     13            13      13        13          13        11
Country Fixed Effects                  NO            NO      NO        YES         YES       YES


Notes: Dependent variable in the regression is the absolute change in the logarithm of the
GBP exchange rate or the USD exchange rate. Changes are annual changes for a sample
ranging over the years 1925 to 1938. Estimation is by Poisson PPML. Robust standard
errors, clustered at the country level are in brackets. *** p-value < 0.01; ** p-value <
0.05; * p-value < 0.10.




                                                51
