                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE LONG AND SHORT (RUN) OF TRADE ELASTICITIES

                                     Christoph E. Boehm
                                     Andrei A. Levchenko
                                     Nitya Pandalai-Nayar

                                      Working Paper 27064
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27064


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 2020, Revised November 2020




We are grateful to our discussant Doireann Fitzgerald for extensive input that improved the paper,
and to George Alessandria, Costas Arkolakis, Dominick Bartelme, Chad Bown, Emily Blanchard,
Meredith Crowley, Matthew Grant, Gene Grossman, Keith Head, Amit Khandelwal, Sam
Kortum, Kalina Manova, Nina Pavcnik, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, Sebastian Sotelo, Meredith
Startz, as well as seminar and workshop participants at NYU/Columbia, Yale, MIT, Dartmouth,
UCSD, UT Austin, VMACS, Virtual ITM, SMU, WCTW (Hawaii), ASSA and Women in
International for helpful comments, and to Barthelemy Bonadio, Jaedo Choi, Jonathan Garita and
Florian Trouvain for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christoph E. Boehm, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Long and Short (Run) of Trade Elasticities
Christoph E. Boehm, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar
NBER Working Paper No. 27064
April 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. F0,F1,F14,F4

                                           ABSTRACT

We propose a novel approach to estimate the trade elasticity at various horizons. When countries
change Most Favored Nation (MFN) tariffs, partners that trade on MFN terms experience
plausibly exogenous tariff changes. The differential growth rates of imports from these countries
relative to a control group ­ countries not subject to the MFN tariff scheme ­ can be used to
identify the trade elasticity. We build a panel dataset combining information on product-level
tariffs and trade flows covering 1995-2018, and estimate the trade elasticity at short and long
horizons using local projections (Jordà, 2005). Our main findings are that the elasticity of tariff
exclusive trade flows in the year following the exogenous tariff change is about -0.76, and the
long-run elasticity ranges from -1.75 to -2.25. Our long-run estimates are smaller than typical in
the literature, and it takes 7-10 years to converge to the long run, implying that (i) the welfare
gains from trade are high and (ii) there are substantial convexities in the costs of adjusting export
participation.


Christoph E. Boehm                                Nitya Pandalai-Nayar
The University of Texas at Austin                 Department of Economics
Department of Economics                           University of Texas at Austin
BRB 3.114                                         3.142 BRB, 2225 Speedway
2225 Speedway                                     Austin, TX 78713
Austin, TX 78712                                  and NBER
chrisboe@umich.edu                                npnayar@utexas.edu

Andrei A. Levchenko
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and CEPR
and also NBER
alev@umich.edu
1       Introduction

The elasticity of trade flows to trade barriers ­ the "trade elasticity" ­ is the central parameter in
international economics. Quantifications of the impact of shocks or trade policies on trade flows,
GDP, and welfare hinge on its magnitude. However, there is currently no consensus on the value of
this parameter, with a variety of empirical strategies delivering a broad range of estimates.1

This paper develops and implements a novel approach to estimating trade elasticities. Our principal
contributions are to simultaneously address (i) endogeneity due to possible reverse causality and
omitted variables, and (ii) variation across time horizons. The main results are as follows. First,
our estimate of the long-run elasticity of trade values exclusive of tariff payments is -1.75 to -2.25,
which is at the lower end of the range of existing estimates. This implies that the welfare-relevant
(i.e., tariff-inclusive) long-run elasticity is around 1 in absolute value, and thus the gains from trade
implied by most static trade models are large. Second, the trade elasticity in the year following the
initial tariff change is -0.76, and it takes several years for it to converge to the long-run value. The
trade elasticity point estimate stabilizes between years 7 and 10.

To obtain these estimates, our first contribution is to highlight the role of omitted variables. The the-
oretical foundations of the gravity equation emphasize the need to control for exporter and importer
multilateral resistance terms, structurally (Anderson, 1979; Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003) or
with appropriate fixed effects (e.g. Redding and Venables, 2004; Baldwin and Taglioni, 2006). We
show that the traditional log-levels gravity specification with multilateral resistance fixed effects
yields the conventional wisdom elasticities of -3 to -7. However, multilateral resistance terms do
not absorb aggregate or product-specific bilateral taste shocks or other unobserved bilateral gravity
variables. Omitting these unobservables can lead to large elasticity estimates ­ for instance if tariffs
are low when the taste shocks are high. Once we augment the traditional specification with a richer
set of fixed effects to soak up bilateral unobserved gravity variables and taste shocks, conventional
OLS log-levels estimates fall sharply to around 1 in absolute value.

Our second contribution is to address residual reverse causality between trade flows and tariffs,
conditional on the rich fixed effects. The identification strategy relies on the key institutional feature
of the WTO system: the MFN principle. Under this principle, a country must apply the same tariffs
to all its WTO member trade partners. We estimate the trade elasticity based on the response of
minor exporters to an importer's MFN tariff change. The identifying assumption is that developments
in the minor exporters do not affect a country's decision to change its MFN import tariffs. Our
estimation procedure then compares the minor exporters' trade flows to a control group of exporters
to the same country to whom MFN tariffs do not apply. These are countries in preferential trade
agreements with the importer. Addressing the reverse causality produces larger elasticities in absolute
    1
        Anderson and van Wincoop (2004) and Head and Mayer (2015) review available estimates.


                                                          1
value than OLS.

Our third contribution is to provide estimates over different time horizons, ranging from impact to
10 years. Because tariff changes can be autocorrelated, to estimate elasticities at longer horizons we
use time series methods, namely local projections (Jordà, 2005). This approach takes into account
the fact that tariffs themselves may have a nontrivial dynamic impulse response structure, implying
the elasticities of trade flows at different horizons might depend on the pattern of autocorrelation of
tariffs. One useful outcome of this exercise is that we can compare short- and long-run elasticities
obtained within the same estimation framework. It is well-known that trade elasticities estimated
from cross-sectional variation in tariffs tend to be much higher than the short-run elasticities needed
to fit international business cycle moments. Normally, this divergence is rationalized by assuming
that the elasticities estimated from the cross-section essentially reflect the long run. However, exist-
ing estimates either use purely cross-sectional variation (e.g. Caliendo and Parro, 2015), or a time
difference over only one horizon (e.g. Head and Ries, 2001; Romalis, 2007). In both cases it is unclear
whether what is being estimated is a long-run elasticity, an elasticity over a fixed time horizon, or
a mix of short- and long-run elasticities. Our exercise provides mutually consistent estimates of the
short- and the long-run elasticities, as well as their full path over time. In addition, we explore
sectoral heterogeneity in trade elasticities. Across 11 broad HS sections, the long-run values range
from -0.75 to -5.

Our analysis uses data on global international trade flows from BACI, and tariffs from UN TRAINS.
The sample covers 183 economies, over 5,000 HS 6-digit categories, and the time period 1995-2018.

Our empirical strategy is deliberately not tied to a particular theory, because we expect that our esti-
mates can serve as targets for multiple theories. The mapping between our estimates and structural
parameters in theoretical models will then depend on model structure. To illustrate this, the final
section of the paper presents a simple dynamic model, focusing on the minimal common structure
required to produce sluggish adjustment to trade cost shocks.2 Our framework nests dynamic ver-
sions of the Krugman (1980), Melitz (2003), and Arkolakis (2010) models, as well as extensions with
pricing to market (e.g. Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo, 2003; Atkeson and Burstein, 2008). The model
delivers analytical expressions for trade elasticities at all horizons that clarify the determinants of
the adjustment dynamics. In this setting, we (i) state the short- and long-run model-implied elas-
ticities and the properties of their time path; (ii) show that this framework delivers our empirical
estimating equations to first order; and (iii) show that the calibrated dynamic model easily delivers
a long-building response of trade to tariff shocks, consistent with the empirical estimates.

Finally, we apply our elasticity estimates to the Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012)
   2
    The recent literature on trade dynamics is rich in both substantive mechanisms and quantification (see, among
many others, Costantini and Melitz, 2007; Ruhl, 2008; Burstein and Melitz, 2013; Drozd and Nosal, 2012; Alessandria
and Choi, 2014; Alessandria, Choi, and Ruhl, 2014; Ruhl and Willis, 2017; Fitzgerald, Haller, and Yedid-Levi, 2019).


                                                         2
gains from trade formula. To do that, we must account for the fact that our left-hand side variable is
trade values exclusive of tariff payments, whereas the elasticity that enters gains from trade formulas
is that of tariff-inclusive spending. Our estimates imply an elasticity relevant for computing the
welfare gains from trade of about -1. Under this value, the gains from trade are 5-6 times larger
than under the commonly used elasticity of -5.

Related Literature Anderson and van Wincoop (2004) and Head and Mayer (2015) review ex-
isting trade elasticity estimates. One common approach is to use tariff variation to estimate this
elasticity (e.g. Head and Ries, 2001; Romalis, 2007; Caliendo and Parro, 2015; Imbs and Mejean,
2015, 2017). Other methods exploit differences in prices across locations (Eaton and Kortum, 2002;
Simonovska and Waugh, 2014; Giri, Yi, and Yilmazkuday, 2020). Existing estimates do not attempt
to address the reverse causality of tariffs with respect to trade flows, and do not distinguish different
time horizons. An alternative is to estimate an elasticity of substitution structurally (e.g. Feenstra,
1994; Broda and Weinstein, 2006; Feenstra et al., 2018; Soderbery, 2015, 2018). In some environ-
ments the substitution elasticity governs the trade elasticity, but in others it does not. Our empirical
strategy is not confined to environments in which the trade elasticity coincides with the elasticity of
substitution.

An important recent strand of the literature uses customs data to estimate firm-level elasticities
of exports to tariffs, and aggregates firm-level responses to recover macro elasticities (see, among
others, Bas, Mayer, and Thoenig, 2017; Fitzgerald and Haller, 2018; Fontagné, Martin, and Orefice,
2018). Often, similar to our strategy, the identifying variation comes from comparisons of MFN and
non-MFN destinations. Our approach complements these firm-level analyses. The customs data have
the clear advantage of the forensic precision with which different dimensions of firm-level responses
to tariffs can be pinned down. On the other hand, this approach normally uses data for a limited
set of countries (most often 1) and years, making it challenging to control for multilateral resistance
terms and/or exploit time series variation in tariffs for identification.3 , 4

Bown and Crowley (2016) describe the empirical features of tariff policy in general, and the MFN
system in particular. A feature of MFN tariffs important for our purposes is that countries negotiate
upper bounds on MFN tariffs, and are then free to set actual MFN tariffs anywhere below those
bounds. In the data, a significant fraction of MFN tariffs is actually below the bounds, and thus
countries can vary them without violating their WTO commitments. There is a voluminous theo-
   3
      While our work focuses on estimating constant elasticities in the tradition of much of the literature, several con-
tributions also explore environments with non-constant elasticities (e.g. Novy, 2013; Adão, Arkolakis, and Ganapati,
2020; Lind and Ramondo, 2020).
    4
      An exception to the common finding of high long-run trade elasticities is Sequeira (2016), who estimates a virtually
zero elasticity of trade flows to tariffs for the Mozambique-South Africa preferential trade agreement. The proposed
explanation for this result is that high levels of corruption in Mozambique imply that firms rarely pay the tariffs in the
first place. This mechanism is unlikely to account for the comparatively low elasticities we find in worldwide data.



                                                            3
retical and empirical literature on trade policy, both unilateral and within the framework of trade
agreements, synthesized most recently in Bagwell and Staiger (2016). This literature emphasizes
endogeneity of tariffs to a variety of factors, and thus calls for an effort to overcome that endogeneity
in estimation.

A more recent literature has focused on the impact of the 2017-2019 US-China trade war. Closely
related to our paper is Fajgelbaum et al. (2020), who use the trade war as a shock to simultaneously
estimate demand and supply elasticities. Our approach in contrast isolates variation coming from
the responses of third countries to incidents like the trade war. Our estimates are complementary
in that we provide both short- and long-run estimates, which at the current moment is naturally
impossible in the context of the trade war.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the econometric framework and
the identification strategy. Section 3 describes the data, and Section 4 the main results. Section 5
connects the estimates to theory. Section 6 concludes.

2     Estimation Framework

2.1    The horizon-h trade elasticity

As the objective of this paper is to estimate elasticities of trade volumes to trade cost shocks at
different time horizons, we start with a definition of a horizon-specific trade elasticity. Let i and j
index countries, p products, and t time. Let Xi,j,p,t be the exports of p from j to i, and i,j,p,t the
"iceberg" trade cost. Denote by h a time difference in a variable between periods t - 1 and t + h:
h xt  xt+h - xt-1 .

Definition. For h ln i,j,p,t = 0 the horizon-h trade elasticity h is defined as

                                                h ln Xi,j,p,t
                                          h =                 .                                     (2.1)
                                                h ln i,j,p,t


Both conceptually and for the purposes of estimation, it is important to take into account the fact
that trade costs follow a stochastic process, and the h-horizon change h ln i,j,p,t is a cumulation
of a sequence of period-to-period changes that occurred between t and t + h. A useful way to think
about this horizon-h-specific trade elasticity is as follows. Suppose an unanticipated shock to trade
costs occurs at time t. The denominator h ln i,j,p,t captures the effect of this shock on trade costs
h periods into the future relative to time t - 1. It can thus be thought of as a horizon-h impulse
response. Similarly, the numerator h ln Xi,j,p,t captures the effect of the time-t shock to ln i,j,p,t
and of the subsequent changes in ln i,j,p,t on trade flows h periods into the future.



                                                   4
This discussion makes clear that both the numerator h ln Xi,j,p,t and the denominator h ln i,j,p,t
can be thought of as sequences following the initial shock. They jointly inform the behavior of
dynamic models, which study how trade adjusts to changes in trade costs.

Traditionally, models of international trade are static, representing a metaphor for the long run.
Thus, parameterizing these models requires the long-run elasticity , defined as the limit:

                                                      h ln Xi,j,p,t
                                           = lim                    ,
                                               h      h ln i,j,p,t

if it exists. This limit measures the permanent change in trade flows that accompanies a permanent
change in trade costs.

2.2   Estimating equations

In practice, we will use tariff variation to estimate h . Let the total trade costs be multiplicative in
gross ad valorem tariffs i,j,p,t and non-tariff costs i,j,p,t :

                                          i,j,p,t = i,j,p,t · i,j,p,t .

Then h = h ln Xi,j,p,t /h ln i,j,p,t .

Consider a change in tariffs 0 ln i,j,p,t between t - 1 and t. We estimate the following equation
using local projections (Jordà, 2005):

                                                       X,h     X,h     X,h
                                      h
                      h ln Xi,j,p,t = X 0 ln i,j,p,t + i,p,t + j,p,t + i,j,p + uX,h
                                                                                i,j,p,t ,          (2.2)

where the  's are fixed effects.

The estimating equation (2.2) is deliberately reduced-form and not tied to a particular theory. We
posit a fairly general estimating equation that can be viewed as time-differenced gravity, and our
objective is to develop a set of estimates that can potentially serve as targets for multiple theories.
Indeed, it is common in both macroeconomics and trade that multiple microfoundations lead to the
same estimating equation. For instance, many business cycle models have a vector autoregression
(VAR) representation (Sims, 1980; Canova and Sala, 2009). In trade, the gravity relationship can
be derived from Armington, Ricardian, and monopolistic competition models (Head and Mayer,
2015). We relate the econometric estimates to a tractable dynamic model in Section 5. This model
delivers estimating equation (2.2) and illustrates that the fixed effects capture dynamic analogues of
multilateral resistance terms.
                h in (2.2) captures the change in trade flows h periods ahead that follows an initial
The coefficient X


                                                       5
                                 h ln Xi,j,p,t                                h as an estimate of the
one-period change in tarifs:     0 ln i,j,p,t .   One might be tempted to use X
horizon-h trade elasticity. If 0 ln i,j,p,t was a one-time change in tariffs (that is, h ln i,j,p,t =
                h is indeed an estimate of h for all h. We can, and do, estimate  h , but it is often
0 ln i,j,p,t ), X                                                                X
misleading as a measure of the trade elasticity if--following the initial change 0 ln i,j,p,t --tariffs
themselves keep changing during the next h periods. For instance, if a tariff reduction in the initial
year tends to be followed by further tariff reductions, we would attribute a large change in trade flows
to a small initial tariff change not taking into account the impact of subsequent, dependent, tariff
decreases. The opposite would happen if tariffs were mean-reverting, such that initial reductions
tend to be followed by increases. The h-period change in trade volumes thus conflates the impact of
the initial- and subsequent-period tariff changes. Below we show that in the data, tariffs do continue
to change following an initial impulse.

To account for this, we estimate a local projection of the h-period tariff change on the initial shock
in tariffs:
                                                       ,h      ,h      ,h
                       h ln i,j,p,t = h
                                        0 ln i,j,p,t + i,p,t + j,p,t + i,j,p + u,h
                                                                                i,j,p,t ,                   (2.3)


where the impact effect of tariffs on tariffs is 0 = 1 by definition.

                                                                         h
                                                                         X
The horizon-h trade elasticity can then be recovered as h =              h .
                                                                         
                                                                               This estimation is carried out at
different horizons h = 0, ..., H , to trace the full profile of   h   over h. In practice, the period length is a
                                                                                            h and
year and we use a maximum horizon of H = 10, as discussed in Section 3. If the estimates of X
h stabilize within 10 years of the shock, we interpret it as convergence of both the numerator and

the denominator in (2.1), rendering our estimates informative about the long-run trade elasticity.
While Section 5 provides a detailed discussion of the convergence to the long-run elasticity in the
context of a class of models, this interpretation is not confined to a particular theoretical framework.

Conventional estimation A common approach to estimating the long-run elasticity  starts from
a static gravity equation: ln Xi,j,p,t =  ln i,j,p,t + i,p,t + j,p,t + ui,j,p,t , and relies on either cross-
sectional variation or a single-horizon difference of this equation. The coefficient  is interpreted as
an estimate of the long-run elasticity . Typically, specifications include multilateral resistance fixed
effects but no bilateral fixed effects.

Conventional approaches cannot speak to the horizon-h trade elasticity. This is immediate for log-
levels estimates, which mostly use cross-sectional variation for identification. However, it is also
true for estimates in differences. A research design that estimates an elasticity based on, say, 5-year
differences in both tariffs and trade ignores the timing of tariff changes. A 5-year tariff change of
a given magnitude could be due to shocks at the beginning or the end of the five year period. As
a result, a 5-year difference specification will estimate a conflation of horizon-0 to horizon-5 trade
elasticities. This observation suggests the use of macroeconometric methods to estimate the trade


                                                        6
elasticity.

We formalize this argument based on our model in Section 5. Appendix Proposition C.1 shows
that estimation in h-period differences does not generally identify the horizon-h trade elasticity. If
tariffs follow a random walk, estimation in h-period differences instead identifies the simple average
of horizon-0 to horizon-h trade elasticities.

A corollary is that estimation in long differences will not necessarily identify the long-run trade elas-
ticity since many tariff shocks could have occurred close to the end-point of the difference. We will
also show below that estimation approaches based predominantly on cross-sectional variation likely
suffer from omitted variable problems. Thus, we argue that our long-run estimates are likely prefer-
able to the conventional alternatives even for researchers only interested in the long-run elasticity
for calibrating a static trade model.

2.3    Identification

Estimating equation (2.2) by OLS would be similar to the common approach in the literature that
treats all tariff variation as exogenous, except that we explicitly highlight magnitude differences
across time horizons. In practice tariffs are set by governments which, in turn, are influenced by
lobbyists, and subject to the WTO policy framework. There are three concerns with viewing applied
tariff changes as exogenous. First, it is possible that a third factor in the importing country drives
both tariff changes and changes in trade flows. A newly elected government, for instance, could
change not only tariffs but also other policies that affect import demand. In a similar spirit, business
cycle fluctuations could induce governments to change tariffs (Bown and Crowley, 2013; Lake and
Linask, 2016). Again, imports would change in part because of the tariff change, and in part due
to the changes in economic conditions. Further, a taste shock for a product from a specific source
country could trigger both larger imports of the product and lower tariffs on that product due
to lobbying. Second, there could be reverse causality, whereby the importer's government changes
tariffs because of observed or anticipated changes in trade patterns (e.g. Trefler, 1993). Third, foreign
governments could influence the importer's government to change tariffs, either through the WTO
body, or through other channels (Gawande, Krishna, and Robbins, 2006; Antràs and Padró i Miquel,
2011).

An instrument for tariff changes is difficult to find, as changes in trade policy are unlikely to ever
be orthogonal to economic activity in general and trade flows in particular. We turn to the WTO's
MFN tariff system to construct a plausibly exogenous instrument. All WTO member countries are
bound by treaty to apply tariffs uniformly to all other WTO countries. Thus, when a WTO country
changes its MFN tariffs, those tariffs change for all of its partners that trade on MFN terms. Of
course, when a country changes its MFN rate on a product, it might do so due to concerns about


                                                   7
imports from an important partner country, or lobbying by an important partner country. The
baseline instrument uses the insight that third countries are also affected by this tariff change if they
are MFN partners. From the point of view of these third countries, the tariff change is plausibly
exogenous. The response of imports from these third countries can then identify the trade elasticity.
To address concerns that trade flows at the country-product level might be trending over time, we
use as a control group countries unaffected by the MFN tariff change because they do not trade on
MFN terms. These are countries in preferential trade agreements (PTAs).

Our baseline instrument is:

                     instr                 applied MFN                 applied MFN
                0 ln i,j,p,t = 1 i,j,p,t = i,j,p,t     × 1 i,j,p,t-1 = i,j,p,t-1

                                    ×1 (not a major trading partner in t - 1 in aggregate)
                                    ×1 (not a major trading partner in t - 1 at product level)
                                    ×1 (not a major trading partner in t in aggregate)
                                    ×1 (not a major trading partner in t at product level)
                                         applied MFN      applied MFN
                                    × ln i,j,p,t     - ln i,j,p,t-1   .


The first two indicators simply say that the applied MFN tariff is binding for the countries and
product in question both in the initial t - 1 and final period t. The next four indicators relate to
whether the exporter is a major trading partner in t - 1 or t, either in terms of aggregate trade, or
in terms of trade in product p. At both the aggregate and the product levels, a trading partner is
                                                         applied MFN      applied MFN
coded as major if its rank is in the top 10.5 Finally ln i,j,p,t     - ln i,j,p,t-1   is simply the log
change in the tariff from t - 1 to t.

Note that the instrument conditions on minor trading partners. We presume that endogeneity con-
cerns that survive the fixed effects will mostly apply to the importer's major MFN trading partners.
Thus, major MFN partners are dropped from the sample. We stress that the classification into major
and minor trading partners is from the perspective of each individual importer. As we show below,
this filter does not produce a treated group composed of only small countries. This is because large
countries are often minor trading partners from the perspective of individual importing countries.
                                                       instr as the instrument for the one year
Then, we estimate equations (2.2) and (2.3) using 0 ln i,j,p,t
endogenous tariff change 0 ln i,j,p,t . Further, we can directly estimate the horizon-h trade elasticity
based on the specification

                                                           h
                         h ln Xi,j,p,t =  h h ln i,j,p,t + i,p,t   h
                                                                 + j,p,t   h
                                                                         + i,j,p + uh
                                                                                    i,j,p,t ,                    (2.4)
  5
      We also carried out the analysis considering the top 5 partners as major. The results were very similar.



                                                            8
                                               instr . Note that this specification simply combines
where we instrument for h ln i,j,p,t with 0 ln i,j,p,t
the two instrumented local projections (2.2)-(2.3) and directly identifies the trade elasticity at horizon
h:  h is an estimator of h . Estimating (2.4) has the advantage that standard errors for the elasticity
estimates are easier to compute.

While our baseline estimates treat the trade elasticity as invariant across product categories, below
                                                                                           h 's.
we also estimate these specifications for broad product groups to obtain a distribution of p

Discussion To succinctly state the source of the identifying variation: we compare the changes in
imports from countries hit by a plausibly exogenous tariff change to the changes in imports from
countries to whom those tariff changes did not apply. The "treatment" countries experienced tariff
changes because they are part of the MFN system. The "control" countries did not experience the
MFN tariff changes because they trade on different terms.

This "instrumented diff-in-diffs" setup sets a high bar for identification in the following sense. First,
the instrument and our estimating equation are differenced, eliminating all time-invariant factors.
Second, the estimating equations include importer-product-time and exporter-product-time fixed
effects, as well as a time-invariant source-destination-product fixed effects. The former are the
changes in multilateral resistance terms, that absorb time-varying importer- or exporter-product-
specific demand or supply shocks, as well as broad tariff changes by a country across a number
of products simultaneously. The source-destination-product fixed effects absorb trends in product-
specific impacts of bilateral resistance forces like distance, addressing concerns about any gravity
variables that survive time differencing. These fixed effects also soak up bilateral taste shocks for a
product (in levels or trends), that could be correlated with tariffs applied on the product.

The identification problem then arises entirely from time-varying, bilateral, non-tariff barriers h ln i,j,p,t ,
or other time-varying, bilateral product-specific supply or demand shocks. The residual tariff changes
may still be the result of deliberate actions aimed at a specific partner and a specific product. After
eliminating the trade partners that are the likely targets of these tariffs, the instrument isolates
plausibly exogenous variation in tariff changes. Finally, by only identifying the elasticity from the
differential growth rate of the "treatment" group exports relative to a "control" group of countries in
PTAs, we leverage the time-series dimension of the data. Relying on the time series variation also
makes it straightforward to estimate how the trade response varies over different horizons.

Section 4.3 contains further discussion of threats to identification, alternative instruments, as well as
extensive robustness checks.




                                                    9
2.4   Institutional background and examples of MFN tariff changes

To understand why countries change MFN tariffs, we provide some institutional background and
discuss some examples.6 When countries join the WTO, their accession treaty sets maximum MFN
tariff rates ("bounds") that they can impose on imports from WTO member countries. These MFN
bounds are country- and product- specific, and vary from very low rates for developed countries and
large economies to much higher rates for developing countries. For instance, the average bound rate
is 3.5% in the US, 10.0% in China, and 48.6% in India. The number of products covered by the
bounds is also negotiated and varies by country. In many countries, including the US and China,
100% of products are covered by the bounds. By contrast, 74% of products are subject to MFN
bounds in India, and 50% in Turkey. The bounds themselves vary substantially across products.
In the US in 2015, about 40% of products had a bound of 0, while about one-tenth of products
had bounds above 10%. Once these MFN bounds are set, they rarely change, except in subsequent
rounds of WTO negotiations. As such, changes in MFN bounds do not provide sufficient variation
for an instrument.

In practice, actual applied MFN tariffs are frequently far below the bounds. Thus, countries can
and do legally vary their applied tariffs below the bounds. Some motives are business-cycle related.
For instance Turkey raised a number of MFN tariffs temporarily around its financial crisis. The
tariffs were lowered again post-crisis. Similar patterns were observed in Argentina. Sometimes the
rationale for changing the MFN rates is less clear ­ India raises and lowers tariffs on varied products
year-to-year. Finally, MFN rates might also be changed while countries are engaged in a trade war.
China lowered MFN rates on 1449 consumer goods and 1585 industrial products while raising tariffs
on the US as part of the US-China trade war in 2018. As a result, China's average tariffs on the US
were 20.7% in late 2018, while those faced by other exporters to China were only 6.7%, on average.
Since the US was the motivation for these MFN tariff changes, they are plausibly exogenous from
the perspective of small exporters to China.7

This discussion makes clear the endogeneity of many tariff changes, and the rationale for the inclusion
of a rich set of fixed effects (to remove business cycles and broad partner-specific variation). Further,
the US-China trade war example illustrates the need to eliminate major partners from the instrument,
in order to isolate the exogenous component of MFN tariff changes for third countries.
  6
     Further details can be found in Bown and Crowley (2016). We are grateful to Chad Bown for useful suggestions
and examples.
   7
     See the blogpost by Bown, Jung and Zhang in June 2019 for a discussion.




                                                       10
3       Data and Basic Patterns

Our trade dataset is the BACI version of UN-COMTRADE, covering years 1995-2018. The data
contain information on the trade partners, years, and product codes at the HS 6-digit level of dis-
aggregation, as well as the value and quantity traded. We link these data to information on tariffs
from the TRAINS dataset, also covering 1995-2018. This dataset includes information on the applied
and the MFN tariffs. The applied tariffs can differ from MFN tariffs for country pairs that are part
of a PTA. Unfortunately, for many countries comprehensive information on tariff rates is often not
available before they join the WTO. The sample covers 183 economies and over 5,000 HS6 categories.

We drop observations for which trade is subject to non-ad valorem (specific or compound) tariffs.
For these tariffs TRAINS reports ad-valorem equivalents. However, computation of these equivalents
requires data on quantities, which are often noisy and could also endogenously respond to changes
in tariffs. Since the large majority of MFN tariffs are ad valorem, the impact of dropping these
observations for our sample size is small.8

The most detailed product classification available in the trade data is at the HS6 level. However, we
face the constraint that the data are provided in several different revisions of HS codes. Further, even
within the same year, countries sometimes report trade flows in different vintages of HS codes.9 While
some concordances of HS6 codes over time are available, we do not implement these fully as they
necessitate splitting values of trade across product codes in different revisions or aggregating product
codes. As we do not observe transaction-level trade, any such split will introduce composition effects
into our tariff measures. In particular, we could have spurious tariff changes coming from averaging
tariffs when product codes are combined over time. Instead, our definition of a product is an HS6
code of a specific revision, tracked over time. We link product codes across revisions only when
there is a one-to-one mapping between the codes across revisions. This approach is conservative,
but it does reduce the effective sample size ­ and hence widens the standard errors ­ for any very
long run elasticity estimates, as over a longer horizon there will be fewer product codes that map
uniquely across revisions. Hence, the maximum horizon over which we estimate the trade elasticity
in the baseline analysis is 10 years, which typically corresponds to only one transition in HS revisions.
Appendix Table A1 provides the fraction of codes that map uniquely across revisions. In a single
revision transition, on average 89% of product codes have a unique mapping.10 In a small number
of instances, the meaning of HS4 codes changes across revisions, which would imply that importer-
exporter-HS4 fixed effect categories combine substantively different products across time periods.
    8
     Among the 148 WTO members in 2013, the median fraction of HS6 products covered by non-ad valorem tariffs is
0.01%, and the mean fraction is 1.76% (World Trade Organization, 2014).
   9
     As far as we are aware, there is no double counting of trade flows reported under different HS revisions.
  10
     Naturally, alternative specifications that include several lags of tariff changes require longer horizons than ten years,
reducing the sample size and increasing the standard errors of the estimates.



                                                             11
We manually identified those instances and eliminated them.11

While HS6 product lines are often the most detailed level at which applied tariffs vary, a few countries
have tariffs that vary within HS6 product groups (for instance at the HS8 or HS9 level). We do not
have trade flows at a more detailed level, so we assess the robustness of our results to excluding series
where countries apply different MFN tariffs within an HS6 product group.

The values of trade flows reported in these data are not inclusive of tariffs. Thus, the elasticities
estimated by our procedure are tariff-exclusive, and must be appropriately adjusted to obtain the
elasticity relevant from the consumer's perspective.12

Patterns in tariff changes Figure 1 plots histograms of tariff changes. The left panels plot all
data, while the right panels plot the data conditioning on observing a tariff change. While more
than half the mass is below zero, tariff increases comprise a substantial share of tariff changes.
The bottom two panels separate treatment (red) and control (green) groups. Both experience a
range of tariff changes. Note that our identification strategy does not require the control group to
experience no tariff changes. Since our specifications include importer-product-time fixed effects, we
exploit differential changes in MFN and non-MFN tariffs for identification. Below we also check the
robustness of our estimates by removing from the control group observations in which non-MFN
tariffs change. Figure 2 plots the autocorrelation function of tariff changes in our data. It highlights
a negative first-order autocorrelation. This pattern motivates the use of time-series methods that
explicitly account for the fact that impact tariff changes are not fully permanent, but partially
reversed in subsequent periods.

Appendix A presents additional summary statistics about our sample: (i) the average share of
imports by destination (Figure A1) and by product (Figure A2); and (ii) the incidence of MFN and
non-MFN trade (Figure A3) in the sample.

Examples of the treatment/control assignments                      Appendix Table A2 provides an illustration
of how the instrument is implemented. As our instrument is defined at the product level, we illustrate
it for a 4-digit HS code 6403, "Footwear; with outer soles of rubber, plastics, leather or composition
leather and uppers of leather." For three large importers (the USA, Japan, and Germany) in 2006,
we list partner countries that fall into each of the following three categories: treatment group, control
group, and excluded group.
  11
    We have similarly implemented manual fixes for the very few HS6 codes that also change meaning over revisions.
  12
    Section 5 contains the complete discussion. As an example, if the underlying model Armington, our long-run
estimates would correspond to the elasticity in the CES aggregator - , while the trade elasticity inclusive of tariffs
would be 1 -  .



                                                         12
                                  Figure 1: Patterns in Tariffs: Frequency of Changes




                                                                               .2
          .8




                                                                               .15
          .6
   Fraction




                                                                           Fraction
                                                                             .1
   .4




                                                                               .05
          .2
          0




                                                                               0
                  -.2       -.1               0                  .1   .2                -.2           -.1              0                 .1   .2
                                   Tariff Change (t,t-1)                                                    Tariff Change (t,t-1)


                            Unconditional                                                     Unconditional, Excluding Zeros
                                                                               .4
        1
        .8




                                                                               .3
            .6
    Fraction




                                                                           Fraction
                                                                              .2
  .4




                                                                               .1
        .2
        0




                                                                               0




                 -.2       -.1               0                  .1    .2                -.2          -.1               0                 .1   .2
                                  Tariff Change (t,t-1)                                                     Tariff Change (t,t-1)

                                  Treatment                Control                                          Treatment               Control



                        Treatment and Control                                         Treatment and Control, Excluding Zeros
Notes: These figures display the frequency of tariff changes in our data. The top two panels display the unconditional
frequency of all tariff changes (top left) and frequency excluding zeros (top right). The bottom panel displays the
overlap in the frequency of changes in the treatment and control groups, including zero changes (left panel) and
removing zero changes (right panel).




                                                                      13
                              Figure 2: Patterns in Tariffs: Autocorrelation




                                               1
                              Autocorrelations of Tariff Change
                                     0         -.5     .5




                                                                  0   2   4          6   8   10
                                                                               Lag




Notes: This figure displays the unconditional autocorrelation of tariff changes in the sample.



Columns 1-2 list the 10 largest MFN trading partners at t - 1 and t. Trading on MFN terms is the
first criterion for being assigned to the treatment group. (Of course, there are many more than 10
countries in this category). Columns 3-4 list the 10 major trade partners in terms of aggregate trade.
These countries are disqualified from the treatment group. Columns 5-6 list the 10 major trading
partners for the product code HS 6403. These are also disqualified from the treatment group. As
expected, there is imperfect overlap between the set of major partners overall and in a specific HS
code.

After these countries are dropped, columns 7-9 list the treatment, control, and excluded groups.
As the table highlights, for the US NAFTA countries such as Canada and Mexico are important in
the control group. The excluded group comprises large trading partners like Germany, China, and
France, but also smaller economies such as Vietnam that are important exporters of footwear to the
US. The treatment group includes smaller trading partners in footwear who trade at MFN rates, such
as Portugal, Poland, Slovakia, and Hungary. While we do not incorporate explicit data on regional
trade agreements, the instrument design appropriately assigns countries in customs unions or PTAs
to control or excluded groups.13 For Germany, for instance, EU member countries do not appear in
the treatment groups, and are only part of the control groups.
  13
    The instrument might be improved if we could additionally incorporate information on PTAs. This would help
in particular in assigning observations to the control group instead of the excluded group in some instances where
the PTA rate is the same as the MFN rate and the country is a large trading partner. Currently, these observations
have to be excluded. Unfortunately, while aggregate datasets on PTAs are available, these are typically not product-
specific. Many free trade agreements exclude certain products, and applying them to all products is problematic for
our estimation. Assigning observations to the excluded group increases our standard errors but is the conservative
option.



                                                                              14
Identifying variation One might be concerned that the coefficient estimates are identified from
special and/or non-representative segments of world trade. One possibility might be, for instance,
that dropping major trading partners leaves a treated group composed of only small developing
countries. Another possibility is that tariff changes might occur predominantly in products that
account for relatively little of world trade. These potential concerns would be exacerbated by the
large number of fixed effects, that further sweep out "singleton"-like observations, for instance cases
in which the entirety of an importer-product trade is carried out on MFN basis.

To better understand the identifying variation in the data, we regress the one year (0 ) change in
log trade flows and tariffs on the full set of fixed effects, and discard observations that are perfectly
absorbed by the fixed effects. In this step we also impose the sample restriction that drops ma-
jor trading partners. The resulting sample reflects the variation in trade flows and tariffs that is
potentially available to identify the coefficients of interest. The patterns are reassuring on several
fronts. The left panel of Figure 3 plots the (log) counts of instances countries appear as treatment
or controls in the residualized data.14 The relative size of the circle reflects country GDP. It is ap-
parent that the same countries appear in both treatment and control groups, and indeed economies
large in absolute size are frequently in the treatment group. The figure rules out the possibility that
identifying variation comes from very small or esoteric countries. It also allays the concern that the
control group countries are dramatically different from the treatment group.15 Appendix Figure A4
projects the frequency of country appearance in treatment or control group on per-capita income. It
is evident that a broad range of income levels is represented in both treatment and control groups.

The right panel of Figure 3 plots the distribution across HS sections. The green bars plot the shares
of observations of all trade data. The orange bars display the shares of observations remaining in the
residualized data after the fixed effects are taken out and sample restrictions imposed. The available
variation is spread across all broad product groups, and is representative of the unconditional sectoral
distribution of trade. The figure thus suggests that we are not identifying our elasticity coefficients
from sectorally un-representative trade flows. Appendix Figure A5 plots the frequency of different
product groups in our residualized data at a finer level of sectoral disaggregation (HS-2).

4        Results

We begin by estimating the impact effects of a one-time tariff change on h-periods ahead trade flows
and tariffs, as in equations (2.2)-(2.3), using our instrumental variables approach. For the baseline
estimation, the product disaggregation for the fixed effects is at the HS4-level. We also exclude major
    14
    The figure reports shares of observations rather than shares of value, because our regressions are unweighted.
    15
    For instance, it does not appear to be the case that small countries that are recipients of GSP tariffs are dispro-
portionately in the control group.



                                                          15
                                                                                                      Figure 3: Country and Product Variation




                                                                                                                                                    Share of total observations in HS sections
                                                               6




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .25
                                                                                                                                      DEU
                                                                                                                                        ITA
                                                                                                                                        FRA
  Count of exporter observations in control group (in log10)




                                                                                                                                              CHN




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .2
                                                               5




                                                                                                                                       USA




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .15
                                                               4




                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                 .05
                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0


                                                                                                                                                                                        Pr ve pro ls
                                                                                                                                                                                               ar tab cts
                                                                                                                                                                                      uc in oo ats

                                                                                                                                                                              R tic the pro ffs

                                                                                                                                                                                                         m ts

                                                                                                                                                                               Pu an nd les i~
                                                                                                                                                                                       of rti ns e~

                                                                                                                                                                                                         o at~
                                                                                                                                                                                       r, and f o od

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                         u ti~

                                                                                                                                                                                                          p ~

                                                                                                                                                                                Ve ry a ls a l pe ~
                                                                                                                                                                               O cles me art l~

                                                                                                                                                                                          , p rcra nic s
                                                                                                                                                                              M Arm hot ft, v l ~

                                                                                                                                                                                        an nd phi e~

                                                                                                                                                                                                 tu un ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                                                                                        or le~

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ar
                                                                                                                                                                                     ic , ai cha icle




                                                                                                                                                                                                        d itio
                                                                                                                                                                            M as or ne, bre
                                                                                                                                                                                    ne ta ra te




                                                                                                                                                                                              ac m ci
                                                                                                                                                                                             or le ma




                                                                                                                                                                                             an che duc




                                                                                                                                                                                    hi nd nd ar
                                                                                                                                                                                    tic ad tex er
                                                               2




                                                                                                                                                                                                              tu



                                                                                                                                                                                                                l




                                                                                                                                                                                                                r




                                                                                                                                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                                                                      o o
                                                                                                                                                                                   lp d a ski th




                                                                                                                                                                                   c s a gra ess
                                                                                                                                                                                            ep ge du




                                                                                                                                                                                 oo s ar ica
                                                                                                                                                                                  od M d f le f




                                                                                                                                                                                                    W rtic
                                                                                                                                                                                          w cle , le




                                                                                                                                                                                 N es gea ile a



                                                                                                                                                                                 hi me ultu las




                                                                                                                                                                                                             of
                                                                                                                                                                                            uf am c,
                                                                                                                                                                                 w es or f w
                                                                                                                                                                                                            th
                                                                                                                                                                                Pl t o era ds




                                                                                                                                                                                 B al to m
                                                                                                                                                                                         al ab ni




                                                                                                                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                                                                      im et e a




                                                                                                                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                                                                                                              a tic




                                                                                                                                                                                                      r,
                                                                                                                                                                            Fo e oo s




                                                                                                                                                                                                    re
                                                                                                                                                                                                      l
                                                                                                                                                                                 An Veg Liv




                                                                                                                                                                                                  o
                                                                                                                                                                                                  e




                                                                                                                                                                              W ide d




                                                                                                                                                                              ot xtil d




                                                                                                                                                                                                s
                                                                                                                                                                                                c
                                                                                                                                                                                   at of
                                                                                                                                                                                   as f




                                                                                                                                                                                 Ar he
                                                                                                                                                                               aw s




                                                                                                                                                                                       al
                                                                                                                                                                                      ur
                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                              ac e
                                                                                                                                                                                       l




                                                                                                                                                                                     m
                                                                                                                                                                                     h




                                                                                                                                                                                   ea
                                                                                                                                                                                     d




                                                                                                                                                                                  pt
                                                                                                                                                                                  T




                                                                                                                                                                                is
                                                                                                                                                                               Pr
                                                                   1        2                     3                    4                5                                                              All data   Available variation
                                                                       Count of exporter observations in treatment group (in log10)



                                                                                      Countries                                                                                                         HS Sections
Notes: The left panel displays the scatterplot of base 10 log counts an exporter appears in the control group on the
y-axis against the log count the same country appears in the treatment group on the x-axis. The size of the circle
is proportional to relative country size as measured by GDP. The plot is based on a residualized sample from which
importer-product-time, exporter-product-time, and importer-exporter-product fixed effects have been taken out, and
the sample restrictions have been imposed. The right panel displays the sectoral distribution of all trade data in our
sample (green bars), and the residualized sample after fixed effects have been taken out and the sample restrictions
have been imposed (orange bars).



trading partners at the HS4-level in the baseline instrument. The left panel of Figure 4 reports the
time path of tariff changes h periods after the initial 1-unit change. Thus, by construction the h = 0
coefficient is 1. The partial mean reversion in tariff changes is evident: following the initial impulse,
about 80% of the change remains after 5 years, and approximately 75% after 10 years. These results
illustrate the need for an estimation method that takes explicit account of the non-trivial time series
behavior of tariffs.

The figure suggests a presence of a pre-trend. A tariff increase of one percent is preceded by a
reduction of approximately 0.3 in the pre-period, reflecting again the negative first order autocor-
relation highlighted above. We control for this pre-trend by including a lagged pre-trend control in
our baseline estimates throughout. The blue lines in Figure 4 depict the estimates after including
the pre-trend controls. They make little difference to the results. We include additional lags in
robustness checks.

The right panel of Figure 4 displays the impact of an initial one percent tariff change on trade flows.
Trade flows respond by -0.26 percent on impact, converging to approximately -1.5 in the long run.
Unlike for tariffs, there is no evident pre-trend in trade flows, regardless of whether we use pre-
trend controls, ruling out an important role for anticipation effects. Including the pretrend control


                                                                                                                                               16
                             Figure 4: Local Projections: Tariffs and Trade
    1.2                                                                  1
                                           No Pretrend Controls
                                           Pretrend Controls
      1
                                                                       0.5

    0.8

                                                                         0
    0.6


    0.4                                                                -0.5


    0.2
                                                                        -1

      0

                                                                       -1.5
    -0.2


    -0.4                                                                -2
        -6    -4   -2    0     2     4      6         8           10      -6   -4   -2   0   2   4     6     8     10


                         Tariffs                                                         Trade
Notes: This figure displays the results from estimating equations (2.2) and (2.3) ­ the local projection of h-period
tariff growth (left panel) and h-period imports (right panel) on one period tariff growth, instrumented with our
baseline instrument. We depict estimates with and without pre-trend controls. The bars display 95% confidence
intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the country-pair-product level.




modestly amplifies the point estimates of the effect of the tariff shock on trade values at longer
horizons, though the difference is not significant. Columns 1 and 4 of Appendix Table A4 report the
estimated impulse response coefficients and standard errors for tariffs and trade, respectively.

Figure 5 reports the baseline estimates of the trade elasticity h across horizons. The impact (h = 0)
elasticity is -0.26. Our data are annual, and it is unlikely that all tariff changes go into effect on
January 1. Thus, we do not focus attention on the impact elasticity as it can be low due to partial-
year effects. The point estimate in the year following the tariff change is probably a better indicator
of the short-run elasticity. At h = 1, the elasticity is around -0.76. The 10-year elasticity is -2.12.
Over the first 7 years, the elasticity converges smoothly to the long-run value, and then is stable for
years 7-10.

The red line reports the OLS estimates. To be precise, the estimates we label "OLS" correspond
to Ordinary Least Squares estimates of equations (2.2)-(2.3), but are obtained by two-stage least
squares where the horizon-h tariff change is instrumented with the tariff change from t - 1 to t, using
all the available data rather than the exogenous subset. The rationale for using only the initial 1-year
tariff change as identifying variation is that relying on higher frequency variation typically reduces
confounding. In addition, using only the initial tariff change allows us to estimate the horizon-h
trade elasticity. In contrast, as discussed in Section 2, estimation in long differences conflates trade


                                                                  17
elasticities of different horizons (see Appendix Proposition C.1).

OLS actually produces a significantly smaller trade elasticity than our baseline IV at all horizons,
a fact we revisit in Section 4.2. The time pattern is roughly similar for OLS and IV. A substantive
explanation for IV estimates being larger in absolute value than OLS is that ­ conditional on all the
fixed effects ­ tariffs are endogenously higher when imports are also high. One possible rationalization
of this pattern is that greater import competition leads to more intense lobbying for protection.
Trefler (1993) formalizes this argument, and shows that accounting for this type of endogeneity in
US non-tariff barriers increases coefficient estimates of their impact of trade substantially.

Measurement error on the right-hand side ­ potentially exacerbated by differencing ­ is another
reason for OLS coeffcients to be biased towards zero. Our right-hand side variable is tariffs, which
are statutory policy instruments unlikely to be measured with error. We have done extensive checks
on the tariff data, and eliminated known issues such as specific tariffs. Thus, both OLS and IV
estimates are unlikely to suffer from this attenuation bias.
                 h ,  h , and h should be interpreted as averages in the following sense. For a
Our estimates of X   
given size shock to tariffs, the subsequent evolution of tariff changes likely differs across shocks in
our sample. Further, the responses of tariffs and trade could depend on the initial state of the
world, they could vary by country pair, and/or depend on the product p for which the tariff changes.
The estimation approach above will effectively average tariff and trade responses over all shocks, all
evolution of tariffs, all initial states of the world, and all country-pairs and products. We now relax
this assumption somewhat and report elasticities for broad product groups.

4.1   Sectoral heterogeneity

HS codes are organized into 21 sections that are consistent across countries. These sections describe
broad categories of goods, such as "Live Animals, Animal Products" (Section 1). In practice, there
is insufficient tariff variation in some of these sections to obtain precise estimates of the elasticity at
all horizons. Thus, we combine a few of the sections together, leaving us with 11 sections. Appendix
Table A3 describes the sections and lists the sections that are aggregated.

Figure 6 plots the point estimates of the trade elasticities over h for the 11 HS product groups. To
contain the role of estimation error, we also report the median estimate from horizon 7 to 10 in the
figure. The long-run elasticities range from -0.75 to approximately -5 even in this coarse sectoral
breakdown. In addition, the elasticities fan out over time. The range at h = 1 is from -0.5 to about
-1.5, much narrower than the long-run range. Appendix Table A5 presents the summary statistics
for the trade elasticities at the 11-Section level, by horizon. The time path of the median elasticity


                                                    18
                                    Figure 5: Trade Elasticity: OLS vs IV
                           0
                                                                                    Baseline
                                                                                    Baseline OLS


                         -0.5




                          -1




                         -1.5




                          -2




                         -2.5




                          -3
                                0   1    2     3     4        5   6     7     8     9       10




Notes: This figure displays estimates of the trade elasticity based on specification (2.4), and including one lag of
the change in tariffs and trade as pre-trend controls. 2SLS estimates with the baseline instrument are in blue, and
OLS estimates are in red. The bars display 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the bilateral
country-pair-product level.




is similar to the aggregate elasticity.

4.2   Relationship to other estimates

Our preferred IV estimates of the trade elasticity are -0.76 in the short run, rising to about -2 in
the long run. These are substantially smaller than the conventional wisdom range of -5 to -10 (see
for instance the review in Anderson and van Wincoop, 2004). Interestingly, even our OLS estimates,
which treat all tariff variation as exogenous as typical in the literature, are much smaller than the
values commonly estimated in other studies. Table 1 investigates the source of these differences.

Panel A of the table estimates the elasticity using the log-levels OLS specification, assuming all tariff
variation is exogenous. This specification, both without fixed effects and with the most commonly
used fixed effects to account for multilateral resistance (importer-product-time and exporter-product-
time), yields values between -3.7 and -6.7, similar to previous estimates. We then add country-
pair-product fixed effects to the same specification. Country-pair effects are not commonly used
in elasticity estimation, but appear in Baier and Bergstrand (2007) and Donaldson (2018), among
others. The elasticity estimates fall sharply to about -1.04 with multilateral resistance terms (column

                                                         19
                           Table 1: Elasticity Estimates: Alternative Approaches

                                                       (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)

Panel A: Log-levels, OLS
ln i,j,p,t                                          -3.696***      -4.468***   -6.696***   -2.734***   -1.040***   -0.892***
                                                     (0.020)        (0.019)     (0.046)     (0.014)     (0.022)     (0.020)

R2                                                   0.013           0.341       0.383       0.530       0.571       0.837
Obs                                                  107.09         107.07      106.24      105.73      104.91       98.45

Panel B: 5-year log-differences, OLS
5 ln i,j,p,t                                        -1.882***      -1.583***   -0.664***   -1.659***   -0.518***   -0.459***
                                                     (0.014)        (0.014)     (0.020)     (0.015)     (0.020)     (0.027)

R2                                                    0.002          0.066       0.180       0.150       0.263       0.504
Obs                                                   38.54          38.52       38.15       38.21       37.82       35.57

Panel C: 5-year log-differences, 2SLS, tariffs instrumented by actual 1-year tariff change
5 ln i,j,p,t                                         -1.337*** -0.968*** -0.470*** -1.019***           -0.448***   -0.406***
                                                      (0.018)     (0.019)     (0.028)      (0.020)      (0.030)     (0.037)

Obs                                                   38.54          38.52       38.15       38.21       37.82       35.57

Panel D: 5-year log-differences, 2SLS, baseline instrument
5 ln i,j,p,t                                         -3.259***     -2.206***   -1.170***   -2.000***   -1.112***   -1.381***
                                                      (0.052)       (0.061)     (0.113)     (0.067)     (0.124)     (0.194)

Obs                                                   21.75          21.73       21.40       21.49       21.13       19.36

Panel E: 5-year log-differences, 2SLS, all partners instrument
5 ln i,j,p,t                                         -1.967*** -1.426***       -0.471***   -1.579***   -0.653***   -0.901***
                                                      (0.023)   (0.027)         (0.053)     (0.027)     (0.054)     (0.098)

Obs                                                   38.54          38.52       38.15       38.21       37.82       35.57
Fixed effects
importer×HS4                                           no             yes         no          no          no          no
exporter×HS4                                           no             yes         no          no          no          no
importer×HS4×year                                      no             no          yes         no          yes         no
exporter×HS4×year                                      no             no          yes         no          yes         no
importer×exporter×HS4                                  no             no          no          yes         yes         no
imp×HS6×year, exp×HS6×year, imp×exp×HS6                no             no          no          no          no          yes

Notes: This table presents the results of estimating the trade elasticity at a single horizon. The dependent variable
is log of trade value, in levels (Panel A), or 5-year differences (Panels B-E). Panels C, D, and E differ in instruments
used for the tariff change. Column 1 reports the results with no fixed effects. Column 2 adds importer-product
and exporter-product fixed effects, column 3 interacts these fixed effects with years, column 4 includes country-pair-
product fixed effects, column 5 includes our baseline fixed effects and column 6 uses the fixed effects in column 5
but defines the product at the HS6 level. Standard errors clustered by country-pair-product are in parentheses.
***, ** and * denote significance at the 99, 95 and 90% levels. Numbers of observations are reported in millions.
All first-stage F -statistics are greater than 10000. The differenced specifications do not have pretrend controls for
comparability with the log-levels specification in Panel A.




                                                              20
                           Figure 6: Trade Elasticity: Sectoral Heterogeneity




Notes: This figure displays the trade elasticities estimated by HS Section based on specification (2.4) and using the
baseline instrument. Some HS Sections are grouped into a single aggregate section "Sec agg" as described in the text.



5), close to our baseline OLS estimates. Making the product dimension of the fixed effects finer in
column 6 does not substantively change the estimates. The country-pair-product fixed effects soak up
any confounders in the gravity equation that are country-pair-product specific (for instance, different,
but constant, shipping costs between a pair of countries for steel vs. agricultural product groups).
Clearly, including them is important for the estimation.

Panel B of the table then presents the results of a 5-year differenced OLS specification. The esti-
mates fall sharply across all combinations of fixed effects, and are often below 1 in absolute terms.
Differencing removes additional confounders, as discussed in Section 2.

Panel C then implements a specification in which the five-year differenced tariff change on the right-
hand-side is instrumented by the actual one year tariff change at the start of the 5-year period.
This is an intermediate step between running simple differenced OLS and our full instrumentation
strategy. Here, the estimation is by 2SLS, but it is unlikely that the estimates are unbiased since
this specification uses variation of all initial-year tariff changes, rather than the exogenous subset.


                                                         21
Again, across all versions of fixed effects the estimates are much smaller and close to or below 1 in
absolute value. The coefficient is -0.448 in our preferred specification with the baseline fixed effects
(Column 5). This specification amounts to the estimation of (2.4) for h = 5 by "OLS", albeit without
pretrend controls.

Panels D and E implement two versions of our IV specification. Panel D has the conservative baseline
instrument, excluding major trading partners, and Panel E has the IV including all trading partners
with pure diff-in-diff identification. Relative to the OLS estimates in Panel C, both instruments push
estimates further away from 0. The conservative instrument increases estimates the most relative to
OLS, as expected, but has larger standard errors. This instrument brings the estimates to -1.11 at
the five year horizon in the specifications with the country-pair-product fixed effects and multilateral
resistance fixed effects.

In summary, country-pair-product specific variation is key for the estimation of trade elasticities.
Estimates are large if this variation is used, and small if this variation is taken out with importer-
exporter-product fixed effects or through differencing. Relative to OLS estimation in differences our
baseline instrument raises estimates of the trade elasticity.

Appendix B provides two additional tables that support these conclusions. Table A6 contrasts the
traditional gravity specification in log-levels (as in Panel A of Table 1) to analogous estimates on
our baseline sample. This check rules out that differences in estimates are driven by the sample
composition. While the conventional approach on the constant sample delivers even higher elasticity
estimates (as high as 8 - 11), the insight that the importer-exporter-HS4 fixed effects decrease the
estimates substantially remains the same. Table A7 presents results for specifications in differences for
alternative time horizons (3 and 7 years) as well as on the baseline sample. In these specifications,
variation at the importer-exporter-product level is differenced out. The estimates are uniformly
low, in particular when time-varying multilateral resistance terms are taken out with fixed effects.
Importer-exporter-HS4 fixed effects in these differenced specifications, which take out linear time
trends, do not affect the results substantially.

4.3   Robustness

Pre-trends and anticipation effects         Tariff decreases often follow tariff increases (tariff changes
are negatively autocorrelated), as shown above. Indeed, the left panel of Figure 4 reveals some
evidence of a pre-trend in tariffs. We account for differential pre-trends in tariffs using the standard
approach of controlling for lagged tariff and trade changes. Our baseline estimates use a single lag
as a pretrend control. Columns 2-3 of Table 2 report results with no lags and 5 lags, respectively,
to compare the results to the baseline in column 1. The substantive conclusions change little when
adding or subtracting lags, although with more lags the sample size drops substantially and the


                                                   22
standard errors increase. Columns 1-3 and 4-6 of Table A4 reports the results of local projections
of tariffs and trade flows directly on the initial tariff change, as in (2.2)-(2.3), while allowing for 1, 0
and 5 lags. Once again, the point estimates change little when adding lags.

A distinct concern is anticipation effects. Even if pre-treatment tariffs are constant, countries might
begin to adjust their exports in response to an expected future MFN tariff change by the importer.
We check for the presence of such anticipation effects by examining pre-trends in the trade volume
equation estimates. Figure 4 shows no evidence of pre-trends in trade values even without controlling
for tariff pre-trends.

Alternative samples and standard errors Column 4 of Table 2 restricts the sample so that
each fixed effect is estimated from at least 50 observations. Column 5 two-way clusters the standard
errors by importer-exporter-HS4 and year. In both cases the estimates and their precision change
little. Column 6 reports estimates on a constant sample. While the point estimates are slightly
lower in absolute value, the standard errors widen substantially. Overall, the difference from the
other specifications is typically not statistically significant. This is reassuring as the constant sample
conditions on positive trade flows for all time horizons. This sample likely has different characteristics
than the full sample, but the stability of the estimates suggests that sample selection is not a big
concern. Finally column 7 reports the results from an estimation where we drop observations from
the control group that experience tariff changes. The estimates are slightly lower than the baseline,
but not significantly so at most horizons.

Our estimated tariff impulse responses stabilize fast and are very persistent, with about 75% of
the initial shock surviving 10 years.16 This alleviates concerns that our estimates are driven by
very short-run temporary MFN tariff changes. To further explore the impact of potentially more
permanent tariff changes, we estimate elasticities using only the tariff changes of the Uruguay Round
GATT/WTO negotiations. It is likely that firms viewed these as persistent or permanent--at least
until the next successful multilateral negotiation. In practice, we constrain the sample to only
MFN tariff changes during 1995-1997, which corresponds to the staggered phasing in of the Uruguay
round MFN bounds. Reassuringly, we find OLS estimates that are not significantly different from
our baseline IV coefficients (Appendix Table A11). This may suggest that the Uruguay Round
tariff changes were more "exogenous" than typical tariff changes, since they resulted from protracted
multilateral negotiations. IV estimates on the 1995-1997 sample are imprecise and not informative,
as the sample size is drastically reduced.
  16
     Consistent with our estimates, Bown and Crowley (2014) document that most MFN tariff changes below bounds
are permanent or very persistent.




                                                     23
Table 2: Trade Elasticity, Robustness: Pre-Trends, Alternative Clustering, Alternative Samples

                      Baseline    Zero Lag    Five Lags    FE50       Two-way      Constant     Alternative
                                                                      Clustering    Sample     Control Group
                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)

             t        -0.262***   -0.147***     0.166     -0.232**    -0.262***    -0.592**      -0.187**
                       (0.072)     (0.054)     (0.138)     (0.094)     (0.096)      (0.290)       (0.077)
             obs        31.66       41.46       14.58       17.62       31.66        5.04          27.33

             t+1      -0.756***   -0.628***     -0.129    -0.599***   -0.756***      -0.098      -0.490***
                       (0.108)     (0.081)     (0.208)     (0.133)     (0.141)      (0.380)       (0.117)
             obs        26.18       32.85        12.52      15.19       26.18         5.04         22.63

             t+3      -1.024***   -0.926***   -0.625**    -0.865***   -1.024***    -0.895**      -0.743***
                       (0.146)     (0.105)     (0.315)     (0.173)     (0.195)      (0.472)       (0.160)
             obs         20.8       26.16        9.76       12.48        20.8         5.04         17.86

             t+5      -1.237***   -1.112***   -1.146***   -1.012***   -1.237***    -0.916**      -0.792***
                       (0.185)     (0.124)     (0.429)     (0.215)     (0.253)      (0.437)       (0.201)
             obs        16.69       21.13         7.3       10.22       16.69         5.04         14.27

             t+7      -2.055***   -1.521***   -2.330***   -1.853***   -2.055***    -0.990**      -1.383***
                       (0.233)     (0.145)     (0.595)     (0.270)     (0.357)      (0.489)       (0.251)
             obs        13.22       16.95        5.25         8.2       13.22         5.04         11.12

             t + 10   -2.122***   -1.463***   -2.550**    -1.760***   -2.122***    -1.818***     -1.600***
                       (0.325)     (0.194)     (1.016)     (0.374)     (0.332)      (0.544)       (0.379)
             obs         8.31       11.25        3.21        5.25        8.31         5.04          6.84


Notes: This table presents robustness exercises for the results from estimating equation (2.4). All specifications
include importer-HS4-year, exporter-HS4-year and importer-exporter-HS4 fixed effects, and the baseline pretrend
controls (one lag) unless otherwise specified. Columns 2 and 3 vary the pretrend controls (including alternatively
zero lags or five lags of import growth and tariff changes). Column 4 reports the results when the sample is restricted
to fixed-effects clusters with a minimum of 50 observations. Standard errors are clustered at the importer-exporter-
HS4 level, except in Column 5 where they are additionally clustered by year. Column 6 restricts the sample to
a constant sample. Column 7 reports results where the control group only contains observations with zero tariff
changes. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 99, 95 and 90 percent level respectively. Observations are reported
in millions.




                                                           24
Alternative instruments, outcome variables, and fixed effects                                The baseline instrument
excludes large trading partners from both treatment and the control groups. Column 2 of Table
3 reports the results when admitting these countries into the treatment group. In this case the
instrument is simply the change in the MFN tariff rate for all countries subject to the MFN tariff
rate. The point estimates fall to about -0.9 for the long-run elasticity. Columns 3 and 4 report results
for quantities and unit values, respectively. It turns out that the impact in the long run is mostly
on quantities. The response of unit values is noisy and in general insignificant. For interpreting the
unit values coefficients, it is important to keep in mind that these are unit values exclusive of tariffs.
Thus, a zero estimated coefficient on unit values indicates complete pass-through of tariff changes to
the buyers in the importing country. Appendix Table A11 contains results for the elasticity estimated
with the multilateral resistance terms at the HS6 level. The estimates are somewhat smaller than
the baseline, though the sample shrinks and the standard errors widen.17

Extensive margin Our baseline specifications are specified in log differences and our data are at
the country-pair product level. Thus, our sample consists of instances where country-pair product
flows are positive in both the initial and end periods. Many trade models emphasize exit and entry of
firms into export markets (see, e.g. Melitz, 2003; Ruhl, 2008; Alessandria and Choi, 2014; Alessandria,
Choi, and Ruhl, 2014; Ruhl and Willis, 2017).18 The firm-level extensive margin of country-pair-
product markets with already positive trade is reflected in our baseline elasticity estimates. However,
our baseline estimation ignores the possibility that tariff changes lead to (dis)appearance of trade
flows at the country-pair-product level.

To implement specifications for this margin, we use the differenced inverse hyperbolic sine transfor-
mation instead of log differences as suggested by Burbidge, Magee, and Robb (1988). This transfor-
mation allows us to include zero or missing trade flows, while approximating logs for larger values of
the data.19

We stress that including zero trade observations in the sample need not increase the trade elasticity
point estimates. How the point estimates change relative to the baseline depends on the relative
importance of observations where trade switches from, say, zero to positive, compared to observations
where trade goes from zero to zero. If a tariff falls and many zero trade observations turn positive,
the elasticity will be pushed up. However, if following a tariff reduction many zero observations stay
  17
      Note that in our baseline estimation, time differencing already eliminates importer-exporter-HS6 fixed effect in
levels.
   18
      As highlighted by Ruhl (2008), among others, the long-run elasticity may be even higher when the extensive margin
is taken into account.
   19
      Tariff data are typically not missing and we can always construct ln i,j,p,t , so we do not need the inverse hyperbolic
transformation for tariffs. Bellemare and Wichman (2020) highlight that caution must be used in interpreting the
estimated coefficient as an elasticity, but in our case the estimated  h can be interpreted as an elasticity. The estimated
coefficient converges to an elasticity as the underlying variable being transformed (trade values in our case) takes on
large enough values on average. This is the case in the trade data.


                                                             25
at zero, the elasticity estimate will be pushed down, since, on average, trade changes become less
responsive to tariff changes.

As a result, elasticity estimates that incorporate the extensive margin are sensitive to which zeros
are added to the sample. We report two sets of estimates. In the first, we include all available zero
trade observations for exporter-HS 1-digit section to any importer in instances where some exports
are ever observed.20 In the second, we only include observations where trade goes from zero to
positive, or from positive to zero. This approach gives the extensive margin maximum chance to
increase the absolute values of elasticity estimates, in the sense that it only admits observations for
which extensive margin changes actually occur. This sample restriction corresponds more closely to
quantitative models and firm-level analyses where the extensive margin is active. However, it should
interpreted as an upper bound on the sensitivity of trade flows to tariffs as it effectively selects
the sample based on outcomes. All extensive margin estimates do not include pretrend controls.
Therefore the results in this exercise must be compared to the baseline estimates without pretrend
controls (Column 2 of Table 2).21

The resulting estimates in columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 can be interpreted as the total elasticity,
inclusive of both the intensive and product-level extensive margins. When including more zeros
(column 5), the point estimates are similar to the baseline initially, smaller in the long run. We
conjecture that this is because the estimation sample now includes many instances of trade being
zero at both t - 1 and t + h. Since these appear as zero changes in the sample, they drive down
the point estimate. Column 6 reports the extensive margin response when we only include zeros in
instances where trade goes from zero to positive, or from positive to zero. As expected, the 10 year
elasticity including the extensive margin is slightly higher (-1.64) than the corresponding intensive
margin instrumented specification without pretrend controls (-1.46).

Additional results, diagnostics, and robustness                    Column 7 of Table 3 estimates a distributed-
lag model as an alternative to the local projection specification. This approach has two disadvantages
  20
      That is, if country A ever exports any product in HS 1-digit section Z to importer B in any year, all the zero
exports of products belonging to section Z from A to B in every year are added to the sample. This leaves out of the
estimation sample export flows between pairs of countries in broad sectors that never occurred, and thus are unlikely
to respond to tariff changes. A more extreme approach is to just include all the possible zeros. Predictably, this leads
to even lower elasticity point estimates, as it increases the fraction of the sample in which trade flows go from zero to
zero.
   21
      Including pre-trend controls leads to elasticity estimates much lower in absolute value, and below the baseline
(intensive margin) estimates. This appears to be due to the fact that adding zero observations adds to the sample
many instances of occasional exporting, where entry is followed by exit and vice versa. As a result, the pre-trend control
for lagged log change in trade has a negative sign and is a very powerful predictor of the subsequent change in trade
(t-statistic of about 2000). If this part of the sample is dominated by idiosyncratic shocks that manifest themselves in
occasional exporting behavior, there would be less for tariff changes to explain. Reporting extensive margin estimates
without pre-trend controls thus gives the extensive margin maximum chance to produce larger elasticities relative to
the baseline.



                                                           26
relative to the baseline: (i) it requires a panel of non-missing log growth rates for trade, tariffs, and
the instrument for every lag, reducing the estimation sample greatly; and (ii) it imposes linearity on
the estimates. Caveats aside, the distributed lag specification with 10 lags yields a long-run trade
elasticity of 3.17 with a standard error of 1.25, while the number of observations falls to just around
6.08 million. This point estimate is statistically indistinguishable from our baseline estimates.22
Finally, the last column of Table 3 estimates the elasticity on a sample where tariffs do not vary
within an importer-HS6. This drops importer-product instances where tariffs are set at finer levels
of disaggregation, such as HS8 or HS10. Again, the results are very similar to the baseline at all
horizons.23

Appendix B presents the results for all the specifications at every horizon. This appendix also
reports the first stage F -statistics for the baseline instrument and the all partners instrument for
every horizon. In all cases, the first stage F -statistics are much higher than 10.

Other candidates for instruments There are other candidate instruments that could in principle
be considered under the WTO framework. Here, we discuss these potential instruments and issues
with each of them.

A natural candidate instrument is WTO accession. When a country such as China joins the WTO,
the negotiations are protracted, and there are substantial anticipation effects (see for instance Pierce
and Schott, 2016). However, once China joins the WTO and sets its MFN tariffs, small third
countries in the WTO are also affected by these MFN tariffs. These countries are plausibly facing an
exogenous change, conditional on the anticipation effects, as they were likely not key players in the
negotiations. While there are a few WTO accessions in our data, a key problem with implementing
this instrument is that product-level tariff data are typically not available in standard datasets for
countries before they join the WTO. It is therefore not possible to construct tariff changes (the
change from the pre-WTO rate to the MFN rate) for estimation.

A second instrument would be a change in the MFN bound, which is the maximum tariff a country
  22
      Formally, we estimate the equation 0 ln Xi,j,p,t = 10        k
                                                             k=0  0 ln i,j,p,t-k + i,p,t + j,p,t + i,j,p + ui,j,p,t instru-
                                      instr
menting 0 ln i,j,p,t-k with 0 ln i,j,p,t-k , for all k. The trade elasticity at horizon h reported in Table 3 is then
   h     k
   k=0  . As this estimation requires 11 instruments for 11 endogenous variables, we report the Sanderson-Windmeijer
F -statistic for weak instruments in Appendix Table A10. Conceptually, there is a subtle difference between the object
estimated by local projections and the distributed lag approach. Whereas the local projections take into account the
time series behavior of the tariff variable, the distributed lag coefficients cumulated up to horizon h are estimates of
the response of trade to a permanent once-and-for-all change in tariffs that happened at horizon 0. This distinction
does not matter for the long-run limit, but is relevant for finite h.
   23
      We have also checked whether the trade response depends on the size of the tariff shock. To do so, we estimated
separate elasticities depending on whether the absolute value of the initial (nonzero) tariff change is below or above
the median nonzero absolute value tariff change. The estimated elasticities for both size categories are very similar and
we do not report them here.



                                                            27
Table 3: Trade Elasticity, Robustness: Alternative Instruments, Outcomes, Fixed Effects, Samples
and Models

              Baseline    All Partners   Quantities   Unit Values   Extensive   Extensive Sel     DL          SD1
                (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)

     t        -0.262***    -0.275***      -0.179*        -0.049       0.025         -0.082        -0.413    -0.313***
               (0.072)      (0.030)       (0.093)       (0.057)      (0.039)       (0.063)       (0.338)     (0.096)
     obs        31.66        57.14         31.66          31.66      131.03          56.35         6.08        28.7

     t+1      -0.756***    -0.624***     -0.664***       -0.027     -0.484***    -0.805***        -0.523    -0.889***
               (0.108)      (0.047)       (0.136)       (0.080)      (0.063)      (0.089)        (0.466)     (0.142)
     obs        26.18        47.19         26.18          26.18       108.13       49.11           6.08       23.76

     t+3      -1.024***    -0.648***     -0.810***       -0.134     -0.590***    -0.955***      -1.578**    -1.228***
               (0.146)      (0.061)       (0.184)       (0.104)      (0.084)      (0.107)        (0.685)     (0.200)
     obs         20.8        38.16          20.8          20.8        87.22         41.5          6.08        18.86

     t+5      -1.237***    -0.718***     -1.422***     0.291**      -0.730***    -1.183***      -2.097**    -1.180***
               (0.185)      (0.073)       (0.232)      (0.128)       (0.100)      (0.122)        (0.861)     (0.253)
     obs        16.69        30.89         16.69        16.69         69.73        34.61          6.08        15.12

     t+7      -2.055***    -0.940***     -2.166***       0.162      -0.902***    -1.496***      -2.710***   -1.990***
               (0.233)      (0.091)       (0.292)       (0.161)      (0.114)      (0.138)        (1.016)     (0.318)
     obs        13.22        24.64         13.22         13.22        55.24         28.4           6.08       11.96

     t + 10   -2.122***    -0.866***     -1.765***       -0.078     -0.941***    -1.638***      -3.166**    -2.360***
               (0.325)      (0.122)       (0.406)       (0.221)      (0.153)      (0.181)        (1.252)     (0.444)
     obs         8.31        15.92          8.31          8.31        35.09        19.24          6.08         7.52


Notes: This table presents alternative estimates for the results from estimating equation (2.4), varying the instrument
or outcome variable. Column 2 uses an alternative definition of the instrument where all trade partners subject to the
MFN regime are included. Column 3 reports results for quantities, and Column 4 the results for unit values. Column
5 presents results including the extensive margin using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation for trade flows,
and all zero trade observations for importer-exporter-section pair with ever positive trade. Column 6 presents results
including the extensive margin using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation for trade flows, and only zero trade
observations when trade switches from zero to positive, or vice versa. Column 7 presents results from a distributed
lag model. Column 8 reports the results based on a sample where tariffs do not vary within an importer-HS6. All
specifications include importer-HS4-year, exporter-HS4-year and importer-exporter-HS4 fixed effects and the baseline
pretrend controls (one lag). Standard errors are clustered at the importer-exporter-HS4 level. ***, ** and * indicate
significance at the 99, 95 and 90 percent level respectively. Observations are reported in millions.




                                                           28
in the WTO can apply against other countries. While these are likely less discretionary, the MFN
bounds are set in the WTO accession treaty and very hard to change ex-post. The lack of instances
of changes in the bounds implies there is insufficient variation in this potential instrument to estimate
the elasticity.

5     Theory and Applications

We stress that equations (2.2), (2.3), and (2.4) are "model free", and under our identification as-
sumptions will produce estimates of h by definition. The mapping between these estimates and
parameters in theoretical models then depends on model structure. This section provides a mapping
to dynamic and static trade models. We first develop a simple dynamic model of sluggish adjustment
to trade cost shocks. The recent literature on trade dynamics is rich in both substantive mechanisms
and quantification (see, among many others, Costantini and Melitz, 2007; Ruhl, 2008; Burstein and
Melitz, 2013; Drozd and Nosal, 2012; Alessandria and Choi, 2014; Alessandria, Choi, and Ruhl, 2014;
Ruhl and Willis, 2017; Fitzgerald, Haller, and Yedid-Levi, 2019; Alessandria, Arkolakis, and Ruhl,
2020). The goal of this section is not to revisit all of the proposed mechanisms for gradual adjust-
ment of trade. Rather, we focus on the minimal common structure that characterizes these models.
Appendix C lays out the model details and proves the propositions in this section.

An attractive feature of our model is that it delivers analytical expressions for trade elasticities at
all horizons that clarify the determinants of the adjustment dynamics. In this setting, we state the
short- and long-run model-implied elasticities and the properties of their time path. We also show
that this framework delivers the estimating equations used above up to a first order approximation.
We then explore a simple quantification exercise that matches the time path of the trade elasticities
following a tariff shock. Finally, turning to the mapping from our estimates to the parameter relevant
for static trade models, we explore the quantitative implications of our estimates for the long run
gains from trade.

5.1    Dynamics of Trade Elasticities

Setup The minimalist model that can capture differing trade elasticities in the short vs. the long
run has to feature a variable that determines trade flows but cannot instantaneously and fully adjust
upon a change in trade costs. In addition, a long and smooth path of increasing trade elasticities
requires some curvature in the costs of adjustments, such that the long run is not reached in the
first period after the shock. Following a long tradition in the literature, we assume that foreign
markets are served by monopolistically-competitive firms that face CES demand. We focus on the
partial equilibrium decisions of firms from one market selling to another, and thus suppress importer,
exporter, and product subscripts. Consistent with the gravity tradition, general equilibrium objects


                                                   29
such as domestic unit costs or foreign demand shifts are absorbed by country-product-time fixed
effects, and thus we ignore general equilibrium forces in this section. Throughout, we assume that
marginal costs are constant at the firm level and thus exporting decisions are separable across loca-
tions. The setup below nests versions of the Krugman (1980), Melitz (2003), and Arkolakis (2010)
models, as well as extensions with pricing to market (e.g. Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo, 2003; Atkeson
and Burstein, 2008).

Trade between the two countries can be expressed as

                                                Xt = px
                                                      t qt n t ,


where nt is a generic mass, px
                             t is the exporters' price exclusive of tariffs, and qt is the quantity
exported per unit mass. Crucially for the short vs. long-run distinction, we assume that px
                                                                                          t and qt
adjust instantaneously to tariff changes, whereas nt is pre-determined by one period, and can only
change from the next period onwards. Quantity and price are a function of tariffs, and quantity must
be consistent with market clearing at the price: px    x                  x
                                                  t = p (t ) and qt = q (pt , t ). Exporting generates
flow profits  (t ) = qt (px
                          t - c), where c is the unit cost. Define the following elasticities:

                            ln q                ln q                   ln px             ln 
                  q,p :=          ,    q, :=         ,    p, :=              ,   , :=        ,          (5.1)
                            ln px               ln                     ln                ln 

where we assume that q,p < 0, q, < 0, and , < 0.

The measure nt comes from profit-maximizing agents serving the export market. Let r denote the
real interest rate at which firms discount future profits, and G a positive and increasing function.
Dynamics in this model are governed by two equations:

                                           1
                                  vt =         Et [t+1 + (1 -  ) vt+1 ] ,                               (5.2)
                                         1+r
                                  nt   = nt-1 (1 -  ) + G (vt-1 ) ,                                     (5.3)

                                                               t
                                                         1-
subject to the transversality condition limt             1+r       vt = 0. The forward-looking equation (5.2)
states that the value of exporting vt is the expected present value of future flow profits from exporting.
The backward-looking equation (5.3) describes how the mass nt evolves. The increment to the mass
nt today G (vt-1 ) is a function of the value of exporting last period, when the entry or investment
decision was made. Parameter  is a rate of depreciation or an exogenous exit rate.

The model's tractability stems from the fact that equations (5.2) and (5.3) can be solved sequentially.




                                                         30
For any stochastic process for tariffs {t }t=0 , equation (5.2) can be solved forward to obtain

                                                              k
                                      1                1-
                              vt =       Et                        (t+k+1 ) .                      (5.4)
                                     1+r               1+r
                                                 k=0

Importantly the value vt does not depend on the evolution of nt . The resulting sequence {vt }t=0 ,
can then be used to obtain nt after solving equation (5.3) backwards,

                                     t-1
                              nt =         (1 -  ) G (vt-1- ) + (1 -  )t n0 .                      (5.5)
                                     =0

For a given initial value of n0 and a stochastic process for tariffs {t }t=0 , equations (5.4)-(5.5) and
elasticities (5.1) characterize the path of the mass of exporters nt . The evolution of nt together with
the static price and quantity decisions then fully determines exports Xt = px
                                                                            t qt nt . We treat the
elasticities (5.1) as constant throughout, which amounts to solving the model to first order.

Examples In the Krugman (1980) model or the Arkolakis (2010) model with a representative
firm, p, = 0 (recall this is the tariff-exclusive price elasticity), and q,p = q, = , = - ,
where  is the demand elasticity. In the Melitz (2003) model, if the exporting cutoff can change
instantaneously conditional on the constant mass of firms nt , p, = - ln / ln  , where  is an
aggregate productivity measure of firms serving the export market, and q,p = q, = - . In the
Krugman (1980) and Melitz (2003) models, nt is the mass of entering firms and G(·) is the cumulative
distribution function of the sunk costs of entry into exporting. To ensure smooth adjustment of the
mass of firms following a change in trade costs, we assume that this distribution is nontrivial. In the
Arkolakis (2010) model with a representative firm, nt is the fraction of the foreign market penetrated
by the firm, and the function G is a transformation of the convex cost of acquiring new customers.
Appendix C.2 provides a detailed discussion of specific microfoundations of this model.

The short-run trade elasticity        Let t0 denote the date of the tariff change. The short run trade
elasticity is:
                                       d ln Xt0
                                0 :=            = (1 + q,p ) p, + q, .                             (5.6)
                                       d ln t0
Recall that the mass nt is predetermined within the period, and hence the derivative of nt0 with
respect to t0 is zero. The short-run trade elasticity is determined by the exporters' price response
(p, ), the quantity response to tariff changes (q, ), and the quantity response to price changes
(q,p ). Because px
                 t and qt are static decisions, they are fully determined by period-t tariffs. Thus, the
short-run elasticity is not a function of future tariffs. As an example, in the Krugman (1980) model
the short-run trade elasticity is 0 = - .



                                                       31
The long-run trade elasticity            The long-run trade elasticity is the steady state change in trade
following a steady state change in tariffs. The long-run trade elasticity differs from the short-run
                                                                                                                 ( )
elasticity because nt adjusts. If tariffs are constant (t =  t) equation (5.4) becomes v =                       +r .
                                                                               G(v ) 24                     d ln n
Equation (5.5) then implies that nt monotonically converges to n =               .        It follows that   d ln  =
                     g (v )v
, , where  :=        G(v ) .   These two expressions characterize the non-stochastic steady state of the
model. Hence, the long-run trade elasticity is

                                         d ln X       d ln n
                                    :=          = 0 +        = 0 + , .                                          (5.7)
                                         d ln         d ln 

In the long run, the response of trade to tariff changes depends on  > 0 and , < 0, the elasticity
of flow profits with respect to tariffs. Consistent with intuition, the more sensitive are profits to
tariffs, the greater the absolute value of the long-run trade elasticity.

The long-run trade elasticity increases in the elasticity  of mass n with respect to value v . The
precise meaning of  depends on the underlying microfoundation. In the dynamic Krugman (1980)
model,  captures the mass of firms at the margin of entry. The greater the mass of firms at the
margin, the more n changes in response to a change in per-firm profits and hence value v . In the
dynamic Arkolakis (2010) model, firms face a convex cost function f (a) of adding a mass of a new
                                              -1
                                     f (a)a
customers. In that case,  =           f (a)        . Greater curvature of this cost function leads to a lower
value of , implying a smaller trade response to tariff shocks.

Transitional dynamics and horizon-h elasticities To derive a horizon-specific elasticity, we
must specify further details of the time path of tariffs. This is because unlike in the short run or
the steady state calculations, the entire path of (expected) tariffs matters for the entry decision in
each period. To make progress, we consider an unexpected change to tariffs at time t0 . This shock
                                                                                                   d ln t0 +h   
is followed by a subsequent evolution of tariffs (an impulse response), denoted by                  d ln t0           .
                                                                                                                h=0
This sequence is the model counterpart of our estimated impulse response function of tariff changes
as depicted in the left panel of Figure 4. Since the tariff shock at time t0 may be followed by
further shocks thereafter, agents cannot perfectly predict future tariffs or profits and therefore form
expectations as in equation (5.4).

The horizon-h impulse response function of trade to the tariff shock at t0 is:

                                    d ln Xt0 +h     d ln t0 +h d ln nt0 +h
                                                = 0           +            .                                    (5.8)
                                      d ln t0        d ln t0     d ln t0
  24
    The convergence of nt to its steady state value is geometric and monotone. The rate of convergence is  . We
provide details in Appendix C.3.




                                                          32
The horizon-h trade elasticity is then computed as the ratio of the two impulse response functions:

                                                 d ln Xt0 +h            d ln nt0 +h
                                        h          d ln t0          0     d ln t0
                                        :=       d ln t0 +h
                                                               = +      d ln t0 +h
                                                                                      ,                                (5.9)
                                                   d ln t0                d ln t0

                                             d ln t0 +h
as long as this object is finite (i.e.        d ln t0     = 0). Note that this definition of the horizon-h trade
elasticity coincides with equation (2.1) for a tariff change of one marginal unit, when we replace the
infinitesimal difference with the difference operator .

To fully characterize the horizon-h trade elasticity, we must characterize the last term in (5.9), the
adjustment of nt to the tariff shock.
                                                                             d ln t0 +    
Proposition 1. Consider an arbitrary evolution of tariffs                     d ln t0          after the shock at t0 . The
                                                                                          =1
impulse response function of ln nt at horizon h = 0, 1, 2, ... is

                                     h-1                                
        d ln nt0 +h     +r                                                     1-         d ln t0 +k+   +1
                    = ,                      (1 -  )h-1-k Et0 +k                                             .        (5.10)
          d ln t0       1+r                                                    1+r            d ln t0
                                      k=0                               =0


Proof. See Appendix C.4.


Plugging (5.10) into (5.9) delivers the horizon-h trade elasticity. As is clear from equations (5.8) and
(5.9), the sluggish adjustment of trade to tariff shocks is entirely driven by the sluggish adjustment
of nt . While this adjustment is somewhat complicated (equation 5.10), it delivers a useful insight: in
general, all tariff changes from time t0 into the infinite future affect the trade response to tariff shocks.
Proposition 1 captures these tariff changes as the elasticities of time t0 + tariffs with respect to the
tariff shock at time t0 , for   = 1, 2, .... For a given time horizon h, elasticities for 0                      < h reflect
changes to past tariffs, the elasticity for         = h reflects a change to current tariffs, and elasticities for
 > h reflect expected changes to future tariffs.

As the following proposition shows, h converges to the long-run trade elasticity, unless the tariff
change induced by the shock in period t0 returns to zero in the limit.
                                d ln t0 +h
Proposition 2. If limh           d ln t0     = 0 and is finite, then limh h = .


Proof. See Appendix C.4.


Although not surprising, this result is important because it validates our interpretation of horizon-h
trade elasticities for large h as estimates of the long-run elasticity.

For concreteness, we next consider two simple examples.

                                                               33
Example 1: tariff constant after 1 period               Let there be a surprise change in the tariff sequence
              d ln t0 +h   
of the form    d ln t0           = {1,  ln >t0 ,  ln >t0 ,  ln >t0 , ...}. That is, the tariff change takes the
                           h=0
value one in the impact period, and is subsequently constant at  ln >t0 . Note that this example
nests a one-time permanent change in tariffs (if  ln >t0 = 1), and is a good approximation of our
estimated impulse response function in Figure 4.

At horizon h  1 the trade elasticity is

                                         h = 0 + , 1 - (1 -  )h ,                                       (5.11)

with 0 given by (5.6). The trade elasticity converges geometrically to the long-run trade elasticity
at the rate  . Convergence occurs in one period if  = 1.

Example 2: AR(1) Second, let the tariffs follow a first order autoregressive process following
an initial shock, so that  ln t+1 =  ·  ln t for t > t0 and 0 <  < 1. Since this process is
mean-reverting, the tariff change approaches zero as h tends to infinity. It follows that the premise
of Proposition 2 does not hold and that the long-run trade elasticity is not defined in this case.
However, we can still compute the elasticity at a finite horizon.

First, consider the case 1 -  < . Intuitively, this condition requires that the rate of depreciation is
higher than the rate of mean reversion of tariffs. In this case the horizon-h trade elasticity is

                                                                                       h
                                                   ( + r)                      1-
                    h = 0 + ,                                            1-                .            (5.12)
                                        [1 + r - (1 -  ) ] 1 -   1-             
                                                                  


As in Example 1, the trade elasticity increases with time horizon h in absolute value. Further,
with 1 -  <  the horizon-h trade elasticity does converge, although not generally to the long-run
trade elasticity. While convergence is still geometric, the rate of convergence now depends on the
persistence of the tariff process. Convergence is faster for more persistent tariff processes, i.e. greater
values of . If tariffs mean-revert sufficiently quickly,   1 -  , the horizon-h trade elasticity does
not converge.

Notice that as  approaches 1, the horizon-h trade elasticity in the AR(1) case (5.12) converges
pointwise to the horizon-h trade elasticity under a permanent tariff change (5.11). This property
is important for our empirical application. Although tariffs changes in our sample retain 75% of
their initial impulse 10 years later, in short samples it is not possible to statistically distinguish
between tariff processes featuring truly permanent or highly persistent tariff changes (Hamilton,
1994, p. 445). Since Proposition 2 does not apply under mean-reverting tariffs ( < 1), one may be
concerned that the horizon-h trade elasticity is not informative about the long-run trade elasticity.
This property alleviates this concern. For  sufficiently close to one, the horizon-h trade elasticity

                                                        34
essentially converges to the long-run trade elasticity, even though tariffs mean-revert in the very long
run.

Estimating equations While we led off the paper with an atheoretical estimating equation, we
now show that this estimating equation can be microfounded by means of the model above.

Proposition 3. The model delivers estimating equation (2.2), where

                                      h-1                     
                   h       +r                         h-1-k        1-    k+   +1
                   X   = ,                  (1 -  )                                + 0 h
                                                                                         .
                           1+r                                     1+r
                                      k=0                     =0

h is defined as the regression coefficient of  ln 
                                              h   i,j,p,t on 0 ln i,j,p,t in the population, and can be
estimated from equation (2.3).
                                                                     X,h       X,h
After augmenting the model with additional shocks, the fixed effects j,p,t and i,p,t capture a weighted
sum of past, present, and expected future supply and demand shocks, respectively. The error term
includes past, present, and expected future time-varying bilateral and product-specific demand shocks
and non-tariff trade barriers, as well as the initial state.


Proof. See Appendix C.4.


Quantification Next, we explore the time path of elasticities. To do this, we calibrate the dynamic
model and subject it to the two tariff shocks in the examples above.

We choose a demand elasticity  of 1.1. This parameter immediately determines the short-run
elasticity, since in the CES-monopolistic competition model 0 = - . Based on equation (5.7), and
using the fact that , = - in the CES-monopolistic competition model, we set  = 0.82 to match
our estimated long-run elasticity of   -2. We further set the depreciation rate to  = 0.25 to
roughly match the rate of convergence to the long run. Calibration of these parameters is sufficient
to compute the transition path of exports in Example 1. For Example 2, we also need the interest
rate and the AR(1) coefficient. We set these to r = 0.03 and  = 0.955. The latter parameter is
chosen to roughly match the impulse response function of tariffs.

The left panel of Figure 7 plots the paths of tariffs. The red line depicts the tariff response of
Example 1, where tariffs increase by one unit in the impact period, and then stay constant at 0.75
starting in period 1 onwards. The blue line is the AR(1) path of tariffs following an impulse of unit
size (Example 2). The green line plots the impulse response of tariffs estimated in the data, which
is quite similar to the two model experiments.

The right panel of Figure 7 displays the trade elasticities. The green line depicts the econometric


                                                       35
                        Figure 7: Time Path of Elasticities in the Dynamic Model




  Notes: This figure illustrates the trade elasticities as implied by the model.




estimates. Because the data are annual, and it is unlikely that all tariff changes went into effect
on January 1, the year-zero trade elasticity is most likely subject to partial-year effects. Thus, for
the purposes of comparing to the model, we consider the h = 1 empirical estimate to be the impact
elasticity 0 . The red and blue lines depict the model trade elasticity in the two experiments. They
are nearly indistinguishable from one another.

The model succeeds in delivering a smooth path of adjustment that takes approximately a decade.
The key parameter for the speed of adjustment is the depreciation rate  . The slow adjustment
observed in the data implies that  is substantially below 1. The main shortcoming of the model is
that it cannot match our short-run elasticity point estimate of -0.76, since the CES-monopolistic
competition assumption requires that  > 1.25
  25
    A natural conjecture is that flexible markups may help push the short-run trade elasticity below 1. We experimented
with versions of the model with local distribution costs à la Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003). With local distribution
costs, the net-of-tariff price received by the exporter px   t falls when a tariff increases, helping push down the trade
elasticity all else equal. However, the flip side of a fall in px
                                                                t is a ceteris paribus increase in the quantity imported. It
turns out there is no combination of  > 1 and local distribution share between 0 and 1 that delivers a less than unitary
trade elasticity as we measure it (of pxt qt with respect to t ). In addition, Table 3 shows a virtually nil response of pt
                                                                                                                           x

to tariffs, a finding consistent with recent estimates using the US-China trade war (Fajgelbaum et al., 2020; Cavallo
et al., 2019). Both of these points suggest that imperfect pass-through into net-of-tariff prices is unlikely to produce
a short-run elasticity below 1. Developing a framework that can successfully reproduce a short-run elasticity below 1
remains a fruitful avenue for future research. One possibility is variable distribution margins. Indeed, Cavallo et al.
(2019) document a fall in retail margins for US imports affected by the trade war.


                                                            36
5.2     The Long Run Welfare Gains from Trade

As is well known from Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012, henceforth ACR), the gains
from trade relative to autarky in many quantitative trade models can be expressed as a function
                                                                             1/
of the trade elasticity and the domestic absorption share: 1 - jj , with jj the share of spending
on domestically-produced goods in total spending. The static models in which this formula applies
are metaphors for the long run, and the gains from trade should be interpreted as steady state
comparisons between autarky and trade. Thus, we use the longest horizon elasticity estimated
above, h = 10, as the long-run value.

To translate our estimates to the welfare-relevant elasticity , it is important to note that in our data
the outcome variable Xi,j,t does not include tariff payments. On the other hand, most theoretical
gravity relationships relate tariff-inclusive spending by domestic agents to trade costs, with the trade
elasticity defined correspondingly. To go from our estimated coefficient to the elasticity relevant for
welfare, we must add 1. Thus, our estimates imply that the welfare-relevant elasticity  is around
-1.26

Figure 8 displays the gains from trade as a function of jj , under our value of  and under an
elasticity of -5 considered by ACR.27 As expected, the gains from trade are substantially larger
with our elasticity. For the US, gains from trade are 5.27% for  = -1, compared to 1.0% for
 = -5. The median welfare gain is 22.9% in a sample of 64 countries, compared to 4.2% implied by
 = -5. Table A12 reports the gains from trade under  = -1, -5, and -10 for selected countries
in the sample.

The blue bars in Appendix Figure A6 report the gains from trade using the multi-sector ACR formula
and our sector-specific elasticity values (section 4.1). We benchmark these to the sector-specific trade
elasticity estimates from Ossa (2015), which explores the properties of multi-sector ACR formulas.
To do this, we concord the sectoral elasticity estimates in that paper to the 11 HS sections for which
we estimate elasticities. Once again, the gains from trade implied by our estimates are considerably
larger than previously suggested in the literature. Our estimates applied to the ACR multi-sector
formula imply mean gains from trade of 26.7%, compared to 12.8% using the elasticities in Ossa
  26
     Let Xi,j = i,j Xi,j be the steady state spending by consumers in economy i on goods from j inclusive of tariffs.
The elasticity in the ACR formula is  = d ln Xi,j /d ln i,j . The object we estimate is the elasticity of trade flows
exclusive of tariff payments Xi,j to tariffs: d ln Xi,j /d ln i,j =  - 1. As an example, in an Armington/Krugman setting
 corresponds to 1 -  , where  is the elasticity of substitution between goods coming from different origins. In that
case, our long-run coefficient estimate has the interpretation  = - . In an Eaton-Kortum setting,  is the Frechet
dispersion parameter. In that case, it can be recovered by adding 1 to our  estimates. This calculation assumes that
Xi,j is recorded as c.i.f. The relationship between  and  is the same if Xi,j is f.o.b., since the iceberg costs i,j are
log-additive and make up the error term in our estimation.
  27
     We use data from the OECD IO tables for 64 countries for the year 2006, the midpoint of our trade and tariff
sample. We compute import penetration by dividing imports by gross output as in ACR.


                                                          37
                                         Figure 8: Gains from Trade




Notes: This figure displays the gains from trade as a function of the domestic absorption ratio jj under our baseline
welfare-relevant elasticity of -1 (solid blue line) and a comparison elasticity of -5 (red dashed line). "World Median"
denotes the median domestic absorption ratio of the 64 countries in the OECD world input-output tables in 2006.



(2015).

We caveat these results in two respects. First, we acknowledge that ACR formulas are not known
to apply in explicitly dynamic models (for some results bridging ACR with dynamics, see Arkolakis,
Eaton, and Kortum, 2011; Alessandria, Choi, and Ruhl, 2014). This is a general critique of all
applications of the ACR formulas in static environments. Nonetheless, the widespread use of ACR
formulas makes them a natural setting for benchmarking the implications of our elasticity estimates
relative to the conventional values. Exploring the implications of our estimates for gains from trade
in explicitly dynamic settings is a fruitful avenue for future research.

Second, care must be taken when going from the micro elasticity estimated in our empirical work
to the macro elasticity that enters the ACR formula. The calculations above make the implicit


                                                          38
assumption that the two coincide. While there are many models in which this is not true, some of
this concern can be allayed by using the multi-sector variant of the formula, that aligns more closely
the levels of disaggregation at which the coefficients are estimated and in the theory. Using our micro
elasticity values in place of the macro elasticity is conservative in the sense that we would expect the
elasticities of substitution to be higher at finer levels of product disaggregation.

6   Conclusion

We develop a novel method to estimate the trade elasticity, a key parameter in virtually all models
in international economics. To tackle the endogeneity problem that tariffs and trade flows are jointly
determined, we propose an instrument that relies on the WTO's MFN principle. We estimate
trade elasticities at different horizons, and find short-run values of about -0.76, and long-run values
close to -2. The estimates are robust to alternative specifications of the instrument and controls,
and uniformly larger than OLS. Our empirical strategy is not specific to a particular theoretical
framework, and applies to all models that have a gravity structure.

The long-run estimates imply the welfare-relevant trade elasticity is around 1 in absolute value. This
is significantly smaller than conventional wisdom in the literature, suggesting the welfare gains from
trade are larger than previously thought. Our finding that the trade elasticity differs by horizon and
converges to the "long-run" after about 7-10 years implies substantial adjustment costs to changing
trade volumes.




                                                   39
References

Adão, Rodrigo, Costas Arkolakis, and Sharat Ganapati. 2020. "Not-Parametric Gravity: Measuring
  the Aggregate Implications of Firm Heterogeneity." Mimeo, Chicago Booth, Yale, and Georgetown.

Alessandria, George, Costas Arkolakis, and Kim J. Ruhl. 2020. "Firm dynamics and trade." Forth-
  coming, Annual Review of Economics.

Alessandria, George and Horag Choi. 2014. "Establishment heterogeneity, exporter dynamics, and
  the effects of trade liberalization." Journal of International Economics 94 (2):207 ­ 223.

Alessandria, George, Horag Choi, and Kim Ruhl. 2014. "Trade Adjustment Dynamics and the Welfare
  Gains from Trade." NBER Working Papers 20663, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop. 2004. "Trade Costs." Journal of Economic Literature
  42 (3):691­751.

Anderson, James E. 1979. "A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation." American Economic
  Review 69 (1):106­116.

Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. "Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
  Puzzle." American Economic Review 93 (1):170­192.

Antràs, Pol and Gerard Padró i Miquel. 2011. "Foreign Influence and Welfare." Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics 84 (2):135­148.

Arkolakis, Costas. 2010. "Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International
  Trade." Journal of Political Economy 118 (6):1151­1199.

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2012. "New Trade Models, Same
  Old Gains?" American Economic Review 102 (1):94­130.

Arkolakis, Costas, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel S. Kortum. 2011. "Staggered Adjustment and Trade
  Dynamics." Mimeo, Yale and Penn State.

Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein. 2008. "Trade Costs, Pricing-to-Market, and International
  Relative Prices." American Economic Review 98 (5):1998­2031.

Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger, editors. 2016. Handbook of Commercial Policy, vol. 1. Elsevier-
  North Holland.

Baier, Scott L. and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand. 2007. "Do free trade agreements actually increase members'
  international trade?" Journal of International Economics 71 (1):72 ­ 95.


                                                 40
Baldwin, Richard and Daria Taglioni. 2006. "Gravity for Dummies and Dummies for Gravity Equa-
  tions." NBER Working Paper 12516.

Bas, Maria, Thierry Mayer, and Mathias Thoenig. 2017. "From micro to macro: Demand, supply,
  and heterogeneity in the trade elasticity." Journal of International Economics 108:1 ­ 19.

Bellemare, Marc F. and Casey J. Wichman. 2020. "Elasticities and the Inverse Hyperbolic Sine
  Transformation." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 82 (1):50­61.

Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A Crowley. 2013. "Import Protection, Business Cycles, and Exchange
  Rates: Evidence from the Great Recession." Journal of International Economics 90 (1):50­64.

Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley. 2014. "Emerging economies, trade policy, and macroeco-
  nomic shocks." Journal of Development Economics 111:261 ­ 273. Special Issue: Imbalances in
  Economic Development.

Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A Crowley. 2016. "The Empirical Landscape of Trade Policy." In The
  Handbook of Commercial Policy, vol. 1, edited by Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger, chap. 1.
  Elsevier-North Holland, 3­108.

Broda, Christian and David Weinstein. 2006. "Globalization and the Gains from Variety." Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 121 (2):541­85.

Burbidge, John B., Lonnie Magee, and A. Leslie Robb. 1988. "Alternative Transformations to Handle
  Extreme Values of the Dependent Variable." Journal of the American Statistical Association
  83 (401):123­127.

Burstein, Ariel and Marc Melitz. 2013. "Trade Liberalization and Firm Dynamics." In Advances in
  Economics and Econometrics Tenth World Congress. Applied Economics, vol. 2. Cambridge, UK:
  Cambridge University Press.

Burstein, Ariel T., Joao C. Neves, and Sergio Rebelo. 2003. "Distribution costs and real exchange rate
  dynamics during exchange-rate-based stabilizations." Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (6):1189­
  1214.

Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro. 2015.        "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
  NAFTA." Review of Economic Studies 82 (1):1­44.

Canova, Fabio and Luca Sala. 2009. "Back to square one: Identification issues in DSGE models."
  Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (4):431 ­ 449.

Cavallo, Alberto, Gita Gopinath, Brent Neiman, and Jenny Tang. 2019. "Tariff Passthrough at the
  Border and at the Store: Evidence from US Trade Policy." Forthcoming, American Economic
  Review: Insights.

                                                 41
Costantini, James and Marc Melitz. 2007. "The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjustment to Trade
  Liberalization."   In The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, edited by E. Helpman,
  D. Marin, and T. Verdier. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Donaldson, Dave. 2018. "Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastruc-
  ture." American Economic Review 108 (4-5):899­934.

Drozd, Lukasz A. and Jaromir B. Nosal. 2012. "Understanding International Prices: Customers as
  Capital." American Economic Review 102 (1):364­95.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel S. Kortum. 2002. "Technology, Geography, and Trade." Econometrica
  70 (5):1741­1779.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Patrick J. Kennedy, and Amit K. Khandelwal. 2020.
  "The Return to Protectionism." Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (1):1­55.

Feenstra, Robert. 1994. "New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices."
  American Economic Review 84 (1):157­77.

Feenstra, Robert C., Philip Luck, Maurice Obstfeld, and Katheryn N. Russ. 2018. "In Search of the
  Armington Elasticity." Review of Economics and Statistics 100 (1):135­150.

Fitzgerald, Doireann and Stefanie Haller. 2018. "Exporters and shocks." Journal of International
  Economics 113 (C):154­171.

Fitzgerald, Doireann, Stefanie Haller, and Yaniv Yedid-Levi. 2019. "How Exporters Grow." Mimeo,
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and Trinity College Dublin and Tiomkin School of Economics.

Fontagné, Lionel, Philippe Martin, and Gianluca Orefice. 2018. "The international elasticity puzzle
  is worse than you think." Journal of International Economics 115:115 ­ 129.

Gawande, Kishore, Pravin Krishna, and Michael J. Robbins. 2006. "Foreign Lobbies and U.S. Trade
  Policy." The Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (3):563­571.

Giri, Rahul, Kei-Mu Yi, and Hakan Yilmazkuday. 2020. "Gains from Trade: Does Sectoral Hetero-
  geneity Matter?" NBER Working Paper 26741.

Hamilton, James D. 1994. Time Series Analysis. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer. 2015. "Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook." In
  Handbook of International Economics, vol. 4, edited by Elhanan Helpman, Kenneth Rogoff, and
  Gita Gopinath. Elsevier B.V., 131­195.



                                                42
Head, Keith and John Ries. 2001. "Increasing Returns versus National Product Differentiation as an
  Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade." American Economic Review 91 (4):858­876.

Imbs, Jean and Isabelle Mejean. 2015. "Elasticity Optimism." American Economic Journal: Macroe-
  conomics 7 (3):43­83.

------. 2017. "Trade Elasticities." Review of International Economics 25 (2):383­402.

Jordà, Òscar. 2005. "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections." American
  Economic Review 95 (1):161­182.

Krugman, Paul. 1980. "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade." Amer-
  ican Economic Review 70 (5):950­59.

Lake, James and Maia K. Linask. 2016. "Could tariffs be pro-cyclical?" Journal of International
  Economics 103:124 ­ 146.

Lind, Nelson and Natalia Ramondo. 2020. "Trade with Correlation." Mimeo, Emory University and
  Boston University.

Melitz, Marc J. 2003. "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
  Productivity." Econometrica 71 (6):1695­1725.

Novy, Dennis. 2013. "International trade without CES: Estimating translog gravity." Journal of
  International Economics 89 (2):271 ­ 282.

Ossa, Ralph. 2015. "Why trade matters after all." Journal of International Economics 97 (2):266 ­
  277.

Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott. 2016. "The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US Manufacturing
  Employment." American Economic Review 106 (7):1632­62.

Redding, Stephen and Anthony J. Venables. 2004. "Economic geography and international inequal-
  ity." Journal of International Economics 62 (1):53­82.

Romalis, John. 2007. "NAFTA's and CUSFTA's Impact on International Trade." Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics 89 (3):416­435.

Ruhl, Kim J. 2008. "The International Elasticity Puzzle." Working Paper.

Ruhl, Kim J. and Jonathan L. Willis. 2017. "New Exporter Dynamics." International Economic
  Review 58 (3):703­726.

Sequeira, Sandra. 2016. "Corruption, Trade Costs, and Gains from Tariff Liberalization: Evidence
  from Southern Africa." American Economic Review 106 (10):3029­63.

                                               43
Simonovska, Ina and Michael E. Waugh. 2014. "The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence."
  Journal of International Economics 92 (1):34­50.

Sims, Christopher A. 1980. "Macroeconomics and Reality." Econometrica 48 (1):1­48.

Soderbery, Anson. 2015. "Estimating import supply and demand elasticities: Analysis and implica-
  tions." Journal of International Economics 96 (1):1­17.

------. 2018. "Trade elasticities, heterogeneity, and optimal tariffs." Journal of International Eco-
  nomics 114:44 ­ 62.

Trefler, Daniel. 1993. "Trade Liberalization and the Theory of Endogenous Protection: An Econo-
  metric Study of U.S. Import Policy." Journal of Political Economy 101 (1):138­160.

World Trade Organization. 2014. "World Tariff Profiles 2014." Geneva: WTO, UNCTAD, and ITC.




                                                 44
Appendix A          Data

                            Figure A1: Fraction of World Imports (Average, %)




                       15
                       10
                       5
                       0
                             SA
                                   EU

                                    N
                                    N
                                   BR

                                     A
                                     A
                                   LD
                                  KG
                                   AN

                                     L
                                    R
                                     P
                                   EX

                                    D
                                     P
                                     E
                                     S
                                     S
                                     L
                                     T
                                     A
                                     E
                                    R
                                   YS

                                     A
                                   ZE

                                    E
                                     K
                                    N
                                  oW
                                 BE




                                PO
                                AU
                                FR

                                  IT




                                ES




                                SG

                                   H
                                AU

                                   U



                                BR
                                SW




                                TH


                                AR

                                   N
                                  H
                                 JP




                                KO




                                 IN




                                TU




                                 ID
                                N




                                C
                            U




                                M




                                M
                                D




                                G




                                C




                                C


                                R




                                D
                                C




                                H




                                R
Notes: This figure shows the average fraction of world trade flows by importer in our sample. "ROW" is the mean
share of world trade among countries outside of the top 20 importers.




                 Figure A2: Fraction of World Imports by HS Section (Average, %)
                       30
                       20
                       10
                       0




                                16 17   5   6   15 11   7   18 14   4   2   20 10   1   13   9   12   8   3   21 19




Notes: This figure shows the average fraction of trade that is in each HS Section in our sample.



                                                                    45
           60
           40
           20
           0       Figure A3: Fraction of World Imports: MFN vs. non-MFN (%)




                           1990s                        2000s                      2010s
                                                 MFN                 Non-MFN


Notes: This figure shows the average fraction of world trade that is subject to MFN tariffs and non-MFN tariffs by
decade in our sample.



                Table A1: Fraction of Unique Mappings Across HS Revisions (percent)

                                                               Mapped to:
                                                HS-92     HS-96 HS-02 HS-07             HS-12
                                      HS-96     89.38
                                      HS-02     81.55        90.81
                   Mapped from:       HS-07     73.34        80.74   88.48
                                      HS-12     68.17        74.91   81.81    91.93
                                      HS-17     61.85        67.92   73.62    81.99     88.05

Notes: This table presents the fraction of HS codes that can be mapped uniquely from one HS revision (in the
"Mapped from" row) to another HS revision (in a "Mapped to" column). All numbers are in percent.




                                                        46
                                                                                                                                                             Figure A4: Explaining Country Variation
                                                               6




                                                                                                                                                                                              Count of exporter observations in treatment group (in log10)
  Count of exporter observations in control group (in log10)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                                               5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                               4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3
                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                               2
                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                   3                                                                     3.5                  4               4.5    5                                                                           3   3.5                  4               4.5   5
                                                                                                                                               Real GDP per capita (in log)                                                                                                Real GDP per capita (in log)



                                                                                                                                                Control                                                                                                                    Treatment
Notes: This figure plots the (log) counts a country appears in the control group (left panel) and in the treatment
group (right panel) against log real PPP-adjusted per capita income from the Penn World Tables, after taking out
the variation absorbed by the fixed effects. The line depicts the OLS fit.



                                                                                                                                                                          Figure A5: Product Variation
                                                                                                                               2.0e+06
                                                                       Observation counts by HS2 groups in available variation
                                                                           500000           1.0e+06      0   1.5e+06

                                                                                                                                               01
                                                                                                                                               02
                                                                                                                                               03
                                                                                                                                               04
                                                                                                                                               05
                                                                                                                                               06
                                                                                                                                               07
                                                                                                                                               08
                                                                                                                                               09
                                                                                                                                               10
                                                                                                                                               11
                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                               13
                                                                                                                                               14
                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                                                                                               18
                                                                                                                                               19
                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                               21
                                                                                                                                               22
                                                                                                                                               23
                                                                                                                                               24
                                                                                                                                               25
                                                                                                                                               26
                                                                                                                                               27
                                                                                                                                               28
                                                                                                                                               29
                                                                                                                                               30
                                                                                                                                               31
                                                                                                                                               32
                                                                                                                                               33
                                                                                                                                               34
                                                                                                                                               35
                                                                                                                                               36
                                                                                                                                               37
                                                                                                                                               38
                                                                                                                                               39
                                                                                                                                               40
                                                                                                                                               41
                                                                                                                                               42
                                                                                                                                               43
                                                                                                                                               44
                                                                                                                                               45
                                                                                                                                               46
                                                                                                                                               47
                                                                                                                                               48
                                                                                                                                               49
                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                               51
                                                                                                                                               52
                                                                                                                                               53
                                                                                                                                               54
                                                                                                                                               55
                                                                                                                                               56
                                                                                                                                               57
                                                                                                                                               58
                                                                                                                                               59
                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                               61
                                                                                                                                               62
                                                                                                                                               63
                                                                                                                                               64
                                                                                                                                               65
                                                                                                                                               66
                                                                                                                                               67
                                                                                                                                               68
                                                                                                                                               69
                                                                                                                                               70
                                                                                                                                               71
                                                                                                                                               72
                                                                                                                                               73
                                                                                                                                               74
                                                                                                                                               75
                                                                                                                                               76
                                                                                                                                               78
                                                                                                                                               79
                                                                                                                                               80
                                                                                                                                               81
                                                                                                                                               82
                                                                                                                                               83
                                                                                                                                               84
                                                                                                                                               85
                                                                                                                                               86
                                                                                                                                               87
                                                                                                                                               88
                                                                                                                                               89
                                                                                                                                               90
                                                                                                                                               91
                                                                                                                                               92
                                                                                                                                               93
                                                                                                                                               94
                                                                                                                                               95
                                                                                                                                               96
                                                                                                                                               97




Notes: This figure plot the frequency of observations belonging to each HS-2 category, after taking out the variation
absorbed by the fixed effects and imposing the sample restrictions.



                                                                                                                                                                                         47
                                    Table A2: Instrument ­ Illustration

Importer    MFN Trade Partners      Major Trade Partners      Major Trade Partners    Treatment     Control    Excluded
                                         Aggregate                  HS 6403
            2005         2006       2005       2006           2005        2006
             (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)            (5)         (6)            (7)         (8)         (9)
Panel A: Germany
           USA          USA         FRA          FRA          ITA         ITA            HKG         ITA         CHN
           CHN          CHN         CHN          CHN          CHN         CHN            KOR         VNM         IND
            JPN         JPN         NLD          NLD          VNM         VNM            SGP         PRT         USA
           KOR          KOR         ITA          ITA          PRT         PRT            NZL         AUT         JPN
            IND         IND         USA          USA          AUT         AUT            CAN         NLD
           CAN          CAN         GBR          GBR          IND         IND            AUS         SVK
           HKG          HKG         BEL          BEL          NLD         NLD            PRK         IDN
            SGP         RUS         AUT          AUT          SVK         SVK                        ESP
           BRA          SGP         CHE          CHE          ESP         IDN                        GBR
            RUS         BRA         JPN          JPN          ROU         ROU                        FRA
Panel B: Japan
           CHN          CHN         CHN          CHN          CHN         CHN            GBR         KHM        CHN
           USA          USA         USA          USA          ITA         ITA            PRT         MMR        ITA
           KOR          KOR         AUS          SAU          KHM         KHM            BRA         BGD        VNM
            AUS         AUS         IDN          ARE          VNM         VNM            MAR         MEX        IDN
            ITA         ITA         KOR          AUS          IDN         IDN            IND         LAO        ESP
           CAN          FRA         DEU          IDN          MMR         MMR            CHE         NPL        FRA
           DEU          CAN         THA          KOR          BGD         BGD            HUN         LBN        DEU
           FRA          DEU         MYS          QAT          ESP         ESP            SVK                    THA
           VNM          VNM         ARE          DEU          FRA         FRA            LKA                    USA
           DNK          DNK         SAU          THA          DEU         DEU            AUT                    KOR
Panel C: USA
           CHN          CHN         CAN          CAN          CHN         CHN            PRT         MEX        CHN
            JPN         JPN         CHN          CHN          ITA         ITA            SVK         CAN        ITA
           DEU          DEU         MEX          MEX          BRA         BRA            POL         DOM        BRA
           KOR          KOR         JPN          JPN          VNM         VNM            HKG          ISR       VNM
            ITA         ITA         DEU          DEU          IDN         IDN            HUN         MAR        IDN
           GBR          GBR         KOR          KOR          THA         THA            CHE         COL        THA
           FRA          FRA         GBR          VEN          MEX         MEX            ALB         SLV        ESP
            IND         IND         FRA          GBR          ESP         ESP            BGR         AUS        IND
           HKG          HKG         ITA          FRA          IND         IND            DNK         ZAF        FRA
           VNM          VNM         MYS          MYS          DOM         DOM            AUT         PER        DEU


Notes: This table illustrates the construction of our instrument, using as an example product code 6403 "Footwear;
with outer soles of rubber, plastics, leather or composition leather and uppers of leather" in 2006. Columns 1-2 list
the top exporters to three importing countries ­ USA, Germany and Japan ­ exporting under the MFN regime in
periods t = 2006 and t - 1 = 2005. Columns 3-4 list the importing countries' major aggregate trading partners in
these periods. Columns 5-6 list the major trading partners in product 6403. Columns 7-9 then list the main countries
in the treatment, control and excluded group for imports of product 6403 to the three importing countries.




                                                         48
                                                               Table A3: HS Sections

                 Code   Name

                 7      PLASTICS AND ARTICLES THEREOF; RUBBER AND ARTICLES THEREOF
                 8      RAW HIDES AND SKINS, LEATHER, FURSKINS AND ARTICLES THEREOF;
                        SADDLERY AND HARNESS; TRAVEL GOODS,
                 9      WOOD AND ARTICLES OF WOOD; WOOD CHARCOAL;
                        CORK AND ARTICLES OF CORK; MANUFACTURES OF STRAW,
                        OF ESPARTO OR OF OTHER PLAITING MATERIALS;
                        BASKETWARE AND WICKERWORK
                 10     PULP OF WOOD OR OF OTHER FIBROUS CELLULOSIC MATERIAL;
                        RECOVERED (WASTE AND SCRAP) PAPER OR PAPERBOARD;
                        PAPER AND PAPERBOARD AND ARTICLES THEREOF
                 11     TEXTILES AND TEXTILE ARTICLES
                 13     ARTICLES OF STONE, PLASTER, CEMENT, ASBESTOS, MICA OR SIMILAR MATERIALS;
                 15     BASE METALS AND ARTICLES OF BASE METAL
                        CERAMIC PRODUCTS; GLASS AND GLASSWARE
                 16     MACHINERY AND MECHANICAL APPLIANCES;
                        ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT; PARTS THEREOF; SOUND RECORDERS AND REPRODUCERS,
                        TELEVISION IMAGE AND SOUND RECORDERS AND
                        REPRODUCERS, AND PARTS AND ACCESSORIES OF SUCH ARTICLES
                        ARTIFICIAL FLOWERS; ARTICLES OF HUMAN HAIR
                 18     OPTICAL, PHOTOGRAPHIC, CINEMATOGRAPHIC, MEASURING,
                        CHECKING, PRECISION, MEDICAL OR SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS AND APPARATUS;
                        CLOCKS AND WATCHES; MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS; PARTS AND ACCESSORIES THEREOF




49
                 20     MISCELLANEOUS MANUFACTURED ARTICLES

                                                                        Aggregated

                 1      LIVE ANIMALS; ANIMAL PRODUCTS
                 2      VEGETABLE PRODUCTS
                 3      ANIMAL OR VEGETABLE FATS AND OILS AND THEIR CLEAVAGE PRODUCTS
                        HANDBAGS AND SIMILAR CONTAINERS; ARTICLES OF ANIMAL GUT (OTHER THAN SILK-WORM GUT)
                 4      PREPARED EDIBLE FATS;ANIMAL OR VEGETABLE WAXES
                        PREPARED FOODSTUFFS;
                        BEVERAGES, SPIRITS AND VINEGAR; TOBACCO AND MANUFACTURED TOBACCO SUBSTITUTES
                 5      MINERAL PRODUCTS
                 6      PRODUCTS OF THE CHEMICAL OR ALLIED INDUSTRIES
                 12     FOOTWEAR, HEADGEAR, UMBRELLAS, SUN UMBRELLAS,
                        WALKING-STICKS, SEAT-STICKS, WHIPS, RIDING-CROPS AND PARTS THEREOF;
                        PREPARED FEATHERS AND ARTICLES MADE THEREWITH;
                 14     NATURAL OR CULTURED PEARLS, PRECIOUS OR SEMI-PRECIOUS
                        STONES, PRECIOUS METALS, METALS CLAD WITH PRECIOUS METAL
                        AND ARTICLES THEREOF; IMITATION JEWELLERY; COIN
                 17     VEHICLES, AIRCRAFT, VESSELS AND ASSOCIATED TRANSPORT EQUIPMENT
                 19     ARMS AND AMMUNITION; PARTS AND ACCESSORIES THEREOF
                 21     WORKS OF ART, COLLECTORS' PIECES AND ANTIQUES

     Notes: This table describes the 21 internationally compatible HS "Sections", which are groupings of HS product codes. We also list the 9 HS
     Sections that we aggregate in the main text into a Section `aggregate', as there is insufficient variation in tariffs in these sections to estimate
     the elasticity. Apendix Table A5 summarizes the elasticity estimates by section.
Appendix B               Robustness

                              Figure A6: Gains From Trade: Multiple Sectors
                   0.6




                   0.5




                   0.4
Gains from Trade




                   0.3




                   0.2




                   0.1




                    0
                          E
                        EX




                          R




                         G
                          L




                          N




                          R


                          R
                          A
                          X




                          T




                         W
                     BR I



                          U
                          R




                          C




                          D




                          N
                          P




                          E
                          K




                          V
                        AN


                          N




                          N
                        EU




                          S
                          K



                        ZE




                          A




                     TW T

                          L




                          L
                          T

                        LD




                          L


                          A




                          P
                         U




                          L




                          A




                          F




                        ZL




                         N
                         N
                         N




                         R




                        YS




                       KG




                         R




                        BR




                         N
                         U



                        YP




                         N




                          L




                         S




                        SA

                         A
                          L




                          Z
                         M




                       AR




                         M
                        LT




                         R
                       IR




                       IS



                      PO




                        H
                      ES




                      BE




                     SW




                        O
                      AU




                      PR




                      PH




                       IT
                      LU




                      ZA
                     SG




                        H
                        N




                        R




                       IS




                        U
                      SV




                      SV




                      TH




                      FR


                      KA


                      ES




                      PE


                      TU
                      LV




                       O
                       O




                        R




                      IN




                      ID
                       FI




                     AU




                     BR


                     AR
                      LT




                      JP
                       U




                     BG




                     KO




                       H
                     SA




                     TU




                       O
                     VN




                     KH




                      C




                      N
                     M




                     M
                      C




                      N




                      C
                     M
                     C




                     C
                     D




                     H
                     C




                     D




                     C




                     R




                     U
                     G




                     G
                     M
                     H




                     H
                     R
                     N




                     C
                     R




                                                                                           -    /
                                                                                              j,s s
Notes: Gains from trade relative to autarky are computed using the formula 1 - s jj,s               , where j,s is the share
of sector s in country j 's total absorption and jj,s is 1 minus the import share in sector s. The numbers for China and
Mexico include export-processing activities (China) and global manufacturing activities (Mexico). "Sectoral long-run
elasticities" refer to the HS-section level elasticities estimated in Section 4.1. We use the median estimate between
years 7-10 for each section as the long-run value. For a comparison, the red bars use elasticities obtained from Ossa
(2015). Data are from the OECD IO tables for 64 countries in year 2006. The OECD IO tables are converted to
HS classification using an OECD's concordance between ISIC and HS. The GTAP sector estimates from Ossa (2015)
are converted to the HS classification using GTAP's concordance table between GTAP sectors and HS classifications.
The number of HS-6 categories in each GTAP-HS section pair is used as a weight.




                                                            50
                                 Table A4: Robustness: Local Projections

                             Panel A: Tariffs                                Panel B: Trade
                     Baseline Zero Lag Five Lags                    Baseline Zero Lag Five Lags
                        (1)        (2)          (3)                    (4)         (5)         (6)
          t-6       -0.099*** -0.090*** -0.102***                     0.097       0.028     0.305*
                     (0.006)    (0.005)       (0.007)                (0.130)    (0.110)     (0.165)
          t-5       -0.021*** -0.031***          .                    0.217    0.275***         .
                     (0.005)    (0.004)          .                   (0.121)    (0.105)         .
          t-4       -0.038*** -0.020***          .                    0.004      -0.055         .
                     (0.005)    (0.004)          .                   (0.111)    (0.093)         .
          t-3       -0.053*** -0.088***          .                    0.075      -0.018         .
                     (0.005)    (0.004)          .                   (0.102)    (0.087)         .
          t-2       -0.133*** -0.034***          .                  0.242***      0.128         .
                     (0.004)    (0.004)          .                   (0.089)    (0.089)         .
          t-1            .     -0.309***         .                      .       0.149**         .
                         .       (0.004          .                      .       (0.072)         .
          t              .          .            .                 -0.262*** -0.147***        0.166
                         .          .            .                   (0.072)    (0.054)     (0.138)
          t+1       0.890*** 0.851*** 0.842***                     -0.673*** -0.535***       -0.109
                     (0.004)    (0.003)       (0.006)                (0.096)    (0.069)     (0.175)
          t+2       0.846*** 0.830*** 0.788***                     -0.716*** -0.588***       -0.129
                     (0.005)    (0.003)       (0.007)                (0.109)    (0.079)     (0.206)
          t+3       0.831*** 0.818*** 0.769***                     -0.851*** -0.758*** -0.481**
                     (0.005)    (0.004)       (0.008)                (0.122)    (0.086)     (0.242)
          t+4       0.821*** 0.813*** 0.747***                     -0.835*** -0.747***       -0.214
                     (0.006)    (0.004)       (0.009)                (0.132)    (0.094)     (0.271)
          t+5       0.807*** 0.823*** 0.718***                     -0.998*** -0.915*** -0.823***
                     (0.005)    (0.004)       (0.010)                (0.149)    (0.102)     (0.308)
          t+6       0.776*** 0.786*** 0.663***                     -1.006*** -0.875*** -0.496**
                     (0.006)    (0.004)       (0.011)                (0.152)    (0.101)     (0.320)
          t+7       0.694*** 0.754*** 0.594***                     -1.425*** -1.146*** -1.383***
                     (0.006)    (0.004)       (0.011)                (0.162)    (0.110)     (0.352)
          t+8       0.668*** 0.716*** 0.552***                     -1.269*** -1.145*** -0.932**
                     (0.007)    (0.005)       (0.012)                (0.169)    (0.117)     (0.391)
          t+9       0.699*** 0.733*** 0.634***                     -1.351*** -0.990*** -1.366***
                     (0.007)    (0.005)       (0.015)                (0.198)    (0.120)     (0.513)
          t + 10    0.715*** 0.720*** 0.641***                     -1.517*** -1.054*** -1.635**
                     (0.008)    (0.005)       (0.018)                (0.232)    (0.139)     (0.649)
Notes: This table presents the results from estimating the local projections equations (2.3) (Panel A) and (2.2) (Panel
B). The first column in each panel presents the baseline local projects results, while the second and third columns in
each panel present results with 2 and 5 lags of tariffs and trade as pre-trend controls respectively. Standard errors
clustered by country-pair-product are in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 99, 95 and 90% levels.




                                                          51
                          Table A5: Trade Elasticity: Sectoral Heterogeneity

                                   Mean      Median      25 percentile     75 percentile
                                    (1)       (2)             (3)               (4)

                         t         -0.396     -0.407         -0.670            -0.117
                         t+1       -0.851     -0.710         -1.116            -0.563
                         t+2       -1.041     -0.798         -1.601            -0.465
                         t+3       -1.381     -1.220         -2.044            -0.791
                         t+4       -1.171     -1.100         -1.619            -0.710
                         t+5       -1.683     -1.698         -2.060            -1.062
                         t+6       -1.747     -1.651         -2.478            -0.887
                         t+7       -3.082     -1.959         -3.731            -1.469
                         t+8       -3.518     -2.324         -4.164            -1.218
                         t+9       -3.352     -2.195         -3.248            -1.522
                         t + 10    -2.804     -2.794         -3.448            -1.906


Notes: This table presents results from estimating equation (2.4) at the HS Section-level for every horizon. We
include estimates for 11 HS Sections here, including one aggregated super-section as described in the text. All
specifications include importer-HS4-year, exporter-HS4-year and importer-exporter-HS4 fixed effects and the baseline
pretrend controls (one lag).




                                                        52
                    Table A6: "Traditional Gravity" Elasticity Estimates in Levels

                                                     (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)

 Panel A: Log-levels, OLS
 i,j,p,t                                          -3.696***      -4.468***   -6.696***    -2.734***   -1.040***   -0.892***
                                                   (0.020)        (0.019)     (0.046)      (0.014)     (0.022)     (0.020)

 R2                                                 0.013          0.341       0.383        0.530       0.571       0.837
 Obs                                               107.09         107.07      106.24       105.73      104.91       98.45

 Panel B: Log-levels, OLS, baseline sample
 i,j,p,t                                          -7.005***      -8.527***   -11.262***   -3.137***   -0.951***   -1.154***
                                                   (0.048)        (0.058)      (0.106)     (0.033)     (0.051)     (0.048)

 R2                                                 0.021          0.362       0.419        0.550       0.593       0.887
 Obs                                                21.13          21.13       21.13        21.13       21.13       19.35
 Fixed effects
 importer×HS4                                        no             yes         no           no          no          no
 exporter×HS4                                        no             yes         no           no          no          no
 importer×HS4×year                                   no             no          yes          no          yes         no
 exporter×HS4×year                                   no             no          yes          no          yes         no
 importer×exporter×HS4                               no             no          no           yes         yes         no
 imp×HS6×year, exp×HS6×year, imp×exp×h6              no             no          no           no          no          yes

Notes: This table presents the results from estimating the trade elasticity in log-levels. The dependent variable is the
log of trade value. Panel A presents estimates for the whole sample while and Panel B uses our baseline sample (for
h = 5). Column 1 reports the results with no fixed effects. Column 2 adds importer-product and exporter-product
fixed effects, Column 3 interacts these fixed effects with years, column 4 includes country-pair-product fixed effects
and column 5 includes our baseline fixed effects. Column 6 uses HS6 product level fixed effects. Standard errors,
clustered at the importer-exporter-HS4 level, are in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 99, 95 and
90% levels. Number of observations are reported in millions. For the baseline sample in Column 6, the number of
reported observations is lower as HS6 fixed effects drop additional singleton clusters, but the underlying panel is the
same.




                                                            53
                     Table A7: "Traditional Gravity" Elasticity Estimates in Differences

                                       OLS                   2SLS using all 1-year Tariff Changes               Baseline IV
                           (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)            (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)

      Panel A: 3-year log-differences
      3 i,j,p,t          -1.069*** -0.482***    -0.393***    -0.774***    -0.397***   -0.343***     -2.011***    -1.001***    -0.926***
                          (0.012)     (0.016)    (0.017)      (0.015)      (0.024)     (0.026)       (0.053)      (0.093)      (0.105)

      R2                  0.038       0.149       0.210
      Observations        47.04       46.60       46.26        47.04        46.60       46.26         26.84        26.44        26.16

      Panel B: 7-year log-differences
      7 i,j,p,t          -2.343*** -0.858***    -0.621***    -0.965***    -0.553***   -0.468***     -2.489***    -1.535***    -1.521***
                          (0.017)     (0.024)    (0.024)      (0.022)      (0.035)     (0.037)       (0.073)      (0.130)      (0.145)

      R2                  0.097       0.209       0.315
      Observations        31.06       30.75       30.44        31.06        30.75       30.44         17.47        17.19        16.95

      Panel C: 5-year log-differences, Balanced Panel
      5 i,j,p,t          -1.638*** -0.772*** -0.634***       -0.788***    -0.402***   -0.438***     -2.238***    -1.177***    -1.112***
                          (0.021)       (0.033)    (0.033)    (0.024)      (0.041)     (0.044)       (0.064)      (0.115)      (0.124)

      R2                  0.065       0.185       0.277
      Observations        21.13       21.13       21.13        21.13        21.13       21.13         21.13        21.13        21.13

      Fixed Effects
      Imp×HS4              Yes         No          No          Yes          No           No           Yes          No           No
      Exp×HS4              Yes         No          No          Yes          No           No           Yes          No           No
      Imp×HS4×Year         No          Yes         Yes         No           Yes          Yes          No           Yes          Yes
      Exp×HS4×Year         No          Yes         Yes         No           Yes          Yes          No           Yes          Yes
      Imp×Exp×HS4          No          No          Yes         No           No           Yes          No           No           Yes


Notes: This table presents the results from estimating the trade elasticity in differences for a single horizon. The
dependent variable is the log-difference in trade value, over 3 years (Panel A), 7 years (Panel B), and 5 years on the
baseline sample for h = 5 (Panel C). Columns 1-3 report the OLS results, columns 4-6 2SLS instrumenting with the
1-year tariff changes, and columns 7-9 instrumenting with the baseline instrument. Standard errors, clustered at the
importer-exporter-HS4 level, are in parentheses. ***, ** and * denote significance at the 99, 95 and 90% levels. Number
of observations reported in millions. All first-stage F statistics are greater than 10000.




                                                                     54
Table A8: Trade Elasticity, Every Horizon:, Robustness: Pre-Trends, Alternative Clustering, Al-
ternative Samples

                      Baseline    Zero Lag    Five Lags    FE50       Two-way      Balanced     Alternative
                                                                      Clustering    Panel      Control Group
                         (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)

             t        -0.262***   -0.147***     0.166     -0.232**    -0.262***    -0.592**      -0.187**
                       (0.072)     (0.054)     (0.138)     (0.094)     (0.096)      (0.290)       (0.077)
             obs        31.66       41.46       14.58       17.62       31.66        5.04          27.33

             t+1      -0.756***   -0.628***     -0.129    -0.599***   -0.756***      -0.098      -0.490***
                       (0.108)     (0.081)     (0.208)     (0.133)     (0.141)      (0.380)       (0.117)
             obs        26.18       32.85        12.52      15.19       26.18         5.04         22.63

             t+2      -0.846***   -0.708***     -0.164    -0.724***   -0.846***     -0.755*      -0.449***
                       (0.129)     (0.095)     (0.262)     (0.156)     (0.189)      (0.444)       (0.141)
             obs        23.27       29.21        11.09      13.77       23.27         5.04         20.05

             t+3      -1.024***   -0.926***   -0.625**    -0.865***   -1.024***     -0.895*      -0.743***
                       (0.146)     (0.105)     (0.315)     (0.173)     (0.195)      (0.472)       (0.160)
             obs         20.8       26.16        9.76       12.48        20.8         5.04         17.86

             t+4      -1.017***   -0.918***     -0.287    -0.784***   -1.017***      -0.769      -0.613***
                       (0.161)     (0.115)     (0.362)     (0.187)     (0.232)      (0.480)       (0.171)
             obs        18.67       23.49        8.53       11.33       18.67         5.04           16

             t+5      -1.237***   -1.112***   -1.146***   -1.012***   -1.237***    -0.916**      -0.792***
                       (0.185)     (0.124)     (0.429)     (0.215)     (0.253)      (0.437)       (0.201)
             obs        16.69       21.13         7.3       10.22       16.69         5.04         14.27

             t+6      -1.296***   -1.113***     -0.747    -1.051***   -1.296***      -0.532      -0.570***
                       (0.196)     (0.129)     (0.482)     (0.231)     (0.274)      (0.463)       (0.216)
             obs        14.92        18.9        6.17         9.2       14.92         5.04         12.62

             t+7      -2.055***   -1.521***   -2.330***   -1.853***   -2.055***    -0.990**      -1.383***
                       (0.233)     (0.145)     (0.595)     (0.270)     (0.357)      (0.489)       (0.251)
             obs        13.22       16.95        5.25         8.2       13.22         5.04         11.12

             t+8      -1.901***   -1.599***   -1.690**    -1.888***   -1.901***    -1.094**      -1.079***
                       (0.253)     (0.163)     (0.709)     (0.289)     (0.465)      (0.510)       (0.275)
             obs        11.53       15.02        4.42        7.19       11.53         5.04          9.63

             t+9      -1.934***   -1.351***   -2.155***   -1.781***   -1.934***    -1.600***     -1.087***
                       (0.283)     (0.164)     (0.812)     (0.323)     (0.500)      (0.551)       (0.306)
             obs         9.85       13.11        3.79        6.19        9.85         5.04           8.2

             t + 10   -2.122***   -1.463***   -2.550**      -1.760    -2.122***    -1.818***     -1.600***
                       (0.325)     (0.194)     (1.016)     (0.374)     (0.332)      (0.544)       (0.379)
             obs         8.31       11.25        3.21        5.25        8.31         5.04          6.84


Notes: This table presents robustness exercises for the results from estimating equation (2.4). All specifications
include importer-HS4-year, exporter-HS4-year and importer-exporter-HS4 fixed effects. Columns 2 and 3 vary the
pretrend controls (including alternatively two lags or five lags of import growth and tariff changes). Column 4 reports
the results when the sample is restricted to fixed-effects clusters with a minimum of 50 observations. Standard errors
are clustered at the importer-exporter-HS4 level, except in Column 5 where they are additionally clustered by year.
Column 6 restricts the sample to have positive trade flows for all time horizons. Column 7 reports results where the
control group only contains observations with zero tariff changes. All columns except 2 and 3 include the baseline
pretrend controls (one lag). ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 99, 95 and 90 percent level respectively.
Observations are reported in millions.                      55
Table A9: Trade Elasticity, Every Horizon, Robustness: Alternative Instruments, Outcomes, Fixed
Effects, and Samples

              Baseline    All Partners   Quantities   Unit Values   Extensive   Extensive Sel     DL          SD1
                (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)

     t        -0.262***    -0.275***     -0.434***      -0.179*       -0.049        0.025       -0.082***   -0.313***
               (0.072)      (0.030)       (0.123)       (0.093)      (0.057)       (0.039)       (0.063)     (0.096)
     obs        31.66        57.14          29.3         31.66        31.66        131.03         56.35        28.7

     t+1      -0.756***    -0.624***     -1.228***     -0.664***      -0.027     -0.484***      -0.805***   -0.889***
               (0.108)      (0.047)       (0.174)       (0.136)      (0.080)      (0.063)        (0.089)     (0.142)
     obs        26.18        47.19         24.26         26.18        26.18        108.13         49.11       23.76

     t+2      -0.846***    -0.647***     -1.550***     -0.663***      -0.139     -0.432***      -0.731***   -0.861***
               (0.129)      (0.053)       (0.213)       (0.162)      (0.094)      (0.073)        (0.098)     (0.174)
     obs        23.27        42.29         21.42         23.27        23.27        96.99          45.23        21.1

     t+3      -1.024***    -0.648***     -1.669***     -0.81***       -0.134     -0.590***      -0.955***   -1.228***
               (0.146)      (0.061)       (0.241)       (0.184)      (0.104)      (0.084)        (0.107)     (0.200)
     obs         20.8        38.16         19.14          20.8         20.8        87.22           41.5       18.86

     t+4      -1.017***    -0.657***     -1.637***     -0.801***      -0.09      -0.449***      -0.846***   ­1.171***
               (0.161)      (0.068)       (0.264)       (0.203)      (0.115)      (0.095)        (0.117)     (0.219)
     obs        18.67        34.39         17.14         18.67        18.67        77.82          37.92       16.92

     t+5      -1.237***    -0.718***     -1.686***     -1.422***    0.291**      -0.730***      -1.183***   -1.180***
               (0.185)      (0.073)       (0.285)       (0.232)     (0.128)       (0.100)        (0.122)     (0.253)
     obs        16.69        30.89         15.32         16.69       16.69         69.73          34.61       15.12

     t+6      -1.296***    -0.781***     -2.477***     -1.374***      0.125      -0.864***      -1.212***   -1.267***
               (0.196)      (0.078)       (0.296)       (0.244)      (0.135)      (0.101)        (0.124)     (0.261)
     obs        14.92        27.65         13.64         14.92        14.92        62.07          31.34       13.51

     t+7      -2.055***    -0.940***     -3.756***     -2.166***      0.162      -0.902***      -1.496***   -1.990***
               (0.233)      (0.091)       (0.401)       (0.292)      (0.161)      (0.114)        (0.138)     (0.318)
     obs        13.22        24.64         12.06         13.22        13.22        55.24           28.4       11.96

     t+8      -1.901***    -1.000***     -3.635***     -2.076***      0.205      -0.688***      -1.429***   -1.955***
               (0.253)      (0.099)       (0.430)       (0.318)      (0.173)      (0.130)        (0.157)     (0.352)
     obs        11.53        21.67         10.48         11.53        11.53        48.51           25.4       10.44

     t+9      -1.934***    -0.970***     -3.149***     -1.656***      -0.180     -1.000***      -1.650***   -2.185***
               (0.283)      (0.109)       (0.451)       (0.353)      (0.193)      (0.137)        (0.161)     (0.388)
     obs         9.85        18.69           8.8          9.85         9.85        41.82          22.36        8.93

     t + 10   -2.122***    -0.866***     -1.865***     -1.765***     -0.0780     -0.941***      -1.638***   -2.360***
               (0.325)      (0.122)       (0.453)       (0.406)      (0.221)      (0.153)        (0.181)     (0.444)
     obs         8.31        15.92          7.54          8.31         8.31        35.09          19.24        7.52


Notes: This table presents alternative estimates for the results from estimating equation (2.4), varying the instrument
or outcome variable. Column 2 uses an alternative definition of the instrument where all trade partners subject to the
MFN regime are included. Column 3 reports results for quantities, and Column 4 the results for unit values. Column
5 presents results including the extensive margin using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation for trade flows,
and all zero trade observations for importer-exporter-section pair with ever positive trade. Column 6 presents results
including the extensive margin using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation for trade flows, and only zero trade
observations when trade switches from zero to positive, or vice versa. Column 7 presents results from a distributed
lag model. Column 8 reports the results based on a sample where tariffs do not vary within an importer-HS6. All
specifications include importer-HS4-year, exporter-HS4-year and importer-exporter-HS4 fixed effects. All columns
include the baseline pretrend controls (one lag). Standard56 errors are clustered at the importer-exporter-HS4 level.
***, ** and * indicate significance at the 99, 95 and 90 percent level respectively. Observations are reported in
millions.
                Table A10: Trade Elasticity: Estimates and First Stage F -Statistics


             OLS        Baseline IV      F -stat    All Partners     F -stat    Distributed Lag       SW F -stat
t         -0.126***      -0.262***       91422       -0.275***       366290           -0.413            20536
           (0.011)        (0.072)                     (0.030)                        (0.338)
t+1       -0.275***      -0.756***       42231       -0.624***       132393           -0.523             18831
           (0.019)        (0.108)                     (0.047)                        (0.466)
t+2       -0.306***      -0.846***       36469       -0.647***       123145           -0.920             22499
           (0.024)        (0.129)                     (0.053)                        (0.586)
t+3       -0.343***      -1.024***       28537       -0.648***       102829         -1.578**             22570
           (0.026)        (0.146)                     (0.061)                        (0.685)
t+4       -0.414***      -1.017***       23771       -0.657***        85767         -1.598**             16227
           (0.029)        (0.161)                     (0.068)                        (0.773)
t+5       -0.448***      -1.237***       22697       -0.718***        81169         -2.097**             12463
           (0.030)        (0.185)                     (0.073)                        (0.861)
t+6       -0.468***      -1.296***       19439       -0.781***        61812         -2.185**             14722
           (0.033)        (0.196)                     (0.078)                        (0.931)
t+7       -0.468***      -2.055***       15481       -0.940***        48802        -2.710***             13473
           (0.037)        (0.233)                     (0.091)                        (1.016)
t+8       -0.445***      -1.901***       13933       -1.000***        44599         -2.798**             13475
           (0.040)        (0.253)                     (0.099)                        (1.109)
t+9       -0.442***      -1.934***       10201       -0.970***        36930        -3.084***             14278
           (0.040)        (0.283)                     (0.109)                        (1.180)
t + 10    -0.481***      -2.122***        8252       -0.866***        31174         -3.166**             10962
           (0.041)        (0.325)                     (0.122)                        (1.252)

Notes: This table presents the first-stage F -statistics for the main estimates. For the Distributed Lag model we
report the Sanderson-Windmeijer F-statistic to test for weak instruments as we have 11 instruments and 11 endogenous
variables.




                                                        57
                            Table A11: Trade Elasticity: Further Robustness

                                            Uruguay Round        HS6 Multilateral Effects
                                          OLS      Baseline IV      OLS     Baseline IV
                                           (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)
                                 t       -0.285       -0.181     -0.186***      0.077
                                        (0.179)      (0.851)      (0.014)      (0.106)
                                obs        0.9         0.55         54.3        30.2

                               t+1     -1.157**      -2.011      -0.261***    -0.682***
                                        (0.581)     (2.392)       (0.022)      (0.134)
                                obs      0.84         0.51          54.3         24.9

                               t+2       -0.771      -1.493      -0.278***    -0.599***
                                        (0.663)     (2.662)       (0.027)      (0.028)
                                obs       0.78         0.5          48.5         22.2

                               t+3     -1.489***     -5.094      -0.288***    -0.589***
                                        (0.563)     (2.469)       (0.030)      (0.173)
                                obs       0.78        0.47          43.7         19.8

                               t+4     -1.608***   -1.434***     -0.373***    -0.767***
                                        (0.592)     (1.960)       (0.032)      (0.190)
                                obs       0.77        0.46          39.5         17.8

                               t+5      -1.287*      -2.077      -0.406***    -1.041***
                                        (0.683)     (2.462)       (0.034)      (0.219)
                                obs       0.71        0.43          35.6         15.9

                               t+6     -1.428**      -1.152      -0.446***    -1.090***
                                        (0.644)     (2.306)       (0.036)      (0.219)
                                obs      0.71         0.43          31.9         14.2

                               t+7      -1.533*      0.260       -0.429***    -1.371***
                                        (0.831)     (2.905)       (0.041)      (0.266)
                                obs       0.7         0.42          28.6         12.6

                               t+8     -1.848**      -4.740      -0.353***    -0.993***
                                        (0.814)     (2.928)       (0.045)      (0.287)
                                obs      0.74         0.46          24.4         11.0

                               t+9       -1.041      -3.610      -0.405***    -0.981***
                                        (0.801)     (2.515)       (0.044)      (0.330)
                                obs       0.74        0.46          22.2         9.45

                              t + 10     -0.296      -2.967      -0.495***      -0.468
                                        (0.991)     (3.278)       (0.043)      (0.355)
                                obs       0.65         0.4          19.0         7.95

Notes: This table presents the results from estimating the trade elasticity using both OLS (column 1) and the
baseline instrument (column 2) for tariff changes only in years 1995-1997 ("Uruguay round"). Columns (4) and (5)
present the OLS and baseline IV specifications when the multilateral resistance terms are country-HS6-year level. In
these columns we drop the bilateral fixed effect. Standard errors are clustered at the importer-exporter-HS4 level.
All columns include the baseline pretrend controls (one lag). ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 99, 95 and 90
percent level respectively. Observations are reported in millions.



                                                          58
                                      Table A12: Gains from Trade

                          Country                      = -1       = -5       = -10
                          G7
                          Canada                       21.0%      3.9%        1.9%
                          France                       15.6%      3.0%        1.5%
                          Germany                      21.7%      3.8%        1.9%
                          Italy                        13.9%      2.7%        1.3%
                          Japan                         7.7%      1.5%        0.7%
                          UK                           13.9%      2.6%        1.3%
                          US                           5.3%       1.0%        0.5%

                          Major Emerging Markets
                          Brazil                7.4%              1.4%        0.7%
                          China                11.9%              2.1%        1.1%
                          India                10.5%              2.0%        1.0%
                          Mexico                6.1%              1.2%        0.6%
                          Russia               19.5%              3.6%        1.8%
                          South Africa         14.1%              2.7%        1.3%

                          Median, 64 Countries         22.9%      4.2%        2.1%


Notes: Data are from the OECD IO tables for 64 countries in year 2006. Gains from trade relative to autarky are
                             1/
computed using the formula jj , where jj is 1 minus the import share. The import share is calculated as imports
divided by gross output. The numbers for China and Mexico include export-processing activities (China) and global
manufacturing activities (Mexico).




                                                       59
Appendix C        Model

Notation Throughout this appendix, we let tildes denote percent deviations from steady state,
                                     -v
     ~t = ln vt - ln v = d ln vt = vtv
e.g. v                                  . Variables without subscripts denote steady state values.

For most of this appendix we suppress source and destination country as well as product subscripts
for convenience. For clarity we provide an overview on the notation here:

   · Dt is a destination and product-specific demand shock, i.e. Dt = Di,p,t

   · t is a source, destination, and product-specific demand shock, i.e. t = i,j,p,t

   · ct denotes marginal cost and is specific to the source country and product, i.e. ct = cj,p,t

   · t denotes non-tariff trade barriers and varies with the source country, the destination country,
     and by product, i.e. t = i,j,p,t

   · t is the country-pair and product-specific iceberg tariff, i.e. t = i,j,p,t

C.1   Model summary

The following system of equations characterizes the trade response to tariff shocks. The first set of
equations is

                                      px
                                       t = px (ct , t t , t Dt ) ,                                    (C.1)
                                       qt =    q (px
                                                   t , t t , t Dt ) ,                                 (C.2)
                                       t =  (ct , t t , t Dt ) ,                                      (C.3)
                                      Xt =     qt p x
                                                    t nt ,                                            (C.4)

where pxt is the price of exported goods, qt a quantity measure, t a measure of flow profits, Xt
is exports exclusive of tariffs, and nt a generic mass. Let further vt denote a generic value. The
following dynamic system determines the evolution of vt and nt ,
                             1
                    vt =         Et [ (ct+1 , t+1 t+1 , t+1 Dt+1 ) + (1 -  ) vt+1 ] ,                 (C.5)
                           1+r
                    nt   = nt-1 (1 -  ) + G (vt-1 ) ,                                                 (C.6)
                              t
                        1-
together with limt 1+     r  vt = 0, a given initial value for n0 , and stochastic processes for ct , t ,
t , t and Dt , which are exogeneous in our partial equilibrium model.

We define the following constants
                               ln q            ln q          ln px         ln 
                     q,p :=          ,  q, :=       , p,
                                                         :=        , , :=      ,                      (C.7)
                               ln px           ln            ln            ln 
                                                                               g (v )v
and assume that q,p < 0, q, < 0, and , < 0. We also define  :=                 G(v )     where G introduced
below, and g = G .

                                                    60
C.2     Microfoundations

We next show that three different frameworks generate the above system of equations.

C.2.1    A dynamic Arkolakis (2010) model

This model is a dynamic extension of the Arkolakis (2010) market penetration framework, where the
number of customers adjusts gradually. The model also shares features with Fitzgerald, Haller, and
Yedid-Levi (2019), and others.

A single representative firm sells its good in the foreign location, earning profits t = nt  (ct , t t , t Dt ).
Here, nt denotes the mass of foreign consumers that the firm reaches in the foreign location. Further,
 (ct , t t , t Dt ) denotes flow profits per unit mass of foreign consumers reached, and is a function
of the exporter's costs ct , tariffs t , nontariff trade costs t , and the demand shifters t Dt .

The mass of foreign consumers available for the firm to sell to evolves according to the accumulation
equation
                                      nt+1 = nt (1 -  ) + at ,                                  (C.8)
where at is the mass of newly added customers in the foreign country. Note that mass nt is predeter-
mined in the current period, so that adding new consumers this period only affects next period's mass
of consumers nt+1 . We assume that adding at new customers requires a payment of f (at ), where
f > 0, f > 0, lima0 f (a) = 0, lima f (a) = , and that the existing mass of consumers
already reached by the firm depreciates at rate  .

The firm discounts at interest rate r and maximizes the present discounted value of future profits,
                                                  t
                                            1
                           max
                             
                               E0                     [nt  (ct , t t , t Dt ) - f (at )] .
                          {at }t=0         1+r
                                     t=0

Denoting by vt the multiplier on constraint (accumulation equation), the current value Lagrangian
is
                              t
                         1
          L = E0                [nt  (ct , t t , t Dt ) - f (at ) + vt (nt (1 -  ) + at - nt+1 )] .
                      1+r
                    t=0

The first order necessary conditions are

                   f (at ) = vt ,
                                 1
                       vt =        Et [ (ct+1 , t+1 t+1 , t+1 Dt+1 ) + (1 -  ) vt+1 ] ,
                             1+r
                                                      t                                             t
                                            1                                              1-
and the transversality condition limt 1+      r  vt nt = 0, which implies that limt 1+       r   vt = 0.
The firm chooses its investment into accumulating new consumers such that the marginal benefit vt
equals the marginal cost f (at ). The shadow value vt , in turn, is the expected present value of profits
generated by each consumer reached in the foreign market.

Note that the above problem is reminiscent of a standard investment problem with convex adjustment


                                                          61
costs, except that flow profits are a linear function of nt , the analogue of the capital stock. This
linearity greatly improves the tractability of the problem and permits analytical solutions.

Letting qt = q (px t , t t , t Dt ) denote foreign demand per unit mass of consumers, and letting
pt = p (ct , t t ) denote the price set by the representative firm, exports are Xt = qt px
 x     x
                                                                                         t nt . After
substituting out at , the accumulation equation (C.8) becomes
                                                               -1
                                      nt = nt-1 (1 -  ) + f         (vt-1 ) .
              -1
For G  f           , the model is described by the set of equations in Section C.1.

C.2.2    A dynamic Krugman (1980) model

We next present a dynamic partial equilibrium version of the Krugman (1980) model. The model
also shares features with Costantini and Melitz (2007), Ruhl (2008), and many others.

There is a continuum of firms, and each exporting firm receives flow profits  (ct , t t , t Dt ) from
exporting. Further, exporters exit the bilateral trade relationship with probability  per period. The
value of an exporting firm at the end of period t is
                                1
                        vt =       Et [ (ct+1 , t+1 t+1 , t+1 Dt+1 ) + (1 -  ) vt+1 ] ,
                               1+r
                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                  1-
where we assume that the value of a non-exporting firm is zero. We also require that limt         1+r       vt =
0, which follows from the transversality condition of the firms' owner(s).

In every period, a unit mass of firms receives the opportunity to begin exporting to the foreign
                                                           s , drawn from distribution G, and then
location. Each of these firms receive i.i.d sunk cost draw t
decide whether to start exporting. Each firm solves
                                                         s
                                               max {vt - t , 0} ,
                                s  v . Note that a firm entering this period begins to receive profits
so a firm enters if and only if t    t
from exporting only in the next period. The mass of firms entering into exporting in period t is thus
G (vt ). The mass of exporting firms at the end of period t is denoted by nt , and it evolves according
to
                                      nt+1 = nt (1 -  ) + G (vt ) .
Letting qt = q (px  t , t t , t Dt ) denote foreign demand per unit mass of firms, and letting pt =
                                                                                                      x
 x                                                                    x
p (ct , t t ) denote the price set by each firm, exports are Xt = qt pt nt . It is clear that this model is
nested by the set of equations in Section C.1.

C.2.3    A dynamic Melitz (2003) model

Consider a version of the Melitz (2003) model, with a two-stage entry problem. In the first stage of
the entry problem, firms do not know their productivity of producing the exported good. Further,
they pay a sunk cost to obtain the right to export on a per-period basis. Having paid this sunk cost,

                                                      62
they learn their productivity and face the following static decision problem going forward: As long
as the firm maintains its right to export on a per-period basis, it can pay a fixed cost to obtain the
profit of exporing for one period.

First stage Let  (ct , t t , t Dt ) denote expected flow profits from exporting in stage one of the
entry problem. The remainder of this stage is isomorphic to the dynamic Krugman (1980) model
described above. Firms lose their right to export on a per-period basis with probability  per period.
The expected value of exporting at the end of period t is
                              1
                      vt =       Et [ (ct+1 , t+1 t+1 , t+1 Dt+1 ) + (1 -  ) vt+1 ] ,
                             1+r
                                                                                                     t
                                                                                               1-
where we assume that the value of a non-exporting firm is zero. We also require that limt      1+r       vt =
0, which follows from the transversality condition of the firms' owner(s).

In every period, a unit mass of firms faces the first stage of the entry problem. Each of these firms
receives an i.i.d sunk cost draw t s , drawn from distribution G, and then decides whether to enter

into the second stage. Each firm solves
                                                        s
                                              max {vt - t , 0} ,

so a firm enters if and only if ts  v . Note that a firm entering this period faces the second stage
                                       t
of the entry problem only in the next period. The mass of firms entering into the second stage in
period t is G (vt ). The mass of firms with the right to export on a per-period basis is denoted by nt ,
and evolves according to
                                       nt+1 = nt (1 -  ) + G (vt ) .

Foreign consumer We assume that foreign demand takes the form Qt = (Ptc )- t Dt , where
Ptc = t t Ptx is the ideal price index of consumer prices paid for the country's exports, so that
Qt = (Ptx )- (t t )- t Dt is the quantity aggregate of the firm-level exports. Qt takes the CES
form                                                        
                                                                  -1          -1
                                      Qt =             qt (j )         dj          ,              (C.9)
                                                j Jt

where j indexes exporting firms and Jt is the set of exporting firms. Profit maximization implies
that
                                                          -
                                                  px
                                                   t (j )
                                    qt (j ) = Qt            ,                              (C.10)
                                                   Ptx
where                                                                          1
                                                                              1-
                                                               1-
                                    Ptx   =           (px
                                                        t (j ))         dj             .         (C.11)
                                               j Jt

Measured exports are Xt = Qt Ptx .

Second stage Once a firm has paid the sunk entry cost, it draws its productivity  from distri-
                                                                   s . A firm's marginal costs are
bution F , which we assume to be independent of the sunk cost draw t



                                                        63
ct
.    Each firm faces demand function (C.10). Profit maximization implies that

                                                              ct
                                             px
                                              t (j ) =              ,
                                                          - 1  (j )

and yields flow profits from exporting

                                                                 ct
                           t (j ) = qt (j ) px
                                             t (j ) -                      -
                                                                  (j )
                                                                   1-
                                         1           ct
                                   =                                     Qt (Ptx ) - ,
                                                 - 1  (j )

where  denotes the per-period fixed cost of exporting, which is common across firms.

A firm exports in period t if t (j )  0, and the marginal firm has productivity
                                                                            1
                                                                            -1
                                   m     =    ct                                    .
                                   t
                                           -1                Qt (Ptx )

Note that Qt and Ptc depend on t and hence changes in tariffs will affect the composition of firms
that exports in a given period.

Following Melitz (2003), we write the price index (C.11) as
                                                                                     1
                                                                                    1-
                                                       1-
                           Ptx =                (px
                                                  t ())   nt dF ()
                                         m
                                         t
                                                                                          1
                                        1                                                1-
                                              
                                = nt   1-
                                                 ct                -1 dF ()
                                              -1               m
                                                               t
                                         1
                                               ct
                                = nt1-
                                              -1~t
where                                                                      1
                                                                           -1
                                                          -1
                                   ~t =                        dF ()            .             (C.12)
                                                 m
                                                 t

Note that ~t denotes an aggregate productivity measure of exporting firms, and not an average.

Now letting
                                                              ct
                                             px
                                              t (~t ) =           ,                           (C.13)
                                                             -1~t
we have                                                  1
                                             Ptx = nt1- px
                                                         t (~t ) .




                                                         64
                                                                             px    -
                                                                              t ()
Again following Melitz (2003), and noting that qt () = Qt                     Pt x            and

                                                                            -
                                                           px
                                                            t (~t )
                                         qt ( ~t ) = Qt        x                ,                     (C.14)
                                                             Pt
                              
                         t
we have that qt () =     ~t      q (~t ). We can then write the quantity index (C.9) as
                                                                                       
                                                                -1
                                                                                       -1

                                  Qt =                qt ()          nt dF ()
                                                m
                                                t
                                                
                                        = nt-1 qt (~t ) .

Now the total value of exports is

                                      Xt = Qt Ptx
                                                                      1
                                            = nt-1 q (~t ) nt1- px (~t )
                                            = nt qt (~t ) px
                                                           t (~t ) ,

where ~t , px
            t (~t ), and qt (~t ) are defined in equations (C.12), (C.13), and (C.14).

Lastly, expected profits can be written as
                                                                 1-
                                  1                 ct
                          t =       Qt (Ptx )                             -  (1 - F (m
                                                                                     t )) .
                                                   -1~t

Since our assumptions on foreign demand imply that Qt (Ptx ) = (t t )- t Dt , we can write
                                   ct
                    px
                     t (~t ) =
                                -1     ~t
                    qt (          x
                         ~t ) = (pt (~t ))- (t t )- t Dt
                                                                            1-
                                    1                      ct
                         t =          (t t )- t Dt                                  -  (1 - F (m
                                                                                               t ))
                                                          -1~t

where ~t is given by equation (C.12) and
                                                                                     1
                                                                                     -1
                                    m
                                    t   =    ct                                           .
                                          -1             (t t )- t Dt

It is now easy to see that the above functions take the forms assumed in equations (C.1)-(C.4).

While the exact values of elasticities (C.7) depend on the distribution F , it is always true that
 ln m                ln ~t                    ln px    ln ~t
 ln t =  -1 > 0,  ln t < 0, and hence  ln t = -  ln t > 0. Further, the partial derivative
      t                                           t

 ln qt
 ln t = - .




                                                          65
C.3     Model solution

Global solution Solving equation (C.5) forward gives, after imposing the transversality condition,
                                                    
                                        1                   1-
                                vt =       Et                      t+   +1     .
                                       1+r                  1+r
                                                    =0

Further, solving equation (C.6) backwards gives
                                     t-1
                              nt =         (1 -  )k G (vt-1-k ) + (1 -  )t n0 .
                                     k=0

The model solution is unique: for any sequence of t+ +1 's, the first equation yields a unique vt , and
for any sequence of vt 's, the second equation yields a unique nt .

Nonstochastic steady state Suppose all exogenous driving forces are constant so that ct = c,
t = , t =  , t =  and Dt = D. Then t =  , and vt immediately collapses to
                                                          
                                                  v=        .
                                                         r+
Further, nt converges to
                                                G (v )
                                                  n=   .
                                                  
These two equations characterize the non-stochastic steady state.

Long-run trade elasticity       The long-run trade elasticity is
                                 d ln X        d ln q     d ln px d ln n
                                             =        +          +
                                 d ln          d ln       d ln     d ln 
                                                     d ln n
                                             = 0 +           ,
                                                     d ln 
where
                               d ln n   d ln n d ln v   d ln 
                                      =               =       = , ,
                               d ln     d ln v d ln     d ln 
and
                                           d ln n   d ln G (v )   g (v ) v
                                   :=             =             =          .
                                           d ln v      d ln v     G (v )

                                                                                                
Monotone convergence If ct = c, t = , t =  , t =  and Dt = D, then vt = v =                    r+ .   It
then follows from equation (C.6) above that

                              nt - n = (1 -  ) (nt-1 - n) + G (v ) - n
                                       = (1 -  ) (nt-1 - n) ,

so convergence is monotone.


                                                       66
Linearized economy We characterize all impulse response functions and trade elasticities up
to a first order approximation. Letting tildes denote percent deviations from steady state, e.g.
                                -v
~t = ln vt - ln v = d ln vt = vtv
v                                  , these are

                                             +r           1-
                                 v
                                 ~t = Et           ~t+1 +        ~t+1 ,
                                                                 v                                                (C.15)
                                             1+r          1+r
                                 n
                                 ~t     ~ t-1 (1 -  ) + v
                                      = n                 ~t-1 ,                                                  (C.16)

in recursive form and
                                                     
                                       +r                    1-
                              ~t =
                              v            Et                      ~t+     +1     ,                               (C.17)
                                       1+r                   1+r
                                                      =0
                                            t-1
                              n
                              ~ t =               (1 -  )t-1-k v
                                                               ~k + (1 -  )t n
                                                                             ~0,                                  (C.18)
                                            k=0

when solved forwards and backwards, respectively.

Further, the static model block (C.1)-(C.4) takes the form

                           ~x
                           pt = p,c c        t + 
                                    ~t + p, (~   ~t ) + p,D      ~t ,
                                                            ~t + D                                                (C.19)

                            q        ~x
                            ~t = q,p p                             ~t ,
                                       t + q, (~
                                               t + ~t ) + q,D ~t + D                                              (C.20)

                            ~t = ,c c
                                    ~t + , (~
                                            t + ~t ) + ,D      ~t ,
                                                          ~t + D                                                  (C.21)
                           ~t = q
                           X         ~x
                                ~t + pt +n
                                         ~t.                                                                      (C.22)


C.4     Proofs of propositions and examples

C.4.1    Proof of Proposition 1

                                                                      d ln t0 +       
Proposition 1. Consider an arbitrary evolution of tariffs              d ln t0             after the shock at t0 . The
                                                                                      =1
impulse response function of ln nt at horizon h = 0, 1, 2, ... is
                                      h-1                             
           d ln nt0 +h     +r                                               1-             d ln t0 +k+   +1
                       = ,                  (1 -  )h-1-k Et0 +k                                               .
             d ln t0       1+r                                              1+r                d ln t0
                                      k=0                             =0


Proof. Combining equation (C.17) as of time t0 + k with the fact that ~t = , ~t in the version of
the model with tariff shocks only (see C.21) gives
                                                           
                                       +r                       1-
                          ~t0 +k = ,
                          v               Et +k                            ~t0 +k+    +1   .                      (C.23)
                                       1+r 0                    1+r
                                                           =0




                                                        67
Next take equation (C.16) at time t0 + h and solve it backwards until period t0 . This gives
                                               h-1
                              n
                              ~ t0 +h =              (1 -  )h-1-k v
                                                                  ~t0 +k + (1 -  )h n
                                                                                    ~ t0                               (C.24)
                                               k=0

Now plugging (C.23) into (C.24) gives
                                   h-1                             
                         +r                                               1-
        ~ t0 +h = , 
        n                                (1 -  )h-1-k Et0 +k                        ~t0 +k+   +1   + (1 -  )h n
                                                                                                              ~ t0 .
                         1+r                                              1+r
                                   k=0                              =0

                                                                                                                   d ln nt0
Lastly, replace n
                ~ t0 +h with d ln nt0 +h , etc., differentiate with respect to d ln t0 , and note that             d ln t0    =
0.



C.4.2    Proof of Proposition 2

                                d ln t0 +h
Proposition 2. If limh           d ln t0      = 0 and is finite, then limh h = .


Proof. We first show that {v ~t0 +h }h=0 converges to , ~. Fix an arbitrary  > 0. Since {   ~t0 +h }h=0
                                                                          
converges to ~, there exists a h such that for h  h : |    ~t0 +h - ~| < |, | . Next note that

                                                           
                                 +r                                1-
                     ~t+h - , 
                     v        ~=     Et+h                                  , (~
                                                                              t+h+       +1   -~) .
                                 1+r                               1+r
                                                           =0

Then, for h  h , and using Jensen's and the triangle inequality,
                                                            
                                              +r                    1-
                   ~t+h - , 
                  |v        ~|                    Et+h                      |, (~
                                                                                t+h+          +1   -~)|
                                              1+r                   1+r
                                                            =0
                                                            
                                              +r                    1-
                                         <        Et+h                       = ,
                                              1+r                   1+r
                                                              =0

           ~t0 +h }
and hence {v       h=0 converges to , ~.

We next show that {n~ t0 +h } converges to ,                                  ~t0 +h }
                                             ~. Fix an arbitrary  > 0. Since {v       h=0 converges
                                                                   
to , ~, there exists a h such that for h  h : |v  ~t0 +h - ,  ~| < 2 . Next note that for h > h ,

                  h-1
  n
  ~ t0 +h =             (1 -  )h-1-k v
                                     ~t0 +k + (1 -  )h n
                                                       ~ t0
                  k=0
                   h-1                                                    h -1
                                h-1-k                               h-h
           =             (1 -  )             ~t0 +k +  (1 -  )
                                             v                                   (1 -  )h -1-k v
                                                                                               ~t0 +k + (1 -  )h n
                                                                                                                 ~ t0 .
                  k=h                                                     k=0



                                                              68
Then, for h > h ,

                           h-1
~ t0 +h - , 
n           ~ =                  (1 -  )h-1-k (~
                                               vt0 +k - , ~ + , ~) - , ~
                           k=h
                                                h -1
                                          h-h
                         + (1 -  )                     (1 -  )h -1-k v
                                                                     ~t0 +k + (1 -  )h n
                                                                                       ~ t0
                                                k=0
                           h-1                                                        h-1
                                           h-1-k
                   =             (1 -  )            vt0 +k - , 
                                                   (~          ~) + , ~                     (1 -  )h-1-k - , ~
                           k=h                                                       k=h
                                                h -1
                         + (1 -  )h-h                  (1 -  )h -1-k v
                                                                     ~t0 +k + (1 -  )h n
                                                                                       ~ t0
                                                k=0
                           h-1
                   =             (1 -  )h-1-k (~
                                               vt0 +k - , ~)
                           k=h
                                                                            h -1
                                           h-h                        h-h
                         -, ~ (1 -  )              +  (1 -  )                      (1 -  )h -1-k v
                                                                                                 ~t0 +k + (1 -  )h n
                                                                                                                   ~ t0 ,
                                                                             k=0

                                                             h-h
                          h-1                         1-(1- )
where we used that        k=h   (1 -  )h-1-k =                        . Next note that

         h-1                                                    h-1
                     h-1-k
               (1 -  )        vt0 +k - , 
                             (~          ~)                           (1 -  )h-1-k |v
                                                                                    ~t0 +k - , ~|
         k=h                                                 k=h
                                                                h-1
                                                                                          
                                                      <               (1 -  )h-1-k      =   1 - (1 -  )h-h .
                                                                                      2   2
                                                             k=h

Hence,
                                   
         |n
          ~ t0 +h - , ~| <           1 - (1 -  )h-h + (1 -  )h-h |, ~|
                                   2
                                                             h -1
                                                 h-h
                                   + (1 -  )                          (1 -  )h -1-k v
                                                                                    ~t0 +k + (1 -  )h |n
                                                                                                       ~ t0 | .
                                                                k=0

                                                                                                         
Now choosing h                               
                  > h such that for all h > h the last three terms are smaller than                      2,   implies that
n
~ t0 +h converges to , ~.
                 ~ t +h = 0 
Lastly note that X                                            ~ t +h = 0 
                                     ~ t0 +h , and hence limh X
                            ~t0 +h + n                                   ~ + , ~ = ~. Since
                    0                                            0
                                 ~ t +h
                                 X
~ = 0, limh h = limh
                                 
                                    0
                                 ~t0 +h   = .




                                                            69
C.4.3   Details on Example 1

Plug  ln >t0 into equation (5.10). This gives
                                                                           h-1
                                d ln nt0 +h
                                               = ,  ln >t0                       (1 -  )h-1-k
                                  d ln t0
                                                                           k=0

                                               = , 1 - (1 -  )h  ln >t0 .

The claim now follows immediately.

C.4.4   Details on Example 2

Tariffs follow a first or autoregressive process with autoregressive root . Then

                                                     d ln t0 +k+    +1           +k+1
                                        Et0 +k                             =            .
                                                         d ln t0

Plugging this expression into (5.10) gives
                                                       h-1                       
               d ln nt0 +h                    +r                                        1-
                                 = ,                          (1 -  )h-1-k                                   +k+1
                 d ln t0                      1+r                                       1+r
                                                       k=0                       =0
                                                       h-1                                      
                                              +r                                                          1-
                                 = ,                          (1 -  )h-1-k ()k+1                              
                                              1+r                                                         1+r
                                                       k=0                                      =0
                                                                           h-1                      h-1-k
                                           +r                                     1-
                                 = ,                  h
                                     1 + r - (1 -  )                               
                                                                           k=0
                                                                                            h
                                                                                  1-
                                           +r           1-                          
                                 = ,                  h                            1-
                                                                                                .
                                     1 + r - (1 -  )     1-                         

Since
                  d ln nt0 +h
                                                                                                               h
                    d ln t0                              ( + r)                                      1-
                  d ln t0 +h
                                = ,                                                     1-                          ,
                                          [1 + r - (1 -  ) ] 1 -            1-                        
                    d ln t0                                                  

the claim follows immediately.

C.4.5   Proof of Proposition 3

Proposition 3. The model delivers estimating equation (2.2), where
                                              h-1                     
                  h        +r                                 h-1-k         1-              k+       +1
                  X    = ,                          (1 -  )                                               + 0 h
                                                                                                                .
                           1+r                                              1+r
                                              k=0                     =0




                                                               70
 h is defined as the regression coefficient of  ln 
                                               h   i,j,p,t on 0 ln i,j,p,t in the population, and can be
estimated from equation (2.3).
                                                                      X,h       X,h
After augmenting the model with additional shocks, the fixed effects j,p,t and i,p,t capture a weighted
sum of past, present, and expected future supply and demand shocks, respectively. The error term
includes past, present, and expected future time-varying bilateral and product-specific demand shocks
and non-tariff trade barriers, as well as the initial state.

Proof. Using equations (C.20) and (C.19), and the definition of 0 = (1 + q,p ) p, + q, (equation
(5.6)), we have

       ~t+h - q
       q             ~x
              ~t-1 + p      ~x
                      t+h - p
                                    0
                                      t+h - 
                              t-1 =  (~     ~t-1 )
                                             +0 (~
                                                 t+h -                                    t+h - 
                                                       ~ t-1 ) + [(1 + q,p ) p,D + q,D ] (~     ~ t-1 )
                                                               ct+h - c
                                             + (1 + q,p ) p,c (~      ~t-1 )
                                                                       ~ t+h - D
                                             + [(1 + q,p ) p,D + q,D ] D       ~ t-1 .

Next, note that
                                                           
                                           +r                     1-
                                 v
                                 ~t+k =        Et+k                       ~t+k+    +1
                                           1+r                    1+r
                                                           =0

and
                                             h-1
                                n
                                ~ t+h =            (1 -  )h-1-k v      ~ t (1 -  )h ,
                                                                ~t+k + n
                                             k=0

so that
                                  h-1                            
                           +r                                          1-
   ~ t+h - n
   n       ~ t-1 =                       (1 -  )h-1-k Et+k                     ~t+k+         +1     ~ t (1 -  )h - n
                                                                                                   +n              ~ t-1
                           1+r                                         1+r
                                  k=0                            =0
                                  h-1                            
                           +r                                          1-
                     =                   (1 -  )h-1-k Et+k                     (~
                                                                                t+k+         +1   -~t-1 )
                           1+r                                         1+r
                                   k=0                            =0

                         +~t-1 1 - (1 -  )h + n
                                              ~ t (1 -  )h - n
                                                             ~ t-1 .

From (C.21) we obtain

      ~t+k+
              +1   -~t-1 = ,c (~
                               ct+k+        +1   -c
                                                  ~t-1 ) + , (~
                                                              t+k+       +1   -~ t-1 ) + , (~
                                                                                            t+k+            +1   -~t-1 )
                              +,D (~
                                   t+k+          +1   -             ~ t+k+
                                                       ~ t-1 ) + ,D D          +1
                                                                                     ~ t-1 .
                                                                                    -D


Now putting the pieces together, and adding the subscripts back in, we have that
                                                         h-1                            
                                                 +r                                               1-
h ln Xi,j,p,t = 0 h ln i,j,p,t + ,                             (1 -  )h-1-k Et+k                         k +     +1 ln i,j,p,t
                                                 1+r                                              1+r
                                                         k=0                            =0
                       h
                      +j,p,t   h
                             + i,p,t + uX,h
                                        i,j,p,t


                                                           71
where we used that, for a generic variable xt , h xt = xt+h - xt-1 , and
      X,h
      i,p,t = [(1 + q,p ) p,D + q,D ] h ln Di,p,t
                               h-1                             
                     +r                       h-1-k                    1-
                +,D                  (1 -  )          Et+k                       k +   +1 ln Di,p,t       ,
                     1+r                                               1+r
                               k=0                             =0
    X,h
    j,p,t = (1 + q,p ) p,c h ln cj,p,t
                              h-1                              
                       +r                                              1-
                +,c                 (1 -  )h-1-k Et+k                            k +   +1 ln cj,p,t   ,
                       1+r                                             1+r
                              k=0                              =0
                                                  h-1                             
                                  +r                              h-1-k                  1-
  uX,h
   i,j,p,t
                 0
             =  h ln i,j,p,t + ,                        (1 -  )           Et+k                        k +     +1 ln i,j,p,t
                                  1+r                                                    1+r
                                                  k=0                             =0
                + [(1 + q,p ) p,D + q,D ] h ln i,j,p,t
                               h-1                             
                        +r                                             1-
                +,D                  (1 -  )h-1-k Et+k                           k +   +1 ln i,j,p,t
                        1+r                                            1+r
                               k=0                             =0
                                          h
                +~i,j,p,t-1 1 - (1 -  )         ~ i,j,p,t (1 -  )h - n
                                               +n                    ~ i,j,p,t-1 .


Next define the regression coefficient of h ln i,j,p,t on 0 ln i,j,p,t as  h in the population, where

we assume that 0 ln i,j,p,t is an exogenous tariff shock. Clearly,   h can be estimated from equation

(2.3). Then the estimating equation becomes
                                                          X,h     X,h
                                         h
                         h ln Xi,j,p,t = X 0 ln i,j,p,t + j,p,t + i,p,t + uX,h
                                                                           i,j,p,t .

where
                                        h-1                       
                                +r                                      1-
                     h
                     X = ,                     (1 -  )h-1-k                       k+
                                                                                        +1
                                                                                             + 0 h
                                                                                                   .
                                1+r                                     1+r
                                        k=0                       =0

Note that h , h = 0, 1, ... are constants, so the expectation drops out.




C.5     Estimation in long differences

Proposition C.1. (Part 1) Estimation as a horizon-h difference does generally not identify the
horizon-h trade elasticity.

(Part 2) If tariffs follow a random walk, a regression of h ln Xt on h ln t identifies the simple
average of horizon-0 to horizon-h trade elasticities.

Proof. Since the first part of the proposition follows from the second part, we prove the second part.

Tariffs follow a random walk,
                                                ~t = ~t-1 + u ut,


                                                          72
where u  t is white noise with unit variance, and u denotes the standard deviation of the innovation
to tariffs. Then
                                                                      k
                                          ~t+k - 
                                                 ~t-1 = u                   ut+j .
                                                                     j =0

Consider the projection of ~t+k - ~t-1 on ~t+h - ~t-1 (i.e. the OLS estimator),

                                                                      k                  h     
                      t+k - 
                 Cov [~      ~t-1 , ~t+h - ~t-1 ]   Cov               j =0 ut+k ,        j =0 ut+k       k+1
                                                  =                                                  =       .           (C.25)
                           t+h - 
                        V [~        ~t-1 ]                                    h                          h+1
                                                                     V        j =0 ut+k


Next note that
                                       h-1                                   
                                +r                                                    1-
        ~ t+h - n
        n       ~ t-1 =                      (1 -  )h-1-k Et+k                                  (~
                                                                                                 t+k+    +1   -~t-1 )
                                1+r                                                   1+r
                                       k=0                                   =0

                              +~t-1 1 - (1 -  )h + n
                                                   ~ t (1 -  )h - n
                                                                  ~ t-1 ,

which implies, together with

                                  ~t+k+   +1   -~t-1 = q, (~
                                                           t+k+               +1      -~t-1 )

that
                                          h-1                                   
                               +r                        h-1-k                          1-
       ~ t+h - n
       n       ~ t-1      = q,                  (1 -  )              Et+k                        (~
                                                                                                  t+k+    +1   -~t-1 )
                               1+r                                                      1+r
                                          k=0                                   =0

                             +~t-1 1 - (1 -  )h + n
                                                  ~ t (1 -  )h - n
                                                                 ~ t-1 .

Since Et+k [~
            t+k+   +1 ]   =~t+k , this expression becomes
                                                   h-1
                       ~ t+h - n
                       n       ~ t-1 = q,                (1 -  )h-1-k (~
                                                                       t+k - ~t-1 )
                                                   k=0

                                          +~t-1 1 - (1 -  )h + n
                                                               ~ t (1 -  )h - n
                                                                              ~ t-1 .




Now
        ~ t+h - X
                ~ t-1 = q
                        ~t+h - q      ~x      ~x
        X                      ~t-1 + p t+h - p      ~ t+h - n
                                               t-1 + n       ~ t-1
                                                                                  h-1
                             ~t+h - q
                           = q      ~t-1 +      ~x
                                                p t+h   -    ~x
                                                             p t-1   + q,               (1 -  )h-1-k (~
                                                                                                      t+k - ~t-1 )
                                                                                  k=0
                                                         h                        h
                               +~t-1 1 - (1 -  )               ~ t (1 -  ) - n
                                                              +n             ~ t-1


                                                             73
                        t+h - 
and regressing this on (~     ~t-1 ) gives

          ~ t+h - X
      Cov X       ~ t-1 , ~t+h - ~t-1
                                                                                                                         (C.26)
             t+h - 
          V (~     ~t-1 , ~t+h - ~t-1 )
                                                          h-1
          ~t+h - q
      Cov q             ~x
                 ~t-1 + p      ~x
                         t+h - p t-1 + q,                 k=0 (1   -  )h-1-k (~
                                                                              t+k - ~t-1 ) , ~t+h - ~t-1
  =
                                             t+h - 
                                          V (~     ~t-1 , ~t+h - ~t-1 )
                                                                                h-1
          ~t+h - q      ~x       ~x                   Cov q,                    k=0 (1   -  )h-1-k (~
                                                                                                    t+k - ~t-1 ) , ~t+h - ~t-1
      Cov q      ~t-1 + pt+h - p  t-1 , ~t+h - ~t-1
  =                                                 +
                t+h - 
             V (~      ~t-1 , ~t+h - ~t-1 )                                         t+h - 
                                                                                 V (~     ~t-1 , ~t+h - ~t-1 )
                   h-1
                                             t+k - 
                                        Cov (~     ~t-1 , ~t+h - ~t-1 )
  = 0 + q,               (1 -  )h-1-k
                                            t+h - 
                                         V (~     ~t-1 , ~t+h - ~t-1 )
                   k=0
                   h-1
                                        k+1
  = 0 + q,               (1 -  )h-1-k                                                                                    (C.27)
                                        h+1
                   k=0

where the last equality uses equation (C.25) above.

Next note that


   h-1
                        k+1                        1                2                  h-1   h
         (1 -  )h-1-k          = (1 -  )h-1           + (1 -  )h-2     + ... + (1 -  )     +
                        h+1                       h+1              h+1                 h+1 h+1
   k=0
                                     1
                               =          [1]
                                   h+1
                                        1
                                   +        [1 + (1 -  )]
                                     h+1
                                   +...
                                        1
                                   +          1 + (1 -  ) + ... + (1 -  )h-2
                                     h+1
                                        1
                                   +          1 + (1 -  ) + ... + (1 -  )h-2 + (1 -  )h-1
                                     h+1
                                            h-1 k
                                    1
                               =                       (1 -  )j
                                   h+1
                                            k=0 j =0
                                            h-1
                                    1             1 - (1 -  )k+1
                               =                                 .
                                   h+1                   
                                            k=0




                                                          74
Plugging this expression into equation (C.27) gives

                ~ t+h - X
            Cov X       ~ t-1 , ~t+h - ~t-1                              h-1
                                                      0  1                     1 - (1 -  )k+1
                                               =  + q, 
                  t+h - 
               V (~     ~t-1 , ~t+h - ~t-1 )            h+1                           
                                                                         k=0
                                                                        h-1
                                                                   1
                                               = 0 + q,                        1 - (1 -  )k+1
                                                                  h+1
                                                                        k=0
                                                                         h
                                                                   1
                                               = 0 + q,                        1 - (1 -  )k
                                                                  h+1
                                                                        k=0
                                                             h
                                                       1
                                               =                  k
                                                      h+1
                                                            k=0


where we used that h = 0 + q, 1 - (1 -  )h , see equation (5.11) of Example 1.




                                                75
