                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       TRADE CREDIT AND THE TRANSMISSION OF
                        UNCONVENTIONAL MONETARY POLICY

                                        Manuel Adelino
                                       Miguel A. Ferreira
                                      Mariassunta Giannetti
                                          Pedro Pires

                                       Working Paper 27077
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27077


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Manuel Adelino, Miguel A. Ferreira, Mariassunta Giannetti, and Pedro Pires. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Credit and the Transmission of Unconventional Monetary Policy
Manuel Adelino, Miguel A. Ferreira, Mariassunta Giannetti, and Pedro Pires
NBER Working Paper No. 27077
May 2020
JEL No. E50,G30

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that trade credit in production networks is important for the transmission of
unconventional monetary policy. We find that firms with bonds eligible for purchase under the
European Central Bank's Corporate Sector Purchase Program act as financial intermediaries and
extend more trade credit to their customers. The increase in trade credit flows is more pronounced
from core countries to periphery countries and towards financially constrained customers.
Customers increase investment and employment in response to the additional financing, while
suppliers with eligible bonds increase their customer base, potentially favoring upstream industry
concentration. Our findings suggest that the trade credit channel of monetary policy produces
heterogeneous effects on regions, industries, and firms.

Manuel Adelino                                  Mariassunta Giannetti
Fuqua School of Business                        Department of Finance
Duke University                                 Stockholm School of Economics
100 Fuqua Drive                                 Box 6501
Durham, NC 27708                                SE-113 83 Stockholm
and NBER                                        Sweden
manuel.adelino@duke.edu                         mariassunta.giannetti@hhs.se

Miguel A. Ferreira                              Pedro Pires
Nova School of Business and Economics           Nova School of Business and Economics
Campus Carcavelos                               Campus Carcavelos
Rua Holanda, 1                                  Rua Holanda, 1
Carcavelos                                      Carcavelos
Portugal                                        Portugal
and CEPR and ECGI                               pmapires@gmail.com
miguel.ferreira@novasbe.pt
1. Introduction
   Conventional monetary policy is typically thought to affect access to external finance more for

small firms than for large firms. The informational frictions that add to the cost of external finance

apply mainly to small firms such as young firms, firms with higher idiosyncratic risk, and firms

with less collateral (Gertler and Gilchrist, 1994; Holmstrom and Tirole, 1997). In addition, small

firms are more likely to be face liquidity constraints (Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen, 1988) and

rely more on financial intermediaries, while large firms have access to public markets (Gertler and

Hubbard, 1988).

   Unconventional monetary policy tools, which involve directly purchasing assets in public debt

markets, can directly affect bond yields and issuance volumes of large firms, as these firms are

much more likely to issue bonds. This has been the case for both episodes of quantitative easing

in the United States focusing on short-and long-term Treasury bills (Foley-Fisher, Ramcharan and

Yu, 2016), and for the European Central Bank's (ECB) Corporate Sector Purchase Program

(CSPP) that involve the purchase of investment grade corporate bonds (Grosse-Rueschkamp,

Steffen, and Streitz, 2019; Todorov, 2020). Quantitative easing can also indirectly benefit small

firms in the economy through the bank lending channel (Acharya, Eisert, Eufinger, and Hirsch,

2018; Grosse-Rueschkamp, Steffen, and Streitz, 2019; Chakraborty, Goldstein, and Mackinlay,

2020).

   This paper proposes and tests a new channel (trade credit channel) of transmission of

unconventional monetary policy, which operates independently from the bank lending channel.

Using the ECB's CSPP announced in March 2016 and implemented starting in June 2016 as a

laboratory, we hypothesize that firms with access to bond markets (i.e., typically large firms) can

act as financial intermediaries by providing trade credit to their customers who do not have access

to bond markets. We examine whether this channel mitigates or exacerbates asymmetries in the

transmission mechanism of monetary policy by studying which customers are supported by firms

with eligible bonds under the CSPP. We also explore how the CSPP affects eligible firms' ability

to acquire and retain customers and thus their competitive position in product markets.

                                                    1
   The CSPP was designed with strict eligibility criteria in place, as only bonds issued by

investment-grade non-financial firms from the euro area can be purchased by the ECB. The design

of the CSPP allows us to implement a difference-in-differences analysis and to address concerns

related to shocks concurrent to the implementation of the CSPP affecting eligible firms and their

customers. We show that the CSPP resulted in a significant increase in the issuance of bonds in

the core of the euro area (includes countries such as France and Germany), where more developed

capital markets and stronger legal institutions allow firms to issue larger amount of bonds that are

deemed to be safe.

   This asymmetric reaction favoring large firms in more financially and economically developed

countries and in countries with better economic conditions is a potentially unintended consequence

of the CSPP. However, if targeted (large, unconstrained) firms pass on the additional funding

liquidity to their customers through trade credit, unconventional monetary policy tools can also

benefit small and financially constrained firms through production networks. In addition, even

though firms located in core countries may experience a larger direct benefit from the CSPP,

whether the increase in liquidity spill overs to other regions depends on the geography of

production networks.

   We investigate these unexplored questions using a new data set containing information on

firm-level customer-supplier networks. We compare the amount of trade credit extended by

eligible firms (i.e., firms with bonds that are eligible under the CSPP) to trade credit extended by

non-eligible firms, before and after the CSPP announcement. We find that eligible firms increase

the amount of trade credit they provide to customers (i.e., accounts receivable as a proportion of

sales) more than non-eligible firms after the CSPP. As we would expect, at the same time, we find

that the amount of trade credit received by customers of eligible firms (i.e., accounts payable as a

proportion of sales) increases after the CSPP. The increase happens only after the program

announcement, with no evidence of significant preexisting differential trends in trade credit.

   We also show that the CSPP reduces financial constraints indirectly for firms in the production

network of firms targeted by the CSPP. Eligible firms extend trade credit to customers that are

                                                   2
more financially constrained. In particular, smaller firms, non-investment grade firms, unrated

firms, and firms with higher leverage and those with low tangible assets to pledge as collateral

receive more trade credit from eligible suppliers.

   We show that our results are not driven by preexisting differences between treatment and

control groups. For instance, one important feature of the tests is that eligible (treated) firms are,

by the nature of the program, larger than most non-eligible (control) firms. In order to account for

the possibility of differential trends by size over time, we repeat our tests using matched samples

of suppliers and customers. We also sort firms in fine size bins (splitting firms into 50 groups)

and include size bin dummies interacted with year dummies in the regressions. We find similar

estimates in these more stringent specifications, which indicates that asymmetric shocks affecting

firms of different size are unlikely to drive our findings.

   A program like the CSPP has the potential to produce redistributive effects across regions.

While the design of the program by the ECB aimed to purchase investment grade bonds of firms

in different euro area countries roughly in proportion of GDP, firms in core countries with more

developed bond markets were able to issue many more investment grade bonds at lower yields

after the announcement of the program. Arguably as a consequence of the asymmetric

improvement in financial conditions, we only detect an increase in accounts receivable for

suppliers located in core countries. There are proportionally fewer suppliers with eligible bonds

under the CSPP in periphery countries such as Italy and Spain, and we do not find a significant

increase in accounts receivable for suppliers located in periphery countries.

   However, we find the exact opposite when we consider the customers of eligible firms.

Customers located in core countries show small and insignificant increases in accounts payable,

while customers in periphery countries show a significant increase in accounts payable as a

proportion of sales. We also provide direct evidence that links between suppliers in core countries

and customers in periphery countries drive the effects. These results are consistent with a

substitution effect for trade credit particularly in periphery countries where banks were more

affected by the 2010-2011 European sovereign debt crisis. We conclude that monetary policy

                                                     3
transmission through production networks mitigates the asymmetric effects that arise from the

regional distribution of eligible firms and their ability to issue investment grade bonds, which

benefit core countries.

   Finally, we also show that the trade credit channel of monetary policy produces real effects.

As a result of the increase in trade financing, the customers of eligible suppliers increase

employment and investment and provide more trade credit to their own customers. While trade

credit in production networks is an important channel of transmission for (unconventional)

monetary policy to the real economy, there are also important effects on product market

competition. Eligible suppliers that are able to extend more trade credit acquire new customers and

thus enhance their competitive position in product markets, which may have long-lasting effects

on real economic activity.

   Our findings highlight mechanisms of tantamount importance in light of the expanded direct

assets purchases announced by the Federal Reserve Board and the ECB in March 2020. Notably,

both the unlimited quantitative easing program of the Federal Reserve Board and the Pandemic

Emergency Purchase Program (PEPP) of the ECB involve direct interventions in corporate bond

markets. We highlight a new channel through which quantitative easing affects the real economy

that complement the stimulus arising from the effects of asset purchases on banks' balance sheets

and lending. Trade credit can transmit the stimulus of unconventional monetary policy

interventions to firms that are not directly targeted by the policy. However, monetary policy

interventions that systematically benefit firms with better access to capital markets in core areas

may favor concentration in upstream industries with long-run consequences on industrial structure.

Hence, complementary measures that directly target small firms are an important complement to

central bank asset purchases.

   Our paper contributes to several strands of the literature. Our findings suggest that monetary

policy can be transmitted through the supply chain. This complements existing studies showing

that trade credit may provide an alternative source of liquidity that can mitigate the effects of bank

liquidity shocks (Restrepo, Cardona-Sosa, and Strahan, 2019). Previous research provides mixed

                                                    4
evidence on whether trade credit attenuates the transmission of monetary policy and bank shocks

to the real economy. While Gertler and Gilchrist (1993) find no substitution between bank loans

and trade credit following monetary and credit contractions, Nilsen (2002) provides evidence that

both small and large firms increase trade credit during monetary contractions.

   This mixed evidence mirrors the findings of more recent papers exploring whether trade credit

can substitute bank credit during credit crunches. Love, Preve, and Sarria-Allende (2007) find no

evidence that firms in East Asia were able to do so during the late 1990s when one excludes the

first phase of the crisis, while Garcia-Appendini and Montoriol-Garriga (2013) finds that cash-rich

suppliers extended more trade credit during the 2007-2009 financial crisis. In this paper, by

exploiting exogenous variation in suppliers' ability to access external finance, we show that supply

chains enhance the transmission of monetary policy, and in particular of quantitative easing

interventions. Thus, we contribute to the understanding of the transmission of unconventional

monetary policies to the real economy.

   Our paper also adds to the growing literature on the importance of customer-supplier networks

in the transmission of economic shocks. A number of papers in this literature explore how negative

shocks are transmitted through the supply chain and show that upstream negative liquidity shocks

are transmitted to customers along the supply chain and are potentially amplified (Boissay and

Gropp, 2013; Jacobson and von Schedvin, 2015; Barrot and Savagnat, 2016). A few recent papers

consider the role of bank liquidity shocks (Alfaro, Garcia-Santana, and Moral-Benito, 2017;

Costello, 2020; Huremovic, Jimenez, Moral-Benito, Peydro, and Vega-Redondo, 2020) and how

banking structure is related to the propagation of shocks along the supply chain (Giannetti and

Saidi, 2019). Using the stock market reaction to monetary policy shocks, Ozdagli and Weber

(2019) show that input-output linkages through higher-order demand effects are an important

transmission mechanism of macroeconomic shocks. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first

to consider how monetary policy is transmitted through trade credit in production networks.

Further, we examine the transmission of quantitative easing policies to the real economy (through

trade credit), which has been largely unexplored in the literature.

                                                   5
2. Data and Methodology

    This section describes the data, variables, and the empirical methodology.


2.1 Sample

    Our initial sample consists of a panel of publicly listed and privately held firms in the period

2013-2017 drawn from the Bureau Van Dijk ORBIS - Global financials for industrial companies

database. 1 We restrict the sample to firms based in the 19 member states that are part of the

Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union (eurozone area). We exclude firms that are

either classified as small companies by ORBIS or firms that have less than 1 million of total

assets in the fiscal year of 2015 from our analysis. 2 We also exclude financial firms (SIC codes

6000-6999) and public administration entities (SIC codes 9000-9999). Finally, we require non-

missing data on Accounts Receivable, Accounts Payable, Assets, Cash, PPE, Net Margin, and

Liabilities. Table A.1 of the Appendix provides variable definitions. The final sample consists of

510,298 unique firms for a total of 2,248,514 firm-year observations. Panel A of Table IA.1 lists

the number of observations in our sample by country. Table 1 reports summary statistics for the

variables used in our analysis.


2.2 CSPP and Eligible firms

    The ECB started a series of quantitative easing programs to ease monetary conditions in the

euro area and achieve the inflation target in 2012. Initially the program was limited to asset backed

securities and sovereign bonds. On March 10, 2016, the ECB announced the CSPP, which implied

an expansion of its asset purchase program to include investment grade corporate bonds, as a tool

to strengthen its accommodative monetary policy stance and to improve firms' financing

conditions. Panel A of Figure 1 shows that the proportion of corporate bond purchases were


1 To avoid double counting of financial reports and since the overwhelming majority of companies in ORBIS report unconsolidated
accounts, we only include data from unconsolidated financial statements in our sample.
2 Companies on ORBIS are considered to be small when they have less than 1 million in operating revenue, less than 2 million

in total assets, and less than 15 employees.

                                                                 6
designed to reflect the distribution of GDP in euro area countries. As a result, 70% of the universe

of eligible bonds under the CSPP are issued by firms in eurozone area core countries. Countries in

the core also represent about 66% of the gross domestic product (GDP) of the euro area.

       The consequences of the policies in terms of the firms' ability to issue investment grade bonds,

that is, the securities that benefitted most from the program in terms of lower yields appear to be

more asymmetric. Panel B shows that the issuance of investment grade bonds (as a % of GDP)

after the CSPP is much more pronounced in core countries, which have more developed bond

markets and stronger creditor protection enhancing firms' ability to issue investment grade bonds.

For example, from 2015 to 2016, in core countries, the new issuance of investment grade bonds

(eligible bonds) increased by 2.74 percentage points (from 1.91% to 4.66% of GDP). In contrast,

in periphery countries, the new issuance of investment grade bonds only increased by 0.58

percentage points (from 0.58% to 1.16% of GDP).

       While differences in bond issuance could also depend on firms' differences in the demand for

credit, Panel C indicates that new issuance of non-investment grade bonds (that were not targeted

by the CSPP) was almost unchanged from 2015 to 2016 both in core and periphery countries, and

if anything increased more in the periphery. This suggests that differences in the demand for credit

are unlikely to play a role.

       To identify whether differences in access to capital markets and trade credit provision arise

from demand shocks, our empirical methodology crucially relies on CSPP-eligible firms. We start

from the list of marketable bonds accepted as collateral for Eurosystem credit operations that was

published by the ECB the day before the CSPP announcement on March 9th, 2016. From this list,

consistent with the CSPP eligibility criteria, we retain euro-denominated securities (denomination

EUR, DEM, FRF) classified as bonds (type AT01) or medium term notes (type AT02) issued by

corporations (issuer group IG3) and financial corporations other than credit institutions (issuer

group IG9) resident in a country member of the euro area. 3



3   Data available at https://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/coll/assets/html/list-MID.en.html.

                                                                   7
    To assign each bond to a unique firm, we first collect the issuer name of each bond in the list

of bonds accepted as collateral by the ECB. Since several bonds are issued by financial subsidiaries

and most are guaranteed by the core organization (e.g., bonds issued by "Volkswagen Intl Finance

N.V." and by "Iberdrola Finanzas S.A.U." are guaranteed by "Volkswagen AG" and by "Iberdrola

S.A.", respectively), we also collect the name of corporations and financial corporations other than

credit institutions (guarantor groups GG3 and GG9) that guarantee eligible bonds provided that

the guarantors are resident in a country member of the euro area. Next, we apply a fuzzy-string

matching technique to identify in ORBIS the firm that has issued the CSPP eligible bonds. We are

able to match 304 unique eligible firms to firms' financial statements in ORBIS. We next exclude

financial firms (SIC codes 6000-6999) from the sample. As a result, our final sample includes 151

unique non-financial eligible firms, domiciled in the euro area, for which we have data on the

variables of interest. Panel B of Table IA.1 of the Internet Appendix reports the number of eligible

firms by country.


2.3 Customers of Eligible Firms

   We match each eligible firm (supplier) to all disclosed customers reported in Factset Revere

Supply Chain Relationship (Factset Revere). Using the Factset Revere database, we can track the

effects on suppliers and on their customers.

   Factset collects relationship information from primary public sources such as SEC 10-K annual

filings, investor presentations, and press releases, and classifies them through normalized

relationship types (e.g., disclosed customer, disclosed supplier, and competitor). Considering

customer and supplier relationship type only, the Factset Revere data include over 25,000 global

companies, which are the source of the supply chain relationship data and over 105,000 global

target companies, which are disclosed by source companies.

   We identify customers of eligible firms using direct and reverse relationships. A direct

relationship is disclosed by the company that lists the target company as a material customer, and

a reverse relationship is disclosed by another company listing the source company as a material


                                                   8
supplier. As a result, our data include a comprehensive network of supply-chain interconnections. 4

     To better understand our data, consider "Deutsche Telekom AG" as an example. Using direct

relationships, the company discloses a list of 24 active material customers by the end of 2015. This

list includes public entities such as "Government of Germany", "Government of Switzerland", and

"European Commission", and corporations such as "Deutsche Post AG, "Daimler AG", "ABB

Ltd", and "Netflix, Inc". Using reverse relationships, "Deutsche Telekom AG" is disclosed as a

material supplier by an additional 11 unique companies. Customers that reported the firm as a

supplier include corporations such as "Freenet AG", "Drillisch AG", and "KION Group AG". In

total, considering both direct and reverse disclosures, "Deutsche Telekom AG" has a total of 35

unique customers identified using Factset Revere.

     We then match the list of customers of eligible firms in Factset Revere to ORBIS using ISIN

identifiers, when available, and a fuzzy-string matching algorithm using names for the remaining

firm. We begin by filtering the Revere data only selecting suppliers that are CSPP-eligible firms.

The initial sample consists of 802 supplier-customers pairs with 106 unique eligible firms and 463

unique customers domiciled in an euro area country. On average, eligible firms report 7.6

customers domiciled in the euro area by the end of 2015. 5

     Our final sample includes 318 unique non-financial customers of eligible firms, domiciled in

the euro area, after matching with ORBIS to obtain firm fundamentals. Panel B of Table IA.1 of

the Internet Appendix reports the number of customers of eligible firms by country. Table IA.2 of

the Internet Appendix reports the interconnections between eligible suppliers and their customers.


2.4 Empirical Methodology

     We perform difference-in-differences estimations by comparing changes in the outcome

variables between treatment and control groups around the CSPP announcement. Specifically, we

estimate the regression:


4 We consider all business relationships that started on or before 2015 (the year before the introduction of the CSPP) and were still
active on or after 2014 (we use one year lag, to include recent relationships).
5 We can only find financial statements for 406 firms out of the 463 unique customers with descriptive information in Orbis.



                                                                    9
           , = 0 + 1  ×  + 2 × ,-1 +  + , + , + ,                                                    (1)


    Our main outcome variables, Yi,t, are the ratio of accounts receivable to sales and the ratio of

accounts payable to sales. We also estimate additional specifications with outcome variables for

investment in short-term assets, long-term assets and employment (Assets Growth, CAPEX,

Change in Inventories, Change in Receivable, Labor Growth), operating activities (Sales Growth,

Profitability), and financing decisions (Change in Financial Debt, Change in Long-term Debt,

Change in Short-term Loans, Change in Cash).

    The treatment variable, Treated, is alternatively: (1) Eligible Supplier, a dummy variable that

takes the value of one if a firm has bonds eligible for purchase under the CSPP, and zero otherwise;

(2) Has Eligible Supplier, a dummy variable that takes the value of one if a firm is a customer of

a firm with eligible bonds, and zero otherwise; and (3) Eligible Suppliers Share, a variable that

measures the firm's share of eligible suppliers relative to the firm's total number of suppliers.

    Post is a dummy variable that takes the value of one in 2016, the year the CSPP is announced

and implemented and thereafter, and zero otherwise. Xi,t-1 is a set of firm-specific control variables

that includes: (1) log(Assets), the logarithm of total assets; (2) Cash, the ratio of cash and cash

equivalent to total assets; (3) PPE, the ratio of tangible fixed assets (property, plant and equipment)

to total assets; (4) Net Margin, the ratio of net income to sales; and (5) Liabilities, the ratio of total

liabilities to total assets. All control variables are lagged by one year. The regressions include firm

fixed effects i, industry-year fixed effects j,t (using the Fama-French 10-industry classification),

and country-year fixed effects c,t. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level to correct for

heteroscedasticity and within-firm residual correlation. In our baseline estimates, we use an

unmatched sample but we also assess the robustness of our results by reporting estimates from a

matched sample approach.




                                                     10
3. Main Empirical Results

     In this section, we first establish whether the shock to eligible firms, following the purchases

of eligible bonds by the ECB, is indeed transmitted through customer-supplier networks. We then

check the robustness of our results using different empirical approaches.


3.1 Monetary Policy Transmission through the Supply Chain

     There is evidence in the literature that the CSPP fostered the ability of eligible firms to tap

public debt markets stimulating new issuance of bonds and reducing the bond yield spreads of

eligible firms (Abidi and Miquel-Flores, 2018; Galema and Lugo, 2019; Grosse-Rueschkamp,

Steffen, and Streitz, 2019; Zaghini, 2019; Todorov, 2020). In the Internet Appendix, we report

evidence consistent with this literature. Table IA.3 of the Internet Appendix shows that eligible

firms experience an increase in the change of financial debt scaled by lagged assets relative to non-

eligible firms after the announcement of the CSPP, which is concentrated in core countries.

Moreover, using a sample of publicly listed firms, with bond debt outstanding before the CSPP,

drawn from Capital IQ/Compustat Global, Table IA.4 of the Internet Appendix shows that eligible

firms experience a statistically significant increase in net bond debt issuance scaled by lagged

assets relative to non-eligible firms, after the announcement of the CSPP. Bond issuance, however,

is concentrated in the core countries. 6

     We hypothesize that thanks to the ability of issuing more bonds, CSPP-eligible firms are able

to extend more trade credit to their customers. In turn, customers of eligible firms facing

deteriorating credit market conditions may be able to fill their financing gap by resorting on the

credit available through the supply-chain and thus delaying the payment of goods and services

purchased from eligible suppliers.

     We begin by testing whether CSPP eligible firms experience an increase in accounts receivable


6
  We also investigate the impact of the CSPP on eligible firm outcomes such as investment, turnover and profitability. Table IA.5
of the Internet Appendix reports the results. We find that eligible firms experience a statistically significant increase in the change
of accounts receivable scaled by lagged assets. Consistent with Grosse-Rueschkamp, Steffen, and Streitz (2019), we also find that
eligible firms experience a statistically significant increase in assets growth but other estimates are statistically insignificant.

                                                                    11
following the announcement and implementation of the CSPP. The variable of interest is the

interaction of the treatment dummy variable Eligible Supplier (that takes a value of one if a firm

has bonds eligible for purchase by the ECB immediately before the announcement of the CSPP,

and zero otherwise) with the Post dummy variable (that takes a value of one in the year the CSPP

is announced and thereafter, and zero otherwise). The interaction term Eligible Supplier × Post

measures the differential effect, on accounts receivable, between eligible firms and non-eligible

firms around the CSPP.

   Table 2 shows the results. The estimates in column (1) show that eligible firms (treatment

group) experience a significant increase in the ratio of accounts receivable to sales of about 10

percentage points relative to non-eligible firms (control group) after the announcement of the

CSPP (treatment). The effect is economically significant as a 10 percentage point increase in

accounts receivable indicates that firms in the treatment group relative those in the control group

increase days receivable by about 36 days (36 = 0.1 × 360), which is about one third of the sample

average. The results remain robust when we add firm-specific controls (column (3)) and country-

year fixed effects (column (5)) to the specification in column (1), which already includes firm

fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects. Importantly, columns (2), (4), and (6) show that both

the treatment and control groups follow parallel trends in the pre-treatment period, which supports

a causal interpretation of the results. In addition, Panel A of Figure IA.1 of the Internet Appendix

shows no evidence of preexisting differential trends in accounts receivables between treatment and

control groups.

   As a placebo test, we estimate the change in the ratio of accounts receivable to sales of U.S.

investment grade firms (the main criteria used by the ECB to determine eligible bonds), after the

introduction of the CSPP. In this test, we use Compustat data, which only contains publicly listed

firms as ORBIS offers a limited coverage of U.S. firms for most financial items. Columns (1) and

(2) of Table IA.6 and Panel B of Figure IA.1 of the Internet Appendix report the results. We find

no evidence that U.S. investment grade firms experience an increase in accounts receivable relative

to control firms after the announcement of the CSPP. Columns (3)-(6) show the results of placebo

                                                  12
tests using a sample of investment grade firms domiciled in countries from the European Union

that are not members of the euro area. We find a statistically significant increase of 1 percentage

point in accounts receivable of non-euro European Union investment grade firms relative to control

firms after the CSPP. The magnitude of the effect is much lower for non-euro European Union

investment grade firms (1 percentage point) than that for eligible firms that are domiciled in euro

area countries (10 percentage points). 7

    So far our results show that eligible firms increase trade financing to customers relative to non-

eligible firms following the CSPP announcement. We also study firms in the downstream network

of eligible firms. Specifically, we test whether customers of eligible firms are indeed the recipients

of the increase in trade financing by eligible suppliers.

    Table 3 shows the results. In Panel A, the explanatory variable of interest is the interaction of

the treatment dummy variable Has Eligible Supplier (that takes a value of one if a firm is a

customer of a firm with CSPP eligible bonds, and zero otherwise) with the Post dummy variable.

The interaction term Has Eligible Supplier × Post measures the differential effect on accounts

payable between firms with eligible suppliers and otherwise similar firms (without eligible

suppliers) following the announcement of the CSPP.

    In column (1), we find that customers of eligible suppliers (treatment group) experience an

increase in the ratio of accounts payable to sales by about 5 percentage points relative to customers

without a business relationship with eligible firms (control group) following the CSPP

announcement (the treatment). The effect is statistically and economically significant as, on

average, eligible firms relative to non-eligible firms benefit from an extension in payment terms

of about 17 days (17 = 0.048 × 360), which is about 20% of the sample mean. The results remain

robust when we add firm-specific controls (column (3)) and country-year fixed effects (column



7
  The placebo using investment grade firms from non-euro European Union countries is not as clean as the placebo
using U.S. investment grade firms as the Bank of England also announced a program to buy corporate bonds in August
2016. In addition, the CSPP also included a fraction of eligible bonds issued by legal entities established in the
eurozone that were financing vehicles of firms resident in non-euro countries (representing about 7% of total CSPP
eligible bonds).

                                                         13
(5)) to the specification in column (1) which already includes firm fixed effects and industry-year

fixed effect. Importantly, columns (2), (4), and (6) show that both the treatment and control groups

follow parallel trends in the pre-treatment period. In addition, Panel A of Figure IA.2 of the Internet

Appendix shows no evidence of preexisting differential trends in accounts payables between

treatment and control groups.

   We also examine whether customers with a larger share of eligible suppliers benefit most from

the increase in trade credit by eligible firms. Panel B of Table 3 shows the results. The explanatory

variable of interest is the interaction of the treatment variable Eligible Suppliers Share (i.e., the

firm's share of eligible suppliers relative to the firm's total number of suppliers) with the Post

dummy variable. The interaction term Eligible Suppliers Share × Post measures the differential

treatment intensities on accounts payable, following the announcement of the CSPP.

   In column (1), we find that the Eligible Suppliers Share × Post coefficient is positive and

statistically significant. The effect is also economically significant. A one-standard-deviation

increase in the share of eligible suppliers (0.362, considering the sample of customers of eligible

suppliers) leads to an increase of 2.5 percentage points (= 0.362 × 0.069) in accounts payable of

customers of eligible suppliers (i.e., a delay in payment terms of about 9 days) and corresponds to

11% of the sample mean. The results are robust across specifications. In addition, there is no

evidence of significant preexisting differential trends between treatment and control groups (see

also Panel B of Figure IA.2 in the Internet Appendix).


3.2 Robustness

   A possible concern with our baseline results is that somehow our firm-year panel regressions

might be insufficient to cope with the heterogeneity of firms in the sample. To further establish

the validity of our baseline results, we employ three additional empirical approaches: (1) a

difference-in-differences estimation using a matched sample; (2) size-bins-by-year fixed effects

regressions; (3) regressions excluding firms with less than 10 million in assets from the sample;

and (4) regressions using the logarithm of the levels of the dependent variables.


                                                    14
   First, we perform the difference-in-differences estimation around the CSPP announcement

(March 2016) using a matched sample. We consider both the effect of the CSPP on eligible firms,

and the effect of the CSPP on customers of eligible firms. We identify 144 eligible firms and 305

customers of eligible firms with non-missing information in ORBIS on 2015 and 2014. We select

control firms that best match each firm in the treatment group using propensity score matching

with replacement (the nearest neighbor) on multiple covariates in the two years preceding the

event: log(Assets), Cash, PPE, Net Margin, Liabilities, and industry fixed effects. The match

assigns each treated firm to a control firm domiciled in the same region of the euro area, that is,

firms either from core countries or periphery countries of the euro area. Panel A of Table 4 reports

the tests of equality of pre-treatment means and medians between the treatment and control groups.

In general, we cannot reject the hypothesis of equal means or medians between treatment and

control groups in either the sample of eligible firms or the sample of customers of eligible firms.

   Panel B of Table 4 presents the results of difference-in-differences estimators using the

matched sample and firm and industry-year fixed effects specifications. The estimates are

qualitatively and quantitatively similar to our baseline specifications. Column (1) shows a

statistically significant 10 percentage-points increase in accounts receivable of eligible firms

(treated group) after the announcement of the CSPP relative to non-eligible firms (control group).

In column (3), we find a positive and statistically significant increase in the accounts payable of

eligible firms' customers. The effect is also economically significant as the accounts payable of

eligible firms' customers increase by 8 percentage points after the announcement of the CSPP

relative to firms without eligible suppliers. Column (5) shows a positive and statistically significant

coefficient of 0.08 on Eligible Suppliers Share × Post, which indicates a positive association

between the share of eligible suppliers and the increase in accounts payable of customers of eligible

firms.

   Second, we estimate specifications with firm size-bins-by-year fixed effects to account for the

possibility that the CSPP might have affected differently large and small companies. This

adjustment controls for firm size heterogeneity in a given year between treatment and control

                                                    15
groups. We proceed, by ranking the firms in the sample according to their assets within each year

of the sample and by assigning each firm to one of the 20 (50) size bins by year.

   Panel A of Table 5 shows the results for the 20 size-bins-by-year fixed effects regressions. In

columns (1)-(3), the accounts receivable of eligible firms experience a statistically significant

increase of about 10 percentage points relative to non-eligible firms in the post-CSPP period. In

columns (4)-(6), the accounts payable of eligible firms' customers experience a statistically

significant increase of about 3-5 percentage points relative to firms without a material link to the

downstream network of eligible firms in the post-CSPP period. The results remain virtually

unchanged when we use 50 size-bins-by-year fixed effects regressions in Panel B of Table 5.

Overall, these findings assuage any concerns that asymmetric shocks to firms of different sizes

drive our findings.

   Third, we assess the sensitivity of our baseline results to the exclusion of small firms from the

sample. Specifically, we estimate our baseline specifications after excluding firms with less than

10 million in assets as of 2015 (the year before the announcement of the CSPP). The results in

columns (1)-(3) of Table IA.7 of the Internet Appendix show that the accounts receivable of

eligible firms increase by about 10 percentage points relative to non-eligible firms in the post-

CSPP period. The results in columns (4)-(6) show that the accounts payable of eligible firms'

customers increase by about 4 percentage points relative to those of non-eligible' firms customers

in the post-CSPP period. The results are very similar to those reported in Tables 2 and 3 and

confirm that our baseline results are not materially affected by size heterogeneity between

treatment and control groups. We also assess the sensitivity of our results using a sample excluding

firms domiciled in Germany. We do so because Germany is under-represented in the ORBIS

database (see Panel A of Table IA.1 of the Internet Appendix). Table IA.8 of the Internet Appendix

shows that our results are qualitatively unchanged.

   Finally, we estimate our baseline specifications using either the logarithm of accounts

receivable or the logarithm of accounts payable as dependent variables. Table IA.9 of the Internet

Appendix shows that our estimates are qualitatively unaffected when we use this approach.

                                                  16
4. Heterogeneity

   In this section, we investigate out how different customer characteristics such as financial

constraints, ability to access public markets, tangibility and growth opportunities contribute to the

magnitude of the monetary policy transmission mechanism through trade finance. We also

examine the differential regional effects of the trade credit channel of monetary policy within the

euro area.


4.1 Customer-Specific Financial Constraints

To better understand the distributional consequences of the trade credit channel of monetary

policy, we explore the cross-section of customers. If the positive shock of monetary policy on the

ability of eligible suppliers to tap credit markets is indeed benefiting their customers, we expect

the effect to be stronger for customers that are more likely to be financially constrained. We

consider several proxies for firm-specific financial constraints and partition the sample according

to the median of these proxies. Table 6 presents the estimates of our baseline regression model for

the subsamples of constrained and unconstrained firms.

   Panel A, columns (1) and (2), show the estimates separately for the group of investment grade

firms (i.e., firm with an investment grade long-term issuer credit rating, AAA to BBB-, by S&P

before the CSPP announcement) vs. the group of non-investment grade firms. Columns (3) and (4)

show thee estimates for the group of rated firms (i.e., firm with a long-term issuer credit rating by

S&P before the CSPP announcement) vs. unrated firms. We find that only non-investment grade

and unrated firms with eligible suppliers experience a statistically significant increase in accounts

payable relative to control firms in the CSPP period. These results suggest that customers of

eligible firms that are less able to tap public debt markets benefit from the increase in trade credit

offered by eligible firms following the CSPP announcement.

   Columns (5) and (6) show that only customers of eligible firms with a high liabilities to assets

ratio experience a positive and statistically significant increase in accounts payable relative to

control firms in the CSPP period. These results suggest that firms with higher external financial

                                                   17
dependence benefit from the increase in trade credit offered by eligible firms following the CSPP.

   In columns (7) and (8), we find a positive and statistically significant increase in accounts

payable both for customers of eligible firms with both high and a low PPE to assets ratio, relative

to control firms in the post-CSPP period. However, the magnitude of the coefficient on the Has

Eligible Supplier × Post variable in the group of low PPE firms (i.e., low tangibility firms) is

almost the double that in the group of high PPE firms. These results suggest that customers of

eligible firms with less tangible assets ­ which are less likely to be able to pledge collateral to

obtain external finance ­ benefit more from the increase in trade credit offered by eligible firms

following the CSPP.

   Small firms are typically more financially constrained than large firms. We do not find a

statistically significant increase in accounts payable of firms with eligible suppliers when we

partition the sample by firm size as proxied by sales. However, Panel B, columns (1) and (2) show

that the magnitude of the coefficient on the Has Eligible Supplier × Post variable in the group of

small firms firms is much higher than that in the sample of large firms, suggestion that eligible

firms' smaller customers benefit more from the increase in trade credit offered by eligible firms.

   Columns (3)-(6) show that only customers of eligible firms with high rates of sales growth and

assets growth experience a positive and statistically significant increase in accounts payable

relative to control firms in the post-CSPP period. These results suggest that firms with greater

growth opportunities benefit from the increase in trade credit offered by eligible suppliers.

    Finally, columns (7) and (8) show a positive and statistically significant increase in accounts

payable for customers of eligible firms with both a high and a low EBITDA to assets ratio

(profitability), relative to control firms. However, the magnitude of the coefficient on the Has

Eligible Supplier × Post variable in the sample of low profitability firms is almost five times higher

than that in the sample of high profitability firms. Thus, customers of eligible firms with a lower

ability to generate internal cash flows to finance operations benefit more from the increase in trade

credit offered by eligible firms.

   Overall, our results suggest that the trade channel of monetary policy is more pronounced for

                                                   18
financially constrained firms, low tangibility firms, firms with greater growth opportunities and

external finance need and firms with lower ability to generate cash flow.


4.2 Publicly Listed vs. Private Firms

    Privately held firms are often considered to be more financially constrained than public firms

because they have no access to public equity markets. We thus investigate how access to public

equity markets determines the decision of both eligible suppliers to extend more trade credit and

of eligible firms' customers to rely more on trade credit. We do so by partitioning the sample in

firms with shares publicly listed in the stock market and firms that are privately held.

    Panel A of Table IA.10 of the Internet Appendix presents the results for the sample of public

firms (i.e., firm is publicly listed in the year before the CSPP announcement date according to

Orbis). Columns (1)-(3) show that publicly listed eligible firms experience a statistically

significant increase in the ratio of accounts receivable to sales, relative to publicly listed non-

eligible firms after the announcement of the CSPP. In contrast, columns (4)-(6) show no

statistically significant increase in the ratio of accounts payable to sales for customers of eligible

firms that are publicly listed. Customers with better access to financial markets are less likely to

be financially constrained and rely on trade finance.

    Panel B of Table IA.10 presents the results for the sample of private firms. In columns (1)-(3),

we still find that private eligible firms experience a statistically significant increase in the ratio of

accounts receivable to sales, relative to private non-eligible firms after the announcement of the

CSPP. However, the magnitude of the effect is less pronounced for eligible firms that are privately

held than to eligible firms that are publicly listed suggesting that the former may face stronger

constraints in issuing bonds. Columns (4)-(6) show that customers of eligible firms that are private

experience a statistically significant increase in the ratio of accounts payable to sales, relative to

controls firms.

    Table IA.10 suggests that firms without the ability to tap the stock market obtain more trade

credit from eligible suppliers. In addition, publicly listed eligible firms are better able to benefit


                                                     19
from the CSPP and thus in a favorable position to extend trade credit to customers. Overall, these

results support that trade credit is an important transmission mechanism of monetary policy as

financially unconstrained suppliers provide trade credit to their financially constrained customers.


4.3 Regional Effects

   In this section, we take a regional perspective and analyze how the CSPP impacts firms

domiciled in countries of either the core or the periphery of the euro area. This is important as

countries in the euro area periphery were more negatively affected by the sovereign debt crisis in

2011-2012. Firms in these countries are therefore more likely to face financial constraints as the

sovereign debt crisis had severe repercussions on the banking system and led to a credit crunch.

   We investigate whether there is propagation of the monetary policy shock from firms

domiciled in core countries to firms domiciled in periphery countries. This is an important

perspective of analysis (as shown in Figure 1) as eligible firms from core countries appear to

benefit more than those from periphery countries in terms of the ability to tap the primary bond

market following the CSPP announcement.

   Panel A of Table 7 shows the estimates of our baseline regression model separately for the

group of firms in core countries (Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Luxembourg, and

Netherlands) and periphery countries of the euro area. We find that only eligible firms from the

core eurozone countries significantly increase accounts receivable relative to non-eligible firms

following the CSPP. This finding suggests that only suppliers in the core countries, virtually

unaffected by the sovereign debt crisis, were able to benefit from improved bond market conditions

and expand the supply of trade credit. However, it is also possible that these suppliers faced

different economic conditions because they had customers with stronger growth opportunities.

   We also examine the effects of the CSPP on eligible firms' customers separately for the group

of firms in core and periphery countries. Eligible firms' customers from the periphery benefit from

a statistically significant increase in accounts payable relative to control firms in the post-CSPP

period. This suggest that there was an increase in demand for external finance, and trade credit in


                                                  20
particular, from firms located in periphery countries. Suppliers in core countries were able to tap

bond markets during the CSPP period and extended trade credit to their customers helping them

to mitigate financial constraints in periphery countries.

   So far our results suggest that firms from periphery countries experience an increase in trade

credit obtained from eligible suppliers domiciled in core countries. Panel B of Table 7 provides a

more direct test of inter-regional propagation of monetary policy through the trade credit channel,

by decomposing the treatment dummy variable into the Has Core Eligible Supplier dummy

variable (that takes the value of one if a firm has an eligible supplier domiciled in a country from

the core, and zero otherwise) and the Has Periphery Eligible Supplier dummy variable (that takes

the value of one if a firm has an eligible supplier domiciled in a country the periphery, and zero

otherwise).

   In column (1), customers of eligible suppliers located in core countries seem to increase their

accounts payable to a larger extent than customers of eligible suppliers located in periphery

countries. Column (2) shows that these effects do not seem to be driven by customers in core

countries for which changes in accounts payable are not statistically distinguishable from those of

the controls firms. In column (3), we find that customers located in periphery countries have more

access to trade credit during the CSPP period. The coefficient on the Has Core Eligible Supplier

dummy variable is double (but imprecisely estimated) than that of the Has Periphery Eligible

Supplier dummy variable.

   Overall, our results suggest suppliers from the less financially constrained countries extended

more trade credit during the CSPP period to firms located in periphery countries that were part of

their production network prior to the CSPP.


5. Real Effects of the CSPP

   In this section, we investigate whether the trade credit channel of monetary policy has real

effects in operating activities, investment policy and financial policy of customers of CSPP eligible

firms, and affects the competitive position of eligible suppliers.

                                                   21
5.1 Effects on Customers

   Our results show firms in the downstream network receive more trade finance from firms with
easier access to the bond market due to unconventional monetary policy tools. In this section, we
test whether the customers of eligible firms take advantage of potential investment opportunities
due to the increase in trade credit. We also explore how the trade credit channel of monetary policy
impacts the financing decisions of these firms.
   Panel A of Table 8 shows that as the CSPP propagates to the clients of eligible firms through

the trade credit channel, these firms experience a statistically significant increase in investment.

Column (1) shows that firms in the treatment group experience an increase of 2.5% in total assets

relative to the control group after the CSPP announcement. Next, we decompose this increase in

assets growth into capital expenditures (CAPEX), change in inventories, and change in receivable

(all variables scaled by lagged total assets). We find that customers of eligible firms experience an

increase of 0.5 percentage points in CAPEX (column (2)), an increase of 0.4 percentage points in

inventories (column (3)), and a 1.1 percentage points increase in accounts receivable (column (4))

relative to control firms in the post-CSPP period. In column (5), we also find a 3.4% increase in

labor for treated firms relative to control firms following the CSPP implementation.

   We also test whether customers of eligible firms experience changes in operating activities.

Column (6) shows that customers of eligible firms experience a 2.4% increase in sales growth,

even though this coefficient is imprecisely estimated. In column (7), we are unable to detect any

short-term effects on the profitability of eligible firms' customers.

   In sum, the customers of eligible firms are able to increase investment in fixed assets, human

capital, and inventories, and to provide more trade credit to their own customers (accounts

receivable) as a result of the CSPP.

   Finally, we investigate how customers of eligible firms finance their assets growth. Panel B of

Table 8 shows the effect on liabilities scaled by lagged total assets. Column (1) shows that firms

with eligible suppliers experience a statistically significant increase of 0.9 percentage points on

the change in accounts payable relative to control firms in the post-CSPP period. This increase in


                                                   22
accounts payable represents more than one third of the capital needs to fund the assets growth of

treated firms relative to control firms.

    We find that customers of eligible firms experience statistically insignificant increases in other

sources of external finance (financial debt), including long-term debt and short-term loans, and

internal financing (cash). This confirms that the real effects we uncover are to be ascribed to

suppliers' trade finance and are not driven by an increase in access to bank credit.


5.2 Effects on Suppliers

    This section sheds some light on the benefits to suppliers to extend more trade credit. Table

IA.11 shows that the trade credit channel is largely driven by eligible suppliers in industries with

lower competition and higher concentration. While we do not find any significant effects of the

program on the profitability of the suppliers, this suggest that suppliers have incentives to fund

customers in order to ensure business relationships with firms in better times.

    This interpretation is consistent with evidence that CSPP-eligible firms benefit by retaining

existing clients and establishing new relationships. To show this, we consider the number of

customer relationships that a firm located in the eurozone is able to maintain and the number of

new relationships that is able to initiate.

    Panel A of Table 9 reports the results. All specifications include firm fixed effects so that we

can test how the number of customers changes for eligible firms after the CSPP. In column (1), we

find that eligible firms (treatment group) are able to maintain a larger number of client relationships

relative to non-eligible firms (control group) after the announcement of the CSPP (treatment). The

results remain robust when we add firm-specific controls (column (2)) and country-year fixed

effects (column (3)) to the specification in column (1), which already includes firm fixed effects

and industry-year fixed effects.

    In column (4), we find that eligible firms experience a statistically significant increase of 3.3

new client relationships relative to non-eligible firms after the announcement of the CSPP. The

effect is economically significant as the sample average of new client relationships is 2.3. The

                                                    23
results remain robust when we add firm-specific controls (column (5)) and country-year fixed

effects (column (6)) to the specification in columns (4).

   We also analyze whether eligible firms from core countries experienced differential effects in

product market outcomes relative eligible firms from periphery countries, which did not increase

the provision of trade credit after the start of the CSPP.

   Panel B of Table 9 report the results for suppliers in core countries. We find that eligible firms

from core countries experience a significant increase in both the number of client relationships

maintained and the number of new client relationships relative to non-eligible firms after the CSPP.

Panel C of Table 9 shows that eligible firms from periphery countries did not experience a similar

increase. Importantly, Table IA.12, these results are robust when we consider the eurozone

competitors (as identified by Factset Revere) of eligible firms as a control group.

   Overall these findings provide further support for the importance of the trade credit channel of

monetary policy, but also suggest that unconventional monetary policies interventions that

facilitate access to credit for large firms with easier access to capital markets may affect firms'

competitive positions and favor concentration in upstream markets.


6. Conclusion

   In today's environment with nominal interest rates near zero in most developed economies,

monetary authorities have resorted on unconventional monetary policies interventions to achieve

their inflation targets. Direct asset purchases lowering the cost of public debt favor large firms that

have access to public debt markets. The concerns about the asymmetric effects of these

unconventional monetary policies are particularly relevant in economic areas, such as the euro

area, where credit protection and access to bond markets exhibit geographical differences.

   We show that supply chains can mitigate the asymmetric effects of direct asset purchases

programs. Firms that benefit the most from an easier access to public debt market (i.e., higher

issuance volumes and lower offer yields) expand the provision of trade credit to their clients. The

expansion in trade credit benefits especially financially constrained customers and customers

                                                    24
located in periphery countries, in which the negative effects of the European sovereign debt crisis

were more severe and bond markets are less developed.

   We also provide evidence of real effects and product market effects of the CSPP. As a result

of the increase in trade finance, firms with suppliers whose bonds are eligible for the CSPP increase

employment and investment and provide more trade credit to their own customers. Eligible

suppliers that are able to extend more trade credit acquire new customers and thus enhance their

competitive position in product markets.

   Our paper has important implications to the understanding of the transmission mechanisms of

unconventional monetary policy interventions, a topic of tantamount importance given that direct

asset purchases and intervention in corporate bond markets have been considerably expanded

worldwide in light of the looming recession due to the Covid-19 pandemic.

   We show that trade credit plays an important role in the transmission mechanism of monetary

policy and that trade credit in production networks matter beyond demand effects. While economic

and financial integration through supplier-customer networks can facilitate the transmission of

monetary policy interventions to economically depressed regions and to firms with limited access

to financial markets, we also highlight that firms benefiting from direct asset purchases are able to

expand their customer base due to their ability to provide trade finance. This suggests that

unconventional monetary policy may increase concentration in upstream industries with

potentially long-lasting consequences on the spatial distribution of economic activity.




                                                   25
References

Abidi, N., Miquel-Flores, I., 2018. Who benefits from the corporate QE? A regression

   discontinuity design approach. ECB Working Paper No. 2145.

Acharya, V., Eisert, T. Eufinger, C., Hirsch, C., 2018. Real effects of the sovereign debt crisis in

   Europe: Evidence from syndicated loans. Review of Financial Studies 31, 2855-2896.

Alfaro, L., Garcia-Santana, M., Moral-Benito, E., 2017. Credit supply shocks, network effects,

   and the real economy. Working Paper, Harvard Business School.

Barrot, J.-N., Sauvagnat, J., 2016. Input specificity and the propagation of idiosyncratic shocks in

   production networks. Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, 1543-1592.

Boissay, F., Gropp, R., 2013. Payment defaults and interfirm liquidity provision. Review of

   Finance 17, 1853-1894.

Chakraborty, I., Goldstein, I., MacKinlay, A., 2020. Monetary stimulus and bank lending. Journal

   of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Costello, A., 2020. Credit market disruptions and liquidity spillover effects in the supply chain.

   Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Fazzari, S., Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Petersen, B., 1988. Financing constraints and corporate

   investment. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 141-195.

Foley-Fisher, N., Ramcharan, R., Edison, Y., 2016. The impact of unconventional monetary policy

   on firm financing constraints: Evidence from the maturity extension program. Journal of

   Financial Economics 122, 1-21.

Galema, R., Lugo, S., 2019. When central banks buy corporate bonds: Target selection and impact

   of the European corporate sector purchase program. U.S.E. Discussion Paper Series Nr: 17-16.

Garcia-Appendini, E., Montoriol-Garriga, J., 2013. Firms as liquidity providers: Evidence from

   the 2007-2008 financial crisis. Journal of Financial Economics 109, 272-291.

                                                  26
Gertler, M., Gilchrist, S., 1993. The role of credit market imperfections in the monetary

   transmission mechanism: Arguments and evidence. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 95,

   43-64.

Gertler, M., Gilchrist, S., 1994. Monetary policy, business cycles, and the behavior of small

   manufacturing firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 309-340.

Gertler, M., and Hubbard, R. Glenn, 1988. Financial factors in business fluctuations, in Financial

   Market Volatility (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City).

Giannetti, M., Saidi, F., 2019. Shock propagation and banking structure. Review of Financial

   Studies 32, 2499-2540.

Grosse-Rueschkamp, B., Steffen, S., Streitz, D., 2019. A capital structure channel of monetary

   policy. Journal of Financial Economics 133, 357-378.

Holmstrom, B., Tirole, J., 1997. Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and the real sector.

   Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663-691.

Huremovic, K., Gabriel, J., Enrique, M., Peydró, J.-L., 2020. Production and financial networks

   in interplay: Crisis evidence from supplier-customer and credit registers. Working Paper, Bank

   of Spain.

Jacobson, T., von Schedvin, E., 2015. Trade credit and the propagation of corporate failure: An

   empirical analysis. Econometrica 83, 1315-1171.

Love, I., Preve, L., Sarria-Allende, V., 2007. Trade credit and bank credit: Evidence from recent

   financial crises. Journal of Financial Economics 83, 453-469.

Nilsen, J. H., 2002. Trade credit and the bank lending channel. Journal of Money, Credit, and

   Banking 34, 226-253.

Ozdagli, A., Weber, M., 2019, Monetary policy through production networks: Evidence from the

   stock market. Working Paper, University of Chicago.


                                                 27
Petersen, M., Rajan, R., 1995. The effect of credit market competition on lending relationships.

   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 407-443.

Restrepo, F., Cardona Sosa, L., Strahan, P., 2019. Funding liquidity without banks: Evidence from

   a shock to the cost of very short-term debt. Journal of Finance 74, 2875-2914.

Todorov, K., 2020. Quantify the quantitative easing: Impact on bonds and corporate debt issuance.

   Journal of Financial Economics 135, 340-358.

Zaghini, A., 2019. The CSPP at work: Yield heterogeneity and the portfolio rebalancing channel.

   Journal of Corporate Finance 56, 282-297.




                                                 28
    Appendix

    Table A.1
    Variable Definitions

          Variable                                                         Definition
Accounts Receivable              Accounts receivable (Orbis item DEBTORS) divided by operating revenue (Orbis item OPRE).
Accounts Payable                 Accounts payable (Orbis item CREDITORS) divided by operating revenue (Orbis item OPRE).
Assets                           Total assets (Orbis item TOAS).
Sales                            Operating revenue (Orbis item OPRE).
Cash                             Cash and cash equivalent (Orbis item CASH) divided by total assets (Orbis item TOAS).
PPE                              Tangible fixed assets (Orbis item TFAS) divided by total assets (Orbis item TOAS).
Net Margin                       Net income (Orbis item PL) divided by operating revenue (Orbis item OPRE).
Liabilities                      Current liabilities (Orbis item CULI) plus non-current liabilities (Orbis item NCLI) divided by total
                                 assets (Orbis item TOAS).
Financial Debt                   Long term debt (Orbis item LTDB) plus loans (Orbis item LOAN) divided by total assets (Orbis item
                                 TOAS).
Eligible                         Dummy variable that equals one if a firm has corporate bonds eligible for purchase under the CSPP
                                 rules before the CSPP announcement, and zero otherwise.
Has Eligible Supplier            Dummy variable that equals one if a firm is reported as a customer of eligible firms in Factset Revere
                                 Supply Chain Relationships database, and zero otherwise.
Eligible Suppliers Share         The firm's share of eligible suppliers relative to the firm's total number of suppliers.
Has Core Eligible Supplier       Dummy variable that equals one if a firm is a customer of an eligible firm with headquarters in core
                                 eurozone countries, and zero otherwise.
Has Periphery Eligible Supplier Dummy variable that equals one if a firm is a customer of an eligible firms with headquarters in
                                periphery eurozone countries, and zero otherwise.
Assets Growth                    Change in total assets (Orbis item TOAS) divided by previous year total assets.
CAPEX                            Change in tangible fixed assets (Orbis item TFAS) plus depreciation and amortization (Orbis item
                                 DEPR) divided by the previous year total assets (Orbis item TOAS).
Labor Growth                     Change in number of employees (Orbis item EMPL) divided by the previous year number of
                                 employees.
Change in Inventories            Change in inventories (Orbis item STOK) divided by the previous year total assets (Orbis item TOAS).
Change in Receivable             Change in accounts receivable (Orbis item DEBTORS) divided by the previous year total assets (Orbis
                                 item TOAS).
Sales Growth                     Change in operating revenue (Orbis item OPRE) divided by the previous year operating revenue.
Profitability                    EBITDA (Orbis item EBTA) divided by the previous year total assets (Orbis item TOAS).
Change in Payable                Change in accounts payable (Orbis item CREDITORS) divided by the previous year total assets (Orbis
                                 item TOAS).
Change in Financial Debt         Change in financial debt (Orbis item LTDB plus Orbis item LOAN) divided by the previous year total
                                 assets (Orbis item TOAS).
Change in Long-term Debt         Change in long-term debt (Orbis item LTDB) divided by the previous year total assets (Orbis item
                                 TOAS).
Change in Short-term Loans       Change in current loans (Orbis item LOAN) divided by the previous year total assets (Orbis item
                                 TOAS).
Change in Cash Holdings          Change in cash (Orbis item CASH) divided by the previous year total assets (Orbis item TOAS).




                                                                      29
Table 1
Summary Statistics
This table shows mean, median, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, and number of observations for each
variable. Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. The sample consists of Bureau Van Dijk
Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. Variables are winsorized at the top and bottom 1%.

                                                             Standard                                 Number of
                                  Mean         Median                     Minimum      Maximum
                                                             Deviation                               Observations
Accounts Receivable                  0.3012       0.1849         0.5574       0.0000        4.6879      2,248,514
Account Payable                      0.2284       0.1134         0.5555       0.0000        4.9558      2,248,514
Assets (million)                    30.1234       3.2753       703.8566       0.0000       198,929      2,248,514
Sales (million)                     22.5520       3.1251       367.4128       0.0000       107,970      2,248,514
Cash                                 0.1130       0.0480         0.1536       0.0000        0.8158      2,248,514
PPE                                  0.2358       0.1303         0.2600       0.0000        0.9767      2,248,514
Net Margin                          -0.0528       0.0157         0.7375      -7.0694        1.7098      2,248,514
Liabilities                          0.6402       0.6690         0.2958       0.0035        1.8202      2,248,514
Financial Debt                       0.1938       0.1170         0.2218       0.0000        1.0345      2,105,609
Eligible                             0.0003       0.0000         0.0177       0.0000        1.0000      2,248,514
Has Eligible Supplier                0.0007       0.0000         0.0257       0.0000        1.0000      2,248,514
Eligible Suppliers Share             0.0002       0.0000         0.0125       0.0000        1.0000      2,248,514
Has Core Eligible Supplier           0.0006       0.0000         0.0238       0.0000        1.0000      2,248,514
Has Periphery Eligible Supplier      0.0001       0.0000         0.0122       0.0000        1.0000      2,248,514
Assets Growth                        0.0854       0.0226         0.3315      -0.4848        2.9298      2,248,512
CAPEX                                0.0449       0.0149         0.0980      -0.1187        0.7761      2,116,731
Labor Growth                         0.0643       0.0000         0.3237      -0.6154        2.0000      1,779,908
Change in Inventories                0.0095       0.0000         0.0754      -0.2499        0.4933      2,246,443
Change in Receivable                 0.0177       0.0001         0.1404      -0.3881        0.7492      2,247,599
Sales Growth                         0.1587       0.0301         0.8279      -0.8701        7.0343      2,248,514
Profitability                        0.0922       0.0697         0.1213      -0.2832        0.7113      2,161,872
Change in Payable                    0.0129       0.0000         0.1212      -0.3467        0.6517      2,238,452
Change in Financial Debt             0.0062       0.0000         0.1273      -0.4347        0.7314      2,081,233
Change in Long-term Debt             0.0027       0.0000         0.1106      -0.5351        0.8165      2,090,098
Change in Short-term Loans           0.0036       0.0000         0.0803      -0.3079        0.4568      2,236,327
Change in Cash Holdings              0.0152       0.0010         0.0983      -0.3164        0.6058      2,231,250




                                                        30
Table 2
Effect of CSPP on Accounts Receivable of Eligible Firms
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the ratio of accounts
receivable to sales. Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if a firm had corporate bonds eligible for
purchase under the CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that
takes the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and zero otherwise. The sample consists of Bureau Van Dijk
Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. All explanatory variables are lagged by one year. Variable
definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted for firm-level clustering are
reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                    (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)
  Eligible × Post                0.103***                     0.102***                      0.089***
                                  (0.032)                        (0.032)                    (0.032)
  Eligible × 2014                                -0.007                       -0.007                       -0.013
                                                 (0.022)                      (0.022)                      (0.022)
  Eligible × 2015                                 0.046                        0.046                        0.042
                                                 (0.043)                      (0.043)                      (0.043)
  Eligible × 2016                               0.077**                       0.077**                      0.062*
                                                 (0.038)                      (0.038)                      (0.038)
  Eligible × 2017                               0.156**                       0.156**                      0.139**
                                                 (0.062)                      (0.062)                      (0.062)
  log(Assets)                                                 -0.013***      -0.013***     -0.014***      -0.014***
                                                                 (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)
  Cash                                                        -0.050***      -0.050***     -0.045***      -0.045***
                                                                 (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.005)
  PPE                                                         -0.086***      -0.086***     -0.087***      -0.087***
                                                                 (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.007)        (0.007)
  Net Margin                                                  -0.006***      -0.006***     -0.006***      -0.006***
                                                                 (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)
  Liabilities                                                  -0.010**      -0.010**        -0.007        -0.007
                                                                 (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.005)


  Firm fixed effects                Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
  Industry-year fixed effects       Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
  Country-year fixed effects        No             No              No           No            Yes            Yes
  Number of observations         2,248,514      2,248,514     2,248,514      2,248,514     2,248,514      2,248,514
  R-squared                         0.74          0.74            0.74         0.74           0.74          0.74




                                                            31
Table 3
Effect of CSPP on Accounts Payable of Eligible Firms' Customers
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the ratio of accounts
receivable to sales. Has Eligible Supplier is a dummy that takes the value of one if a firm had a supplier with CSPP-
eligible bonds, and zero otherwise. Eligible Suppliers Share is the firm's share of eligible suppliers relative to the
firm's total number of suppliers. Post is a dummy variable that takes the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017,
and zero otherwise. The sample consists of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. All
explanatory variables are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust
standard errors adjusted for firm-level clustering are reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Dummy Variable
                                      (1)           (2)              (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)
Has Eligible Supplier × Post       0.048***                       0.045***                   0.032*
                                    (0.017)                        (0.017)                   (0.017)
Has Eligible Supplier × 2014                       0.030                        0.028                       0.025
                                                  (0.023)                      (0.023)                     (0.023)
Has Eligible Supplier × 2015                       0.039                        0.038                       0.039
                                                  (0.027)                      (0.027)                     (0.027)
Has Eligible Supplier × 2016                     0.034**                       0.031*                       0.018
                                                  (0.016)                      (0.017)                     (0.017)
Has Eligible Supplier × 2017                     0.110***                     0.107***                    0.092***
                                                  (0.034)                      (0.034)                     (0.034)
log(Assets)                                                       -0.045***   -0.045***    -0.046***      -0.046***
                                                                   (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
Cash                                                              0.022***    0.022***      0.026***      0.026***
                                                                   (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)
PPE                                                               -0.048***   -0.048***    -0.047***      -0.047***
                                                                   (0.008)     (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)
Net Margin                                                        -0.019***   -0.019***    -0.019***      -0.019***
                                                                   (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)
Liabilities                                                       0.066***    0.066***      0.069***      0.069***
                                                                   (0.006)     (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)


Firm fixed effects                   Yes           Yes              Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
Industry-year fixed effects          Yes           Yes              Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
Country-year fixed effects            No            No               No          No           Yes            Yes
Number of observations            2,248,514      2,248,514        2,248,514   2,248,514    2,248,514      2,248,514
R-squared                            0.71          0.71             0.71        0.71          0.71          0.71




                                                             32
Table 3 (continued)

Panel B: Share of Eligible Suppliers
                                          (1)         (2)              (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
Eligible Suppliers Share × Post        0.069**                      0.067**                  0.051*
                                        (0.030)                      (0.029)                 (0.029)
Eligible Suppliers Share × 2014                     0.051                         0.043                   0.040
                                                    (0.045)                      (0.045)                 (0.045)
Eligible Suppliers Share × 2015                     0.039                         0.035                   0.036
                                                    (0.041)                      (0.040)                 (0.040)
Eligible Suppliers Share × 2016                    0.050**                       0.042*                   0.027
                                                    (0.025)                      (0.025)                 (0.025)
Eligible Suppliers Share × 2017                    0.159***                     0.155**                 0.138**
                                                    (0.062)                      (0.060)                 (0.060)
log(Assets)                                                         -0.045***   -0.045***   -0.046***   -0.046***
                                                                     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
Cash                                                                0.022***    0.022***    0.026***    0.026***
                                                                     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)
PPE                                                                 -0.048***   -0.048***   -0.047***   -0.047***
                                                                     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
Net Margin                                                          -0.019***   -0.019***   -0.019***   -0.019***
                                                                     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
Liabilities                                                         0.066***    0.066***    0.069***    0.069***
                                                                     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)


Firm fixed effects                       Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Industry-year fixed effects              Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Country-year fixed effects                No          No               No          No         Yes         Yes
Number of observations                 2,248,514   2,248,514        2,248,514   2,248,514   2,248,514   2,248,514
R-squared                                0.71        0.71             0.71        0.71        0.71        0.71




                                                               33
Table 4
Difference-in-Differences around the CSPP: Matched Sample
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the ratio of accounts
receivable to sales and accounts payable to sales. Panel A shows pre-treatment (CSPP announcement) means and
medians of non-treated, treated, and control groups and tests of the difference in mean and median between treated
and control groups. Treated firms consist of either 144 firms with eligible bonds or 305 firms with eligible suppliers.
The samples includes only treated firms with non-missing information in Orbis on the two years preceding the
treatment (2014 and 2015). Non-treated firms are all other firms. Control firms are firms that best match treated firms
using propensity scores (nearest neighbor). Panel B shows estimates of the difference-in-differences regressions.
Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if a firm had corporate bonds eligible for purchase under the
CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero otherwise. Has Eligible Supplier is a dummy that takes the value
of one if a firm had a supplier with CSPP-eligible bonds, and zero otherwise. Eligible Suppliers Share is the firm's
share of eligible suppliers relative to the firm's total number of suppliers. Post is a dummy variable that takes the value
of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and zero otherwise. The sample consists of a matched sample based on Bureau
Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. All explanatory variables are lagged by one year. Variable
definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted for firm-level clustering are
reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Summary Statistics (pre-treatment)
                                                             Eligible Firms
                                            Mean                                                   Median
                      Non-                                         t-test         Non-                              Pearson 2
                     Treated      Treated          Control       (p-value)    Treated      Treated      Control     (p-value)
log(Assets)          15.335       22.862           22.856          0.974          15.028   23.093       23.181        0.637
Cash                  0.118        0.060           0.091           0.011          0.052    0.030            0.043     0.480
PPE                   0.232        0.159           0.161           0.935          0.126    0.010            0.035     0.814
Net Margin           -0.051        0.284           0.083           0.204          0.018    0.183            0.078     0.000
Liabilities           0.637        0.624           0.631           0.813          0.662    0.614            0.710     0.059
                                                    Customers of Eligible Firms
                                            Mean                                                   Median
                      Non-                                         t-test         Non-                              Pearson 2
                     Treated      Treated          Control       (p-value)    Treated      Treated      Control     (p-value)
log(Assets)          15.334       21.164           21.094          0.716          15.027   21.410       21.172        0.224
Cash                  0.118        0.088           0.098           0.347          0.052    0.042            0.023     0.019
PPE                   0.232        0.105           0.094           0.450          0.126    0.017            0.010     0.124
Net Margin           -0.051        0.066           0.097           0.805          0.018    0.081            0.078     0.331
Liabilities           0.637        0.551           0.540           0.615          0.662    0.575            0.550     0.292




                                                                    34
Table 4 (continued)

   Panel B: Difference-in-Differences Estimates
                                                  Accounts Receivable                      Accounts Payable
                                           (1)            (2)            (3)       (4)           (5)            (6)
   Eligible × Post                       0.103**       0.109**
                                         (0.047)        (0.050)
   Has Eligible Supplier × Post                                        0.079**   0.066**
                                                                       (0.030)   (0.031)
   Eligible Suppliers Share × Post                                                             0.083**        0.076*
                                                                                               (0.039)        (0.043)


   Controls                                No            Yes             No       Yes            No             Yes
   Firm fixed effects                      Yes           Yes            Yes       Yes            Yes            Yes
   Industry-year fixed effects             Yes           Yes            Yes       Yes            Yes      Yes
   Number of observations                 1,401         1,371           2,863     2,797         2,863         2,797
   R-squared                               0.81          0.81           0.62      0.64           0.62          0.64




                                                                  35
Table 5
Size Bins-by-Year Fixed Effects Regressions
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the ratio of accounts
receivable to sales and the ratio of accounts payable to sales. Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one
if a firm had corporate bonds eligible for purchase under the CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero
otherwise. Has Eligible Supplier is a dummy that takes the value of one if a firm had a supplier with CSPP-eligible
bonds, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that takes the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and
zero otherwise. The regressions in Panel A include 20 size bins-by-year fixed effects. The regressions in Panel B
include 50 size bins-by-year fixed effects. The sample consists of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the
2013-2017 period. All explanatory variables are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in
the Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted for firm-level clustering are reported in parentheses. , , and 
indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: 20 Size Bins
                                              Accounts Receivable                           Accounts Payable
                                     (1)              (2)              (3)         (4)            (5)             (6)
Eligible × Post                   0.102***         0.100***         0.087***
                                   (0.032)          (0.032)          (0.032)
Has Eligible Supplier × Post                                                    0.048***       0.045***         0.032*
                                                                                 (0.017)        (0.016)         (0.017)


Controls                             No              Yes              Yes          No             Yes            Yes
Firm fixed effects                   Yes             Yes              Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes
Industry-year fixed effects          Yes             Yes              Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes
Country-year fixed effects           No               No              Yes          No             No             Yes
Size bins-by-year fixed effects      Yes             Yes              Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes
Number of observations            2,248,512       2,248,512         2,248,512   2,248,512      2,248,512       2,248,512
R-squared                           0.74             0.74             0.74        0.71            0.71           0.71

Panel B: 50 Size Bins
                                              Accounts Receivable                           Accounts Payable
                                     (1)              (2)              (3)         (4)            (5)             (6)
Eligible × Post                   0.102***         0.099***         0.087***
                                   (0.032)          (0.032)          (0.032)
Has Eligible Supplier × Post                                                    0.048***       0.045***         0.032*
                                                                                 (0.017)        (0.016)         (0.017)


Controls                             No              Yes              Yes          No             Yes            Yes
Firm fixed effects                   Yes             Yes              Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes
Industry-year fixed effects          Yes             Yes              Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes
Country-year fixed effects           No               No              Yes          No             No             Yes
Size bins-by-year fixed effects      Yes             Yes              Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes
Number of observations            2,248,512       2,248,512         2,248,512   2,248,512      2,248,512       2,248,512
R-squared                           0.74             0.74             0.74        0.71            0.71           0.71




                                                              36
Table 6
Effect of CSPP on Accounts Payable of Eligible Firms' Customers: Role of Financial Constraints
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the ratio of accounts receivable to sales. Has Eligible Supplier is a dummy
that takes the value of one if a firm had a supplier with CSPP-eligible bonds, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that takes the value of one in the years
of 2016 and 2017, and zero otherwise. The sample consists of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. In columns (1) and (2), Panel A,
the sample is partitioned in firms with investment grade rating and firms with either a speculative grade rating or without a credit rating. In columns (3) and (4),
Panel A, the sample is partitioned in firms that are rated and firms without a credit rating. In columns (5) and (6), Panel A, the low and high liabilities groups
consist of those firms that are below or above the median of the distribution of the ratio of liabilities to assets. In columns (7) and (8), Panel A, the low and high
PPE groups consist of those firms that are below or above the median of the distribution of the ratio of PPE to assets. In columns (1) and (2), Panel B, the low and
high sales groups consist of those firms that are below or above the median of the distribution of sales. In columns (3) and (4), Panel B, the low and high sales
growth groups consist of those firms that are below or above the median of the distribution of sales growth. In columns (5) and (6), Panel B, the low and high assets
growth groups consist of those firms that are below or above the median of the distribution of assets growth. In columns (7) and (8), Panel B, the low and high
profitability groups consist of those firms that are below or above the median of the distribution of EBITDA to assets ratio. All explanatory variables are lagged
by one year. Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted for firm-level clustering are reported in parentheses.
, , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

      Panel A
                                                         Non-
                                        Investment                                                      Low            High
                                                      Investment         Rated          Unrated                                       High PPE      Low PPE
                                          Grade                                                       Liabilities    Liabilities
                                                        Grade
                                            (1)           (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)              (7)           (8)
      Has Eligible Supplier × Post        -0.049        0.041**          -0.055         0.047**          0.023       0.082***         0.022**         0.039*
                                          (0.048)       (0.021)          (0.038)        (0.022)         (0.020)       (0.031)          (0.010)       (0.023)


      Controls                             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
      Firm fixed effects                   Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
      Industry-year fixed effects          Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
      Number of observations               697         2,247,817         1,169        2,247,345       1,124,258      1,124,256        1,124,256     1,124,258
      R-squared                            0.77          0.71             0.68           0.71            0.71           0.72            0.72           0.72




                                                                                   37
Table 6 (continued)

Panel B
                                                        Low Sales   High Sales   Low Assets   High Assets      High            Low
                               High Sales   Low Sales
                                                         Growth      Growth       Growth        Growth      Profitability   Profitability
                                  (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)             (8)
Has Eligible Supplier × Post     0.019        0.191       0.027      0.044**       0.014       0.052**        0.014**        0.066***
                                (0.015)      (0.371)     (0.032)     (0.019)      (0.029)       (0.026)       (0.006)         (0.023)


Controls                          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
Firm fixed effects                Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
Industry-year fixed effects       Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
Number of observations         1,124,256    1,124,258   1,081,305   1,081,303    1,090,815    1,090,812      1,082,737       1,082,737
R-squared                        0.68         0.72        0.76         0.75         0.75         0.73           0.71            0.72




                                                                       38
Table 7
Core vs. Periphery Eurozone Countries
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the ratio of accounts
receivable to sales and the ratio of accounts payable to sales. Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one
if a firm had corporate bonds eligible for purchase under the CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero
otherwise. Has Eligible Supplier is a dummy that takes the value of one if a firm had a supplier with CSPP-eligible
bonds, and zero otherwise. Eligible Suppliers Share is the firm's share of eligible suppliers relative to the firm's total
number of suppliers. Has Core Eligible Supplier is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if a firm is a customer
of eligible firms headquartered in core eurozone countries, and zero otherwise. Has Periphery Eligible Supplier is a
dummy variable that takes the value of one if a firm is a customer of eligible firms headquartered in periphery eurozone
countries, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that takes the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and
zero otherwise. The sample consists of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. All
explanatory variables are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust
standard errors adjusted for firm-level clustering are reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Core vs. Periphery Eurozone Countries
                                                 Core Countries                               Periphery Countries
                                   Accounts        Accounts        Accounts      Accounts          Accounts       Accounts
                                   Receivable       Payable        Payable       Receivable         Payable       Payable
                                      (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)               (5)           (6)
Eligible × Post                    0.126***                                         0.018
                                    (0.045)                                        (0.025)
Has Eligible Supplier × Post                         0.017                                         0.072**
                                                    (0.019)                                        (0.032)
Eligible Suppliers Share × Post                                     0.003                                        0.109**
                                                                   (0.031)                                        (0.048)


Controls                              Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
Firm fixed effects                    Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
Industry-year fixed effects           Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
Number of observations              650,691         650,691        650,691       1,597,823        1,597,823      1,597,823
R-squared                             0.77           0.71            0.71           0.73             0.71          0.71




                                                              39
Panel B: Core vs. Periphery Eurozone Countries Eligible Suppliers
                                                                      Core      Periphery
                                                 Eurozone
                                                                    Countries   Countries
                                                 Accounts           Accounts    Accounts
                                                 Payable             Payable     Payable
                                                   (1)                 (2)         (3)
Has Core Eligible Supplier × Post                 0.044**            0.018       0.077
                                                  (0.020)            (0.020)     (0.051)
Has Periphery Eligible Supplier × Post            0.024*             0.003       0.034*
                                                  (0.013)            (0.023)     (0.018)


Controls                                             Yes              Yes         Yes
Firm fixed effects                                   Yes              Yes         Yes
Industry-year fixed effects                          Yes              Yes         Yes
Number of observations                           2,248,514          650,691     1,597,823
R-squared                                            0.71             0.71        0.71




                                                40
Table 8
Real Effects of CSPP: Investment, Operations, and Financing of Eligible Firms' Customers
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of firm outcomes. Panel A shows regressions for variables that measure
corporate investment (assets growth, CAPEX, change in inventories, change in receivable, and labor growth) and operating outcomes (sales growth, and
profitability). Panel B shows regressions for variables that measure corporate external and internal financing decisions (change in payable, change in financial debt,
change in long-term debt, change in short-term loans, change in cash holdings). Has Eligible Supplier is a dummy that takes the value of one if a firm had a supplier
with CSPP-eligible bonds, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that takes the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and zero otherwise. The sample
consists of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. All explanatory variables are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are provided
in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted for firm-level clustering are reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

   Panel A: Investment and Operating Activities
                                                  Investment in Fixed Assets, Working Capital and Human Capital                         Operational Activity
                                                                               Change in        Change in
                                     Assets Growth          CAPEX                                               Labor Growth      Sales Growth       Profitability
                                                                              Inventories       Receivable
                                                        (Fixed Assetst
                                        Assetst                             Inventoriest /     Receivablet /    Employeest /          Salest          EBITDAt
                                                        + Depreciationt)
                                       /Assetst-1                               Assetst-1        Assetst-1       Employeest-1        / Salest-1       /Assetst-1
                                                           / Assetst-1
                                           (1)                (2)                 (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)              (7)
   Has Eligible Supplier × Post         0.025*              0.005*           0.004**            0.011**            0.034*             0.024             0.001
                                        (0.015)             (0.003)           (0.002)           (0.005)            -0.02             (0.048)           (0.003)


   Controls                               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
   Firm fixed effects                     Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
   Industry-year fixed effects            Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
   Number of observations              2,248,512          2,116,731          2,246,443         2,247,599         1,779,908          2,248,514         2,161,872
   R-squared                              0.55               0.48              0.32              0.29               0.28               0.39              0.73




                                                                                      41
Table 8 (continued)

                  Panel B: External and Internal Financing
                                                             Change in      Change in       Change in Long-     Change in Short-     Change in Cash
                                                              Payable     Financial Debt      term Debt           term Loans           Holdings
                                                             Payablet /   Financial Debtt    Long-term            Short-term             Casht
                                                             Assetst-1      / Assetst-1     Debtt / Assetst-1   Loanst / Assetst-1     / Assetst-1
                                                                (1)             (2)               (3)                  (4)                (5)
                  Has Eligible Supplier × Post               0.009***          0.008             0.005               0.004               -0.007
                                                              (0.003)         (0.007)           (0.007)              (0.004)            (0.004)


                  Controls                                      Yes            Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
                  Firm fixed effects                            Yes            Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
                  Industry-year fixed effects                   Yes            Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
                  Number of observations                     2,238,452       2,081,233         2,090,098           2,236,327           2,231,250
                  R-squared                                     0.27           0.26               0.22                0.18                0.43




                                                                                  42
Table 9
Effect of CSPP on Client Relationships Maintained and New Client Relationships Obtained
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the number of client
relationships maintained and number of new clients. The dependent variable in columns (1)-(3) is the number of client
relationships maintained by a supplier relative to the existing relationships in the previous year. The dependent variable
in columns (4)-(6) is the number of new client relationships initiated by a supplier relative to the existing relationships
in the previous year. Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if a firm had corporate bonds eligible for
purchase under the CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that
takes the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and zero otherwise. The sample consists of Factset Revere Supply
Chain Relationship nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. All explanatory variables are lagged by one year.
Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted for firm-level
clustering are reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

   Panel A: Eurozone Countries
                                             Number of Clients Kept                      Number of New Clients
                                       (1)            (2)             (3)        (4)             (5)             (6)
   Eligible × Post                9.514***         8.223***      7.624***     3.281***        2.767**       2.715**
                                   (1.935)          (2.073)       (2.043)      (1.234)         (1.231)       (1.219)


   Controls                            No             Yes             Yes        No             Yes              Yes
   Firm fixed effects                 Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes              Yes
   Industry-year fixed effects        Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes              Yes
   Country-year fixed effects          No             No              Yes        No              No              Yes
   Number of observations             9,434          6,045        6,037         9,434          6,045         6,037
   R-squared                          0.84            0.84            0.84       0.58           0.57             0.57

   Panel B: Core Eurozone Countries
                                             Number of Clients Kept                      Number of New Clients
                                       (1)            (2)             (3)        (4)             (5)             (6)
   Eligible × Post               11.700***         9.968***      9.729***     4.247***        3.429**       3.612**
                                   (2.334)          (2.510)       (2.481)      (1.482)         (1.501)       (1.471)


   Controls                            No             Yes             Yes        No             Yes              Yes
   Firm fixed effects                 Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes              Yes
   Industry-year fixed effects        Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes              Yes
   Country-year fixed effects          No             No              Yes        No              No              Yes
   Number of observations             6,558          3,883        3,883         6,558          3,883         3,883
   R-squared                          0.84            0.84            0.84       0.59           0.58             0.58




                                                                 43
Table 9 (Continued)

  Panel C: Periphery Countries
                                         Number of Clients Kept                    Number of New Clients
                                   (1)            (2)             (3)      (4)             (5)             (6)
  Eligible × Post                0.624           -0.359       -0.580     -0.419          0.275         -0.648
                                 (1.318)        (1.445)       (1.548)    (1.152)         (1.058)       (1.248)


  Controls                         No             Yes             Yes      No             Yes              Yes
  Firm fixed effects              Yes             Yes             Yes     Yes             Yes              Yes
  Industry-year fixed effects     Yes             Yes             Yes     Yes             Yes              Yes
  Country-year fixed effects       No             No              Yes      No              No              Yes
  Number of observations         2,876           2,162        2,154      2,876           2,162         2,154
  R-squared                       0.85            0.85            0.85    0.51             0.5             0.52




                                                             44
Figure 1
New Issuance of Corporate Bonds around the CSPP: Core vs. Periphery Countries
Panel A shows the percentage of GDP as of 2015 by country and the percentage of nonfinancial eligible firms by
country. The number of nonfinancial eligible firms is obtained before excluding observations with missing information
in the variables used in the benchmark regressions. Panel B and C show the amount of capital (scaled by GDP) raised
by core and periphery eurozone firms in the euro-denominated corporate bond market. Bond issuance data are obtained
from SDC New Issues and includes bonds issued by nonfinancial firms domiciled in the eurozone over the 2013-2017
period. Panel B shows new issuance of investment grade bonds. Panel C shows new issuance of non-investment grade
bonds.

Panel A: Distribution of GDP and Eligible Bonds by Country




                                                           45
  Panel B: New Issuance of Investment Grade Bonds (% of GDP)




Panel C: New Issuance of Non-Investment Grade Bonds (% of GDP)




                               46
Trade Credit and the Transmission of Unconventional Monetary
                          Policy

                           Manuel Adelino
                   Duke University, CEPR and NBER
                           Miguel A. Ferreira
         Nova School of Business and Economics, CEPR and ECGI
                        Mariassunta Giannetti
            Stockholm School of Economics, CEPR and ECGI
                             Pedro Pires
                  Nova School of Business and Economics
Table IA.1
Sample Description by Country
This table shows the frequency distribution of the sample by country using a sample of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis
nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. Panel A reports the number of observations by country. Panel B reports
the distribution of eligible firms and customers of eligible firms by country.

                   Panel A: Frequency Distribution of the Sample by Country
                                            Baseline Sample              Sample (Assets > 10 million)
                                       Number of                          Number of
                                                           %                                 %
                                      Observations                       Observations
                   Austria                     7,749               0.3           6,025            1.3
                   Belgium                   76,449                3.4          31,812            6.7
                   Cyprus                      1,783               0.1             721            0.2
                   Estonia                   16,763                0.8           2,642            0.6
                   Finland                   49,511                2.2           9,477            2.0
                   France                   453,503               20.2          89,549           18.7
                   Germany                   53,214                2.4          39,714            8.3
                   Greece                    45,561                2.0          10,659            2.2
                   Ireland                     9,787               0.4           5,547            1.2
                   Italy                    831,072               37.0         149,283           31.2
                   Latvia                    17,432                0.8           2,518            0.5
                   Lithuania                 10,092                0.5           2,791            0.6
                   Luxembourg                  5,657               0.3           3,591            0.8
                   Malta                       1,616               0.1             684            0.1
                   Netherlands                 4,608               0.2           3,503            0.7
                   Portugal                 122,214                5.4          20,278            4.2
                   Slovakia                  45,735                2.0           7,608            1.6
                   Slovenia                  23,613                1.1           3,577            0.8
                   Spain                    472,155               21.0          88,286           18.5
                   Total                  2,248,514               100          478,265           100




                                                              1
Panel B: Distribution of Eligible Firms and Customers of Eligible Firms by Country
                           Eligible Firms              Customers of Eligible Firms
                     Number of                         Number of
                                         %                                 %
                       Firms                             Firms
Austria                          8               5.3               6            1.9
Belgium                        16               10.6             13             4.1
Cyprus                           1               0.7               0            0.0
Estonia                          2               1.3               2            0.6
Finland                          4               2.6             15             4.7
France                         44               29.1             89            28.0
Germany                        28               18.5             80            25.2
Greece                           0               0.0               6            1.9
Ireland                          1               0.7               9            2.8
Italy                          16               10.6             42            13.2
Latvia                           1               0.7               0            0.0
Lithuania                        0               0.0               0            0.0
Luxembourg                       1               0.7               4            1.3
Malta                            0               0.0               0            0.0
Netherlands                      1               0.7               2            0.6
Portugal                         8               5.3               8            2.5
Slovakia                         1               0.7               1            0.3
Slovenia                         2               1.3               0            0.0
Spain                          17               11.3             41            12.9
Total                         151               100             318            100




                                            2
Table IA.2
Supply Chain Relationships: Distribution by country
This table shows the frequency distribution of the sample of supplier-customer pairs by country. The sample includes nonfinancial suppliers domiciled in the euro
area as reported by Factset Revere before the CSPP announcement.

Supplier                                                                     Customer country
 country    AT     BE     CY     DE      EE     ES      FI    FR     GR      IE        IT   LT    LU     LV     MT     NL      PT      SI    SK    Other   Total
  AT         40      4      0     50      2       8      7     15      2      3         9    0      6      0      0      9      4       2      0    381      542
   BE         1     32      0     35      1       4      2     49      4      3        6     0      2      0      0     22      0       0      0    408      569
  CY          1      0      3      2      0       5      0      6      3      1        6     0      0      0      0      5      0       0      0    133      165
  DE         64     37      3 1,348       3      45     38    215     21     31       78     2     34      1      1    117      7       1      1   3,208   5,255
   EE         0      0      0      0     25       0      2      2      0      0        0     4      0      4      0      0      0       0      0       7      44
   ES         4     10      0     54      2    209       6     64      8      9        33    0      7      3      0     26     17       1      0    860    1,313
   FI        13     13      4     61      9       6    194     40      3      5        14    4      5      2      0     16      1       2      1    843    1,236
   FR        15     73      2    316      8      78     35 1,158      13     28       113    0     41      1      1    170     13       4      6   3,514   5,589
  GR         10      4      3     38      0       9      2     30     83      7        17    0      5      0      2     34      4       1      0    468      717
   IE         0     10      1     17      0       2      1     23      1     24         9    0      2      1      0     19      2       0      0    616      728
   IT         6      8      1    122      0      29     11    112      9     13       414    1      9      0      1     41      1       1      3   1,224   2,006
   LT         0      1      0      3      1       0      2      0      0      0         0   12      0      3      1      0      1       0      0      26      50
  LU          1      5      0     22      0      11      2     32      3      2         6    1      7      0      0     16      1       0      1    386      496
  LV          0      0      0      0      0       0      0      0      0      1         0    3      0      1      0      1      0       0      0       8      14
  MT          1      1      0      0      1       3      1      1      1      0         0    0      0      0      0      0      0       0      0       7      16
  NL          8     15      3    159      3      27     10     76      9     19        32    0      6      1      1    130      7       0      0   1,374   1,880
   PT         0      0      0      0      0       1      0      2      2      1         1    0      0      0      0      2     29       0      0      49      87
   SI         1      0      0      3      0       0      1      1      0      0         0    0      1      0      0      1      0       3      0      15      26
   SK         0      1      0      2      0       1      0      0      0      0         1    0      0      0      0      0      0       2      9      18      34
  Total     165    214     20 2,232      55    438     314 1,826     162    147       739   27    125     17      7    609     87     17      21 13,545 20,767




                                                                                  1
Table IA.3
Effect of CSPP on Financial Debt of Eligible Firms
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the change in financial debt
scaled by lagged assets. Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if a firm had corporate bonds eligible
for purchase under the CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that
takes the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and zero otherwise. The sample consists of Bureau Van Dijk
Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. All explanatory variables are lagged by one year. Variable
definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted for firm-level clustering are
reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                         Core          Periphery
                                                        Eurozone
                                                                       Countries       Countries
                                                           (1)            (2)             (3)
                     Eligible × Post                      0.016          0.022*         -0.007
                                                         (0.011)        (0.014)         (0.017)


                     Controls                             Yes             Yes             Yes
                     Firm fixed effects                   Yes             Yes             Yes
                     Industry-year fixed effects          Yes             Yes             Yes
                     Number of observations             2,081,233       633,211        1,448,022
                     R-squared                            0.26            0.25           0.26




                                                             1
Table IA.4
Effect of CSPP on Financial Debt, Bond Debt and Bank Debt Financing of Publicly Listed Eligible Firms
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of firm outcomes. The dependent variable in columns (1), (4), and (7) is the
change in total debt scaled by lagged assets. The dependent variable in columns (2), (5), and (8) is the change in bond debt scaled by lagged assets. The dependent
variable in columns (3), (6), and (9) is the change in bank debt scaled by lagged assets. Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if a firm had
corporate bonds eligible for purchase under the CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that takes the value of
one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and zero otherwise. The sample consists of Capital IQ/Compustat Global nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. All
explanatory variables are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted for firm-level
clustering are reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                  Eurozone                                  Core Countries                         Periphery Countries
                                     Change in    Change in    Change in       Change in      Change in    Change in    Change in       Change in    Change in
                                     Total Debt   Bond Debt    Bank Debt       Total Debt    Bond Debt Bank Debt        Total Debt Bond Debt Bank Debt
                                      Total        Bond         Bank            Total          Bond         Bank         Total           Bond          Bank
                                       Debtt /     Debtt /      Debtt /          Debtt /       Debtt /      Debtt /       Debtt /        Debtt /       Debtt /
                                      Assetst-1    Assetst-1    Assetst-1       Assetst-1      Assetst-1    Assetst-1    Assetst-1       Assetst-1     Assetst-1
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)             (8)           (9)
       Eligible × Post                 0.007       0.016**       -0.008          0.005         0.013*        -0.003        0.006         0.016         -0.029
                                       (0.010)      (0.006)     (0.007)         (0.012)        (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.023)       (0.018)       (0.022)


       Controls                         Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
       Firm fixed effects               Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
       Industry-year fixed effects      Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
       Number of observations          3,908        3,908        3,908           2,463          2,463        2,463         1,445         1,445         1,445
       R-squared                        0.39         0.29         0.26            0.39           0.31         0.29          0.4          0.29           0.23




                                                                                   2
Table IA.5
Real Effects of CSPP: Investment, Operations, and Financing of Eligible Firms
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of corporate investment (assets growth, CAPEX, change in inventories,
change in receivable, and labor growth) and operating outcomes (sales growth, and profitability). Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if a firm
had corporate bonds eligible for purchase under the CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that takes the value
of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and zero otherwise. The sample consists of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. All explanatory
variables are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted for firm-level clustering are
reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                    Investment in Fixed Assets, Working Capital and Human Capital                  Operational Activity
                                                                               Change in        Change in
                                       Assets Growth         CAPEX                                           Labor Growth     Sales Growth     Profitability
                                                                              Inventories      Receivable
                                                          (Fixed Assetst
                                          Assetst                           Inventoriest /   Receivablet /   Employeest /        Salest          EBITDAt
                                                         + Depreciationt)
                                         /Assetst-1                             Assetst-1        Assetst-1    Employeest-1      / Salest-1       /Assetst-1
                                                            / Assetst-1
                                             (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)            (5)              (6)              (7)
       Eligible × Post                     0.023*           0.002             0.005           0.009**           0.018            -0.018            0.003
                                           (0.014)         (0.005)           (0.004)          (0.004)          (0.024)           (0.076)          (0.004)


       Controls                             Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
       Firm fixed effects                   Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
       Industry-year fixed effects          Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
       Number of observations            2,248,512        2,116,731         2,246,443        2,247,599        1,779,908        2,248,514        2,161,872
       R-squared                            0.55             0.48             0.32             0.29              0.28             0.39             0.73




                                                                                      3
Table IA.6
Effect of CSPP on Accounts Receivable of Eligible Firms: Placebo Test
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the ratio of accounts
receivable to sales. Investment Grade is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if a firm had an investment grade
credit rating (AAA to BBB-) before the CSPP announcement, and zero otherwise) Post is a dummy variable that takes
the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and zero otherwise. Columns (1) and (2) show the results for a sample
of U.S. publicly listed firms drawn from Compustat. Columns (3) and (4) show the results for a sample of publicly
listed firms domiciled in European Union countries that are not part of the eurozone. Columns (5) and (6) show the
results for a sample of public and private firms domiciled in European Union countries that are not part of the eurozone.
The sample in columns (3)-(6) consists of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. All
explanatory variables are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust
standard errors adjusted for firm-level clustering are reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                   U.S. Public Firms           EU Non-Euro Public Firms          EU Non-Euro Firms
                                       (Compustat)                     (Orbis)                        (Orbis)
                                   (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)               (5)          (6)
Investment Grade × Post           0.004                           -0.014                        0.013*
                                 (0.005)                          (0.013)                       (0.007)
Investment Grade × 2014                          0.001                          0.019                         0.011**
                                                (0.004)                        (0.015)                         (0.005)
Investment Grade × 2015                          0.005                          -0.017                        0.018**
                                                (0.006)                        (0.018)                         (0.008)
Investment Grade × 2016                          0.004                          -0.021                        0.031***
                                                (0.007)                        (0.020)                         (0.009)
Investment Grade × 2017                          0.007                          -0.008                         0.017
                                                (0.007)                        (0.021)                         (0.011)


Controls                           Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes
Firm fixed effects                 Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes
Industry-year fixed effects        Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes
Number of observations           17,209          17,209           11,837        11,837          747,924       747,924
R-squared                          0.65           0.65             0.74          0.74            0.76           0.76




                                                              4
Table IA.7
Sample Excluding Firms with less than 10 million in Assets
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the ratio of accounts
receivable to sales and the ratio of accounts payable to sales. Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one
if a firm had corporate bonds eligible for purchase under the CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero
otherwise. Has Eligible Supplier is a dummy that takes the value of one if a firm had a supplier with CSPP-eligible
bonds, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that takes the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and
zero otherwise. The sample consists of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. The sample
excludes firms with less than 10 million in Assets as of 2015 (the year before the announcement of the CSPP). All
explanatory variables are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust
standard errors adjusted for firm-level clustering are reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                              Accounts Receivable                          Accounts Payable
                                      (1)             (2)             (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)
Eligible × Post                    0.098**         0.097**          0.088**
                                    (0.041)         (0.041)         (0.041)
Has Eligible Supplier × Post                                                     0.043**        0.041**        0.037*
                                                                                 (0.021)        (0.020)       (0.020)


Controls                              No             Yes             Yes           No            Yes            Yes
Firm fixed effects                   Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Industry-year fixed effects          Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Country-year fixed effects            No              No             Yes           No             No            Yes
Number of observations             478,265         478,265          478,265      478,265        478,265       478,265
R-squared                            0.74            0.74            0.74          0.71          0.71           0.71




                                                              5
Table IA.8
Sample Excluding Germany
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the ratio of accounts
receivable to sales and the ratio of accounts payable to sales. Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one
if a firm had corporate bonds eligible for purchase under the CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero
otherwise. Has Eligible Supplier is a dummy that takes the value of one if a firm had a supplier with CSPP-eligible
bonds, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that takes the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and
zero otherwise. The sample consists of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. The sample
excludes firms domiciled in Germany. All explanatory variables are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are
provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted for firm-level clustering are reported in
parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                              Accounts Receivable                           Accounts Payable
                                      (1)             (2)              (3)         (4)            (5)             (6)
Eligible × Post                    0.125***        0.124***         0.112***
                                    (0.040)         (0.040)          (0.040)
Has Eligible Supplier × Post                                                     0.055**        0.053**         0.041*
                                                                                 (0.022)        (0.022)         (0.022)


Controls                              No             Yes              Yes          No             Yes            Yes
Firm fixed effects                   Yes             Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
Industry-year fixed effects          Yes             Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
Country-year fixed effects            No              No              Yes          No             No             Yes
Number of observations            2,195,300       2,195,300         2,195,300   2,195,300      2,195,300       2,195,300
R-squared                            0.74            0.74             0.74         0.71           0.71           0.71




                                                              6
Table IA.9
Logarithm of Accounts Receivable and Accounts Payable
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the logarithm of accounts
receivable and the logarithm of accounts payable. Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if a firm
had corporate bonds eligible for purchase under the CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero otherwise.
Has Eligible Supplier is a dummy that takes the value of one if a firm had a supplier with CSPP-eligible bonds, and
zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that takes the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and zero otherwise.
The sample consists of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. All explanatory variables
are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted
for firm-level clustering are reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels, respectively.

                                            Log(Accounts Receivable)                       Log(Accounts Payable)
                                     (1)              (2)              (3)         (4)              (5)              (6)
Eligible × Post                    0.239**         0.244***        0.222**
                                   (0.094)          (0.094)         (0.094)
Has Eligible Supplier × Post                                                     0.080*           0.073*           0.060
                                                                                 (0.043)          (0.043)          (0.043)


Controls                             No               Yes              Yes         No              Yes              Yes
Firm fixed effects                   Yes              Yes              Yes        Yes              Yes              Yes
Industry-year fixed effects          Yes              Yes              Yes        Yes              Yes              Yes
Country-year fixed effects           No               No               Yes         No               No              Yes
Number of observations            2,055,571        2,055,571       2,055,571   2,011,980         2,011,980     2,011,980
R-squared                            0.92             0.92             0.92       0.92             0.92             0.92




                                                               7
Table IA.10
Sample of Public vs. Private Firms
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the ratio of accounts
receivable to sales and the ratio of accounts payable to sales. Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one
if a firm had corporate bonds eligible for purchase under the CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero
otherwise. Has Eligible Supplier is a dummy that takes the value of one if a firm had a supplier with CSPP-eligible
bonds, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that takes the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and
zero otherwise. Panel A shows regressions for the sample of publicly listed firms. Panel B shows regressions for the
sample of privately held firms. The sample consists of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017
period. All explanatory variables are lagged by one year. Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the
Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted for firm-level clustering are reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Public Firms
                                              Accounts Receivable                           Accounts Payable
                                      (1)             (2)              (3)         (4)            (5)             (6)
Eligible × Post                    0.130**         0.131**          0.119**
                                    (0.053)         (0.053)          (0.053)
Has Eligible Supplier × Post                                                      0.014          0.010          0.012
                                                                                 (0.024)        (0.023)         (0.025)


Controls                              No             Yes              Yes          No             Yes            Yes
Firm fixed effects                   Yes             Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
Industry-year fixed effects          Yes             Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
Country-year fixed effects            No              No              Yes          No             No             Yes
Obs.                                10,051          10,051           10,051       10,051        10,051          10,051
R-squared                            0.67            0.67             0.68         0.69           0.69           0.69

Panel B: Private Firms
                                              Accounts Receivable                           Accounts Payable
                                      (1)             (2)              (3)         (4)            (5)             (6)
Eligible × Post                     0.060*          0.059*           0.045
                                    (0.034)         (0.034)          (0.034)
Has Eligible Supplier × Post                                                     0.076**        0.073**         0.065*
                                                                                 (0.037)        (0.035)         (0.036)


Controls                              No             Yes              Yes          No             Yes            Yes
Firm fixed effects                   Yes             Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
Industry-year fixed effects          Yes             Yes              Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
Country-year fixed effects            No              No              Yes          No             No             Yes
Number of observations            2,238,463       2,238,463         2,238,463   2,238,463      2,238,463       2,238,463
R-squared                            0.74            0.74             0.74         0.71           0.71           0.71




                                                              8
Table IA.11
The Role of Product Market Competition
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the ratio of accounts
receivable to sales and the ratio of accounts payable to sales. Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one
if a firm had corporate bonds eligible for purchase under the CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero
otherwise. Has Eligible Supplier is a dummy that takes the value of one if a firm had a supplier with CSPP-eligible
bonds, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that takes the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and
zero otherwise. In Panel A, the low and high Lerner index (EBITDA/Sales) groups consist of those firms that are
below and above the yearly median at the two-digit SIC level. In Panel B, the low and high Herfindahl Index groups
consist of those firms that are below and above the yearly median at the two-digit SIC level. The sample consists of
Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. All explanatory variables are lagged by one year.
Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted for firm-level
clustering are reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

 Panel A: Lerner Index
                                                  Low Lerner Index                        High Lerner Index
                                             Accounts            Accounts           Accounts           Accounts
                                             Receivable          Payable            Receivable         Payable
                                                (1)                (2)                  (3)              (4)
 Eligible × Post                               0.102                                 0.117***
                                              (0.067)                                 (0.041)
 Has Eligible Supplier × Post                                      -0.007                               0.041*
                                                                  (0.019)                               (0.021)

 Controls                                       Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes
 Firm fixed effects                             Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes
 Year fixed effects                             Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes
 Number of observations                      1,161,440           1,161,440           1,087,074         1,087,074
 R-squared                                      0.76                0.73                0.73              0.70

 Panel B: Herfindahl Index
                                                 Low Herfindahl Index                   High Herfindahl Index
                                             Accounts            Accounts           Accounts           Accounts
                                             Receivable          Payable            Receivable         Payable
                                                (1)                (2)                  (3)              (4)
 Eligible × Post                               0.109                                 0.086**
                                              (0.073)                                (0.037)
 Has Eligible Supplier × Post                                      -0.022                               0.045**
                                                                  (0.043)                               (0.018)

 Controls                                       Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes
 Firm fixed effects                             Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes
 Year fixed effects                             Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes
 Number of observations                      1,186,108           1,186,108           1,062,406         1,062,406
 R-squared                                      0.74                0.71                0.77              0.73




                                                             9
Table IA.12
Client Relationships Maintained and New Client Relationships Initiated: Sample of Competitors as Control
Group
This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of firm-level panel regressions of the number of client
relationships maintained and number of new clients. The dependent variable in columns (1)-(3) is the number of client
relationships maintained by a supplier relative to the existing relationships in the previous year. The dependent variable
in columns (4)-(6) is the number of new client relationships initiated by a supplier relative to the existing relationships
in the previous year. Eligible is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if a firm had corporate bonds eligible for
purchase under the CSPP before the CSPP announcement date, and zero otherwise. Post is a dummy variable that
takes the value of one in the years of 2016 and 2017, and zero otherwise. The sample consists of Factset Revere Supply
Chain Relationship nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. The control group includes the competitors of eligible
firms, domiciled in the Eurozone, as reported in Factset Revere. All explanatory variables are lagged by one year.
Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust standard errors adjusted for firm-level
clustering are reported in parentheses. , , and  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

   Panel A: Eurozone Countries
                                             Number of Clients Kept                      Number of New Clients
                                       (1)            (2)             (3)        (4)             (5)             (6)
   Eligible × Post                7.573***         6.377***      5.297**       2.972**         2.444*        2.278
                                   (2.233)          (2.412)       (2.451)      (1.412)         (1.462)       (1.478)


   Controls                            No             Yes             Yes        No             Yes              Yes
   Firm fixed effects                 Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes              Yes
   Industry-year fixed effects        Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes              Yes
   Country-year fixed effects          No             No              Yes        No              No              Yes
   Number of observations             1,761          1,507        1,504         1,761          1,507         1,504
   R-squared                          0.84            0.85            0.85       0.56           0.56             0.58

   Panel B: Core Eurozone Countries
                                             Number of Clients Kept                      Number of New Clients
                                       (1)            (2)             (3)        (4)             (5)             (6)
   Eligible × Post                8.983***          7.520**      7.146**       3.981**         3.359*        3.417*
                                   (2.754)          (2.998)       (3.021)      (1.729)         (1.848)       (1.840)


   Controls                            No             Yes             Yes        No             Yes              Yes
   Firm fixed effects                 Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes              Yes
   Industry-year fixed effects        Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes              Yes
   Country-year fixed effects          No             No              Yes        No              No              Yes
   Number of observations             1,282          1,078        1,078         1,282          1,078         1,078
   R-squared                          0.84            0.84            0.85       0.57           0.57             0.58




                                                                 10
Table IA.12 (Continued)

  Panel C: Periphery Countries
                                         Number of Clients Kept                   Number of New Clients
                                   (1)            (2)             (3)     (4)             (5)             (6)
  Eligible × Post                -0.228          -1.147       -1.839    -1.329          -0.582        -1.303
                                 (1.896)        (2.015)       (2.172)   (1.544)         (1.470)       (1.514)


  Controls                         No             Yes             Yes     No             Yes              Yes
  Firm fixed effects              Yes             Yes             Yes    Yes             Yes              Yes
  Industry-year fixed effects     Yes             Yes             Yes    Yes             Yes              Yes
  Country-year fixed effects       No             No              Yes     No              No              Yes
  Number of observations          479             426             421    479             426              421
  R-squared                       0.88            0.9             0.9    0.57            0.57             0.58




                                                             11
Figure IA.1
Accounts Receivable of Eligible Firms around the CSPP
This figure shows point estimates and 90% confidence interval of the differences in the ratio of accounts receivable
to sales between treated firms (eligible firms) and control firms around the CSPP announcement. The results in Panel
A are based on the estimates in column (4) of Table 2. The sample in Panel A consists of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis
nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. The results in Panel B are based on the estimates in column (2) of Table
IA.6 of the Internet Appendix. The sample in Panel B consists of Compustat U.S. publicly listed firms.

                        Panel A: Effect of CSPP on Accounts Receivable of Eligible Firms




                  Panel B: Placebo Effect on Accounts Receivable of US Investment Grade Firms




                                                          12
Figure IA.2
Accounts Payable of Eligible Firms' Customers around the CSPP
This figure shows point estimates and 90% confidence interval of the differences in the ratio of accounts payable to
sales between treated firms (firms with a supplier with CSPP-eligible bonds) and control firms around the CSPP
announcement using a sample of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in the 2013-2017 period. The results in
Panel A are based on the estimates in column (4) of Panel A of Table 3. The results in Panel B are based on the
estimates in column (4) of Panel B of Table 3. The sample consists of Bureau Van Dijk Orbis nonfinancial firms in
the 2013-2017 period.

               Panel A: Effect of CSPP on Accounts Payable of Eligible Firms' Customers (Dummy)




          Panel B: Effect of CSPP on Accounts Payable of Eligible Firms' Customers (Share of Suppliers)




                                                          13
