                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           ISLAM AND THE STATE:
             RELIGIOUS EDUCATION IN THE AGE OF MASS SCHOOLING

                                        Samuel Bazzi
                                       Masyhur Hilmy
                                       Benjamin Marx

                                     Working Paper 27073
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27073


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          May 2020, Revised December 2020




We thank Natalie Bau, Jean-Paul Carvalho, Quoc-Anh Do, Jeanne Hagenbach, Rema Hanna,
Agustina Paglayan, Vincent Pons, Nancy Qian, and seminar participants at the 2020 ASREC
conference, Australia National University, the Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, Bilkent
University, Columbia University, CREST, the NBER Summer Institute, Nova SBE, Oxford,
Sciences Po, Stockholm University, Tinbergen Institute, University of British Columbia, UC San
Diego, University of Pittsburgh, and Yale for helpful feedback. Bazzi acknowledges support from
the National Science Foundation (SES-1942375). Hilmy acknowledges support from the Manuel
Abdala Gift Fund and the Institute for Economic Development at Boston University. Marx
acknowledges support from the Sciences Po Scientific Advisory Boad (SAB) 2020-21. All errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Samuel Bazzi, Masyhur Hilmy, and Benjamin Marx. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Islam and the State: Religious Education in the Age of Mass Schooling
Samuel Bazzi, Masyhur Hilmy, and Benjamin Marx
NBER Working Paper No. 27073
May 2020, Revised December 2020
JEL No. H52,I25,N45,P16,Z12

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the competition between public and religious schools and its consequences for nation
building. In the 1970s, a landmark mass schooling effort in Indonesia aimed to secularize
education and to curb religious influence in society. The regime built 61,000 public elementary
schools, seeking in part to upend a longstanding Islamic school system. Using novel data on
Islamic school construction and curriculum, we identify short-run effects on exposed cohorts as
well as dynamic, long-run effects on education markets. While primary enrollment shifted
towards state schools, religious education increased on net as Islamic secondary schools absorbed
the higher demand for continued education. The Islamic sector not only entered new markets to
compete with the state but also increased religious curriculum at newly created schools. While
exposed cohorts are not more attached to secular principles, they report greater religiosity and
transmit these religious values to the next generation. Overall, the ideological competition in
education undermined the nation-building impacts of mass schooling.

Samuel Bazzi                                    Benjamin Marx
Department of Economics                         Sciences Po
Boston University                               Department of Economics
270 Bay State Road                              28 Rue des Saints-Peres
Boston, MA 02215                                75007 Paris
and CEPR                                        France
and also NBER                                   benjamin.marx@sciencespo.fr
sbazzi@bu.edu

Masyhur Hilmy
Boston University
Department of Economics
270 Bay State Rd.
Boston, MA 02215
mhilmy@bu.edu
1   Introduction
Providing education is one of the central missions of modern states. Yet, mass public schooling is a re-
cent historical phenomenon. For centuries, religious organizations dominated education markets across
Western Europe, the Middle East, and elsewhere. In many countries, the state overturned this domi-
nance through secularization policies with notable examples in the Ferry Laws in France or Kemalist
reforms in Turkey. In other countries, religious schools still cater to a large share of the student popu-
lation. Across these settings, little is known about how competition between state and religious schools
shapes identity and nation building (Alesina et al., 2019).
    Understanding this process is of central importance in contexts where religious schools account for
a large share of private education. The literature on school competition has generally overlooked the
religious dimension of education as a key margin of school choice. Yet, these choices may be crucial in
shaping cultural transmission (Bisin and Verdier, 2000). Other recent work has examined the link be-
tween schooling reforms and ideology, but has not explored the competitive response to state expansion
in education markets (Bandiera et al., 2019; Cantoni et al., 2017). In this paper, we study how religious
school choice and competition between state and religious schools affect cultural change.
    We explore the consequences of mass public schooling for identity and nation building in the world's
largest Muslim country. We show that Islamic schools counteracted the secularizing impacts of mass
schooling. Indonesia provides a rich context for understanding how religious schools endure in mod-
ernizing states. Millions of Indonesians were educated in religious institutions historically, and around
one-fifth of students attended Islamic schools in 2019 (see Table 1). Yet, in the 1970s, the country un-
derwent a uniquely ambitious expansion of its public schooling system through the celebrated Sekolah
Dasar (SD) Presidential Instruction (INPRES). This policy oversaw the construction of more than 61,000
elementary schools--many of them in areas where Islamic institutions long played an important role.
    Beginning with Duflo (2001), a large literature has studied the impacts of SD INPRES on human
capital and development. However, the policy also entailed political objectives in the wake of turmoil
in the 1960s that saw the demise of the Communist movement and the growing strength of Islamic
institutions. Rooted in the Suharto regime's hostility towards organized Islam, SD INPRES was designed
to foster nation building and to curb religious influence in society (Boland, 1982; Kelabora, 1976). Mass
secular schooling would hasten the transition to a single national curriculum and render Islamic schools
irrelevant. We study how the religious sector adapted and responded to this effort.
    Our analysis identifies short-term effects of the policy on exposed cohorts as well as dynamic, long-
term effects on education markets with varying INPRES school construction in the 1970s. Several novel
data sources allow us to explore, for the first time, how the policy shaped multiple dimensions of school-
ing content. These data include nationally-representative surveys capturing Islamic education as well
as administrative records on the universe of schools with date and location of establishment. The latter
record nearly 220,000 secular and 80,000 Islamic schools. This allows us to characterize the evolution
of demand- and supply-side responses over the ensuing decades. For some schools, we also observe a
breakdown of curriculum hours in 2019, which we use to quantify the religious content of subject matter
and to measure long-run differences in ideological differentiation.


                                                     1
       Perhaps unexpectedly, public school expansion increased overall exposure to Islamic education. In-
tuitively, SD INPRES decreased attendance in primary Islamic day schools (madrasa) in the short run.
However, religious schools absorbed some of the increased demand for secondary schooling that re-
sulted from mass primary schooling. As many as three-quarters of Islamic junior secondary school
students originated in public primary schools. Ultimately, this demand effect increased the likelihood
that INPRES-exposed cohorts would attend an Islamic school throughout their educational years. In
other words, SD INPRES increased not only years of schooling--as identified in prior work--but also
exposure to Islamic education, which was arguably contrary to the regime's objective.
       These school choices were shaped by the Islamic sector response. Overall, Islamic school construc-
tion increased in districts with greater SD INPRES intensity. In the short-run, secondary madrasa entered
to capitalize on growing demand for continued schooling among graduates from INPRES elementary
schools. We observe this strategic entry within very local education markets, below the district level.
Secondary madrasa continued to enter high-INPRES markets differentially over the ensuing decades.
While elementary madrasa did not enter immediately to compete with nearby INPRES schools, they
began to do so systematically around the mid-1980s. A simple Stackelberg competition framework pro-
vides intuition for this more surprising result. Strategic complementarities between the two education
systems led the Islamic sector to increase its supply of schools in response to SD INPRES. As a result, the
state expansion in education markets failed to crowd out Islamic schools.1
       In addition to the quantity response, Islamic schools entering high-INPRES districts after the pro-
gram provided greater curriculum differentiation at the primary and junior secondary level. We measure
differentiation based on classroom hours devoted to Islamic subjects, e.g., Islamic law (fiqh), theology
(aqidah), and ethics (akhlaq), as well as Arabic instruction. The increase in Islamic content comes at the
expense of subjects emphasized in the standard curriculum, including study of the national language
and Pancasila, the secular ideology of the state. Such differentiation may have been welfare-enhancing
to the extent that variation in Islamic content addressed heterogeneous preferences for different types of
schooling. Overall, though, the quantity and ideological responses of the Islamic sector counteracted the
state's efforts to homogenize and secularize education.
       These results open a new window into the celebrated SD INPRES program and show how the ide-
ological effects of mass schooling depend on the response of non-state schools. We establish the plau-
sibility of the parallel trends assumption not only for years of schooling as in Duflo (2001) but also for
religious schooling rates at all instruction levels, and for establishments of new Islamic schools. Al-
though the state may have targeted SD INPRES towards districts with a greater prevalence of Islamic
schools, it did not target on the basis of differential trends in Islamic school construction or religious
schooling rates prior to the 1970s. While these patterns lend themselves to a causal interpretation, we

1
    Several potential mechanisms underlie these strategic complementarities. First, transitions between secular and religious
    schools are common. In the Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS), 31% of students graduating from Islamic primary (at age
    12) attend secular junior secondary between ages 12­15, and 48% of students graduating from Islamic junior secondary at
    age 15 attend secular senior secondary between ages 15­18. Second, many secondary madrasa are built in the same physical
    location as primary madrasa to take advantage of lower costs and increased demand. Third, elementary madrasa may have been
    more attractive than INPRES elementary schools for conservative families that remained reluctant to send their daughters to
    secular schools, especially after the adoption of a headscarf ban in public schools in 1982 (see Section 5.2).


                                                                2
note that the long-run effects capture a complex set of responses that unfold well after the 1970s policy
shock. Like with any difference-in-difference, the farther one moves from the intervention period, the
less compelling the causal inference. Nevertheless, given that mass schooling programs like SD INPRES
occur at critical junctures of development, the dynamics we identify may reflect trajectories that would
not have otherwise emerged absent the program.
       While the state also expanded secondary schools after SD INPRES, it was not able to fully counteract
the Islamic sector's ability to capture new primary school graduates. There are at least two explanations
for this differential response. On the state side, a budgetary shock in the early 1980s due to declining
oil revenue led to major cutbacks in education spending. The regime may also have prioritized primary
school expansion because it believed that indoctrination was best realized at that level. Meanwhile, the
Islamic sector was able to leverage its major charitable institution, known as the waqf, to expand educa-
tional infrastructure. This protected revenue stream, built on private charity, helps Islamic organizations
compete with the state in the education sector across the Muslim world. We show that the Islamic school
supply response was, in fact, stronger in districts with a larger waqf base prior to SD INPRES.2
       Using a combination of electoral, census, and survey data, we further characterize the legacy of SD
INPRES for identity and nation building. Overall, the policy did not shore up support for the Suharto
regime, and it did not increase attachment to standard markers of Indonesian identity. Strikingly, SD
INPRES did not benefit Suharto's political party, Golkar, in the 1977 and 1982 elections, nor after 1987
when affected cohorts began to vote. Instead, Islamic parties, the main opposition, gained in districts
with greater INPRES intensity, consistent with backlash against the secular state. In the long run, school-
age exposure to SD INPRES did not increase support for Pancasila, use of the national language, or
affinity with secular principles. Instead, exposed cohorts report greater attachment to Islam: they are
more likely to be literate in Arabic, a core part of the curriculum in Islamic schools, and also exhibit
greater piety across a range of Islamic practices. Moreover, the patterns of Islamic school choice we
observe among exposed cohorts are passed on to children in the next generation, who are more likely to
inherit the religious identity of their parents.
       Together, these results suggest that the policy fell short of its ideological objectives through a combi-
nation of exposure to religious education and increased transmission of Islamic values. On the supply
side, the increased provision of religious schooling allowed the Islamic sector to attract large numbers of
SD INPRES graduates. On the demand side, the secularization of education prompted some families to
prioritize religious school choice and cultural transmission (Bisin et al., 2020). As a result, mass public
schooling did not bolster national identity or support for the secular state, and it did not decrease reli-
giosity in the long run. At the same time, the greater piety among affected cohorts was not accompanied
by greater support for sharia law. Ultimately, the state failed to curb religious influence in society, but it
may have been more effective at stifling Islamism inside the classroom.
       In this regard, some of our findings stand in contrast to Bazzi et al. (2020) who show that a resource

2
    In practice, the Islamic sector is comprised of schools run by large Islamic foundations or organizations (such as Muhammadiyah
    and Nahdlatul Ulama) as well as independent establishments funded through their own autonomous waqf endowments. We
    do not distinguish between these two types of schools, but note that the existence of large institutional actors implies some
    degree of coordination within the otherwise decentralized Islamic school system.


                                                                  3
windfall for Islamic institutions in the 1960s caused a shift towards Islamism. While waqf endowments
empowered Islamists in the 1960s, they also enabled mainstream Islamic actors to counteract the state's
attempt to secularize education a decade later, and ultimately to strengthen religious identity. The dis-
tinct shifts in piety and religious politics across the two studies have organizational and cultural roots.
In the 1960s, the Islamists, long-repressed by the state, benefitted most from an increase in their re-
source base. By contrast, in the 1970s, moderate organizations like Muhammadiyah and Nahdlatul Ulama,
with their extensive resources and long history of providing Islamic education, were best positioned to
capitalize on the growing demand for secondary education that resulted from mass primary schooling.
Moreover, unlike the 1960s land reform that targeted agrarian elites, mass secular education challenged
religious identity and values for society at large. Many families invested in preserving their religious
identity by choosing religious schools and by transmitting religious values to their children.
       Across the two studies, the resources and legal protections available to Islamic institutions may have
proven decisive in their resilience against the secularization of society. Historically, religious institutions
in Europe often did not benefit from such protections. The same regimes that enforced sweeping secular-
ization reforms in education were also careful to strip the Church of its physical assets. In contrast to the
Muslim world, this may have contributed to the relative demise of religious organizations in education
and other markets.

Related Literature. There is growing evidence on the crucial role of education policy in nation building.3
Some studies show that education fosters civic engagement (Dee, 2004; Larreguy and Marshall, 2017).
Many show that education weakens religiosity (e.g., Glaeser and Sacerdote, 2008; Hungerman, 2014;
Mocan and Pogorelova, 2017), while others show that mass schooling led to the decline of church atten-
dance in historical Germany (Becker et al., 2017) and to lower piety in contemporary Turkey (Gulesci
and Meyersson, 2016). Our paper is among the first to link mass schooling to greater religiosity, at the
expense of secular nation-building objectives.
       Our key innovation lies in understanding how the state's historical competitor in education
provision--religious organizations--responded to mass schooling. Two recent studies explore the ef-
fects of education reforms in France and Turkey. Squicciarini (2020) shows how the Catholic Church,
through investments in religious schools, slowed the diffusion of technical knowledge in 19th century
France. Sakalli (2019) shows that religious families in Turkey pushed back against state efforts at secular-
ization by removing their children from public schools. In contrast, we investigate competition between
Islam and the state after one of the largest school expansion programs ever implemented. Ultimately,
the Islamic sector response contributed to the program's limited impacts on nation building.
       Prior work on SD INPRES has not explored the Islamic sector response or the program's nation-
building consequences. Recent work by Akresh et al. (2018) and Mazumder et al. (2019) identify the
long-term and intergenerational effects on similar outcomes as Duflo (2001), while Ashraf et al. (2020)
show that the policy had large effects on education for women from ethnic groups with a bride price
3
    Alesina et al. (2019) describe the experiences of European states and provide a model formalizing the role of mass schooling.
    Cantoni et al. (2017) study how a curriculum reform affected political attitudes in China. Bandiera et al. (2019) link the rise of
    public schooling to immigration in the U.S. Other related work can be found across the social sciences with leading examples
    in political science (Ansell and Lindvall, 2013; Paglayan, 2017, 2018) and sociology (Meyer et al., 1979).


                                                                   4
tradition. Martinez-Bravo (2017), Roth and Sumarto (2015), and Rohner and Saia (2019) study the im-
pacts on governance, intergroup tolerance, and conflict, respectively. While these studies also show how
education affects political economy outcomes, we explore how religion and politics shape educational
outcomes and, in turn, the long-term consequences of mass schooling. Our findings offer insight into
the general equilibrium effects of education policy in societies with a strong religious schooling sector.
With the benefit of new data, we show how the endogenous response of the Islamic sector works against
the homogenizing effects of mass schooling.
       These insights also advance the literature on religious schooling and its consequences for religious
cultural transmission. The education literature in the U.S. has explored the returns to Catholic schooling
(Altonji et al., 2005; Neal, 1997). Andrabi et al. (2006) and Berman and Stepanyan (2004) provide descrip-
tive background on Islamic schooling in Pakistan and a range of Muslim countries, respectively. Few
studies in this literature distinguish between private and religious schools, which often pursue distinct
ideological objectives. In the tradition of Bisin and Verdier (2000, 2001), many argue that parents make
school choices so as to influence the horizontal or "oblique" transmission of cultural values. For exam-
ple, Cohen-Zada (2006) models religious school choice as a function of religious group shares in society.
Carvalho and Koyama (2016) describe how historically marginalized communities may underinvest in
education as a form of cultural resistance. We show that parents responded to a secular education policy
by increasing the scope for religious cultural transmission through their choice of religious schools.


2       Background: Islam and Education in Indonesia
Indonesia's longstanding dual education system reflects the enduring role of religious schools in a coun-
try home to more than 225 million Muslims.4 This section provides background on religious schools,
education policy and the SD INPRES program, school curricula, and education markets.


2.1      Typology of Islamic Schools

Indonesia's education system is comprised of secular and religious schools. Secular education is pro-
vided by public as well as private schools--76% of secular schools are public, but 90% are at the primary
level and only 50% at the senior secondary level. Secular schools fall under the regulatory authority of
the Ministry of Education and Culture (Kemdikbud or MEC) since the 1970s (see Section 2.2). Parallel to
secular schools, there are two types of Islamic schools--madrasa and pesantren--that played a major role
in the transmission of human capital and culture for much of Indonesian history.
       Madrasa are day schools that use pedagogical methods similar to secular schools but offer substan-
tially more religious content in their curriculum (see Section 2.4). There is an exact correspondence
between education levels in the madrasa system and the secular system. Elementary madrasa (Madrasah
Ibtidaiyah or MI) correspond to public elementary schools (Sekolah Dasar or SD), while junior secondary
madrasa (Madrasah Tsanawiyah or MTs) and senior secondary madrasa (Madrasah Aliyah or MA) are the
Islamic counterparts to junior (Sekolah Menengah Pertama or SMP) and senior (Sekolah Menengah Atas
4
    Nearly ninety percent of Indonesians are Muslim with Christians being the largest minority religion.


                                                                 5
or SMA) secondary schools, respectively. Outside this nomenclature, other schools known as Madrasa
Diniyah, often operating as afternoon schools (akin to Bible study), exclusively teach Islamic subjects.
      Pesantren are boarding schools devoted to the study of Islam. Similar to Christian seminaries, many
pesantren are geared towards producing religious scholars, though they typically offer instruction across
multiple levels of education beginning as young as age 6. Compared to madrasa, pesantren tend to have
more religious instruction, less regulatory oversight, and a more politically active orientation.
      The vast majority of Islamic schools are privately run. This includes all pesantren and 92% of madrasa
in 2019. The small number of state-run madrasa largely originate out of a central government initiative
in the late 1950s to take over Islamic schools run by provincial governments. In 1967, the regime invited
all private madrasa to become state-run and gain access to additional funding. This effort fell flat as most
Islamic schools opted to remain private. The Islamic sector's strong desire to maintain independence is
at the heart of Indonesia's dual education system.


2.2     SD INPRES and the Origins of the Dual System

The literature provides rich background on the SD INPRES program. Here, we provide additional details
on the historical context of state efforts to confront Islamic schools.

Origins of the Dual System. At independence in 1945, amidst a wider debate about the place of Islam
in Indonesia's constitution, the state established a secular education system. Religious schools were
placed under the purview of the Ministry of Religious Affairs (Kemenag or MORA), which sought to
extend its influence over madrasa (Kelabora, 1976). For example, in 1958 a major reform effort failed to
limit religious instruction time to 21­28% of study hours. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, "the strong
commitment of the Muslim community to having their own education system . . . made it impossible for
the government to replace Islamic schools with non-religious schools" (Zuhdi, 2006, p. 75).
      In the early years of Suharto's New Order regime, nation building became a central priority. At
first, Islamic leaders were associated with this effort, having helped defeat Communist forces during the
political upheaval of the mid-1960s. As testament to this alliance, the government made 2­4 hours of
mandatory religious instruction in public schools in 1967. However, the regime stance towards Islamic
education rapidly changed as it embraced an overarching policy of suppressing political Islam (Boland,
1982). This manifested in the decision to force four existing Islamic political organizations into the single
umbrella United Development Party (Partai Persatuan Pembangunan or PPP) in 1973. Less than a decade
later, the government adopted a ban on religious veiling inside public schools (see Section 5.2).

Sekolah Dasar (SD) INPRES. It is in this context that the government launched SD INPRES. Equipped
with windfall oil revenues from the early 1970s, the Suharto regime prioritized development spending.
This included a large allocation for primary school construction to meet the new compulsory require-
ment introduced in 1973. The Presidential Instruction No. 10/1973 and subsequent yearly decrees spec-
ified the funding allocated to each district as a function of the child population not enrolled in school.
Each school package funded the construction of a primary school for grades 1­6 with six classrooms.
In total, up to 61,000 schools were constructed between 1973­80 under the program, with each district

                                                      6
receiving anywhere between 16 and 824 new elementary (SD) schools.5 The school expansion program
was accompanied by mass hires of teachers and the removal of primary school fees in 1977.
      The expansion of the state school system entailed both developmental and political objectives. SD
INPRES aimed at secularizing and homogenizing primary education. Civic education was to supplant
certain Islamic subjects, while instruction was to take place in the national language, Bahasa Indonesia,
rather than the local ethnic languages or Arabic.6 The goal was to build a citizenry steeped in the in-
clusive Pancasila ideology and invested in the national identity. A World Bank (1989) report notes that
". . . public education was viewed by the Government as a key medium for promoting national unity and
national values--first, through instruction in Pancasila, and next through instruction in the national lan-
guage, Bahasa Indonesia" (p. 14), and that "[i]n so large and dispersed a country . . . policymakers have
consistently looked to neighborhood primary schools as vehicles for national integration" (p. 35).
      Parallel to the school expansion program, a 1972 decree stipulated that all formal education must
be administered by the Ministry of Education. In the context of the regime's growing hostility towards
political Islam, this was interpreted as an attack on the status and independence of Islamic schools:

        "While there was no clear statement concerning the status of the Islamic schools . . . Muslim leaders
        interpreted that the Presidential Decree was intended, among other things, to weaken the status of the
        Islamic educational institutions. Since the decree did not specifically clarify the status of Islamic edu-
        cational institutions, they assumed that the government was trying to eliminate these latter through
        the application of a so-called pendidikan satu atap ("single roof education") policy." (Zuhdi, 2006, p.89)

      The reform was strongly opposed by Muslim leaders and ultimately abandoned as part of a com-
promise between the MEC and MORA. In 1975, the government recognized the special status of Islamic
education, allowing madrasa to remain under MORA authority. Subsequent reforms in 1984 and 1989
provided further recognition to Islamic school graduates on par with their secular school counterparts.
Ultimately, though, the reform left the dual system in place: as of writing, Islamic schools remain under
the MORA, which monitors quality and curriculum.


2.3     Curriculum Differences Between Secular and Islamic Schools

Islamic schools teach a range of religious subjects that are not covered in secular schools. There are five
core subjects: Islamic law (fiqh), Islamic doctrine and ethics (aqidah and akhlaq), Qur'an and traditions of
Prophet Muhammad (hadith), Arabic language, and history of the Prophets (qisa al-anbiya). Zuhdi (2006)
provides examples of curriculum timetables in elementary madrasa, pesantren, and public schools in the
1950s. Grade 6 students in the latter spent a total of 2 hours per week in religious education, whereas
those in Islamic schools spent anywhere from 25 to 40 percent of instruction time on religious subjects.


5
  The Presidential Decrees for 1973­74 (INPRES 10/1973 and 6/1974), 1975­76 (6/1975 and 3/1976), 1977­78 (3/1977 and
  6/1978) and 1979­80 (12/1979 and 6/1980) authorized grants for 6,000, 10,000, 15,000, and 14,000 new schools, respectively.
  The total of these appears closer to the figure of 45,874 INPRES schools appearing in 1980 village-level administrative data
  known as Podes. In Tables A.6 and A.7, we show that the program's impacts on years of schooling and religious schooling are
  robust to using this alternative measure of INPRES intensity (as in Martinez-Bravo, 2017).
6
  Bahasa Indonesia is based on the minority ethnic language of Malay, which was spoken by only 5 percent of the country when
  it was chosen as the national language by leaders of the independence movement in 1928.


                                                              7
       These sharp patterns of curriculum differentiation can be seen in contemporary data. Secular public
schools largely adhere to 2 hours of religious instruction per week. Meanwhile, data described in Section
3 show that madrasa devote 26% of instruction hours to religious content on average with more hours
at higher grade levels. There is considerable variation across madrasa (standard deviation of 6%) but a
roughly equal breakdown in hours across the five subjects above, including Arabic. At the same time,
only 5% of instruction is devoted to Pancasila and Civic Education and an additional 5% to the study
of Indonesian language and literature. This large gap between hours devoted to Islamic content versus
civics and the national language distinguishes student experiences in Islamic versus secular schools.


2.4      Education Markets and Religious School Choice

Before introducing our data, we make three remarks on education markets and the scope for school
choice. First, Islamic schools comprise a majority of all private schools (more than 60% nationally in
2019). Moreover, in many local markets, private school choice is tantamount to Islamic school choice.
While secular private schools are important in some areas, they provide a very different learning expe-
rience from their religious private counterparts under the MORA.
       Second, at the local level, one finds considerable scope for religious versus secular school choice. For
primary school, the village--home to 2,500­3,500 people on average--is the relevant education market.
Here, we see, in 1990 for example, that 95% of villages with an elementary madrasa also have an elemen-
tary secular school. For secondary school, the education market often spans multiple villages, but even
at this level, one finds that 43% of villages with an Islamic middle school also have a secular middle
school.7 Given these patterns of local competition, it is not surprising that Islamic and secular school
students report traveling similar distances to school in survey data from 2015 (Susenas).
       Third, while Islamic and state schools may differentiate on cost as well, such differentiation appears
limited. We can only see this in contemporary data (Susenas 2015), which shows average annual costs,
at the primary level, of roughly USD 20 for Islamic schools and USD 21 for state schools. At the middle
school level, annual costs average USD 34 for state schools and USD 29 for madrasa. These figures suggest
ample scope for competition across secular and religious schools along various margins besides cost.


3       Data
We draw upon several new data sources that allow for the first systematic analysis of how SD INPRES
affected education markets over the short- and long-run. We combine survey data on Islamic education
with administrative data on Islamic school construction to shed new light on both the demand- and the
supply-side response to the policy. With data on school curriculum, we characterize different margins
of adjustment to mass schooling efforts by the state. Additional data sources help understand how the
policy shaped identity and nation building over the long run.

Survey Data on Schooling. We measure Islamic school attendance and other measures of education
7
    These figures are based on contemporaneous Podes administrative data, described in the following section.


                                                                8
status using six rounds of the National Socioeconomic Survey (Susenas), collected between 2012­2018.
The Supas 1995 intercensal survey data used by Duflo (2001) did not include information on Islamic
education. While Susenas has reported breakdowns of madrasa and secular education since the late 1990s,
the 2012 round was the first to include information on birthplace, which is needed to identify childhood
exposure to SD INPRES. Additionally, we can link (co-resident) children's schooling to their parents'
exposure to SD INPRES in the 1970s.
   One limitation of Susenas is that it only records the type (Islamic vs. secular) of school for the final
level of attainment and hence misses potentially informative patterns of switching across Islamic and
secular schools throughout one's educational years. We revisit this issue in Section 5, where we also
use the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS) for validation purposes. The IFLS is a rich longitudinal
survey spanning 1993 to 2014, and, unlike Susenas, it records the type of schooling for each year of
education. However, the IFLS is limited in geographic scope, which often frustrates analyses of policies
with district-level variation like SD INPRES. Table 1 reports estimates of Islamic schooling in the IFLS,
Susenas, and administrative records. Together, these sources point to a sizable Islamic education sector.

School Registries. We use newly compiled administrative data from MORA comprising the universe
of madrasa and pesantren (see Appendix C for details). In total, there are 52,398 formal madrasa, 82,871
madrasa diniyah (informal Qur'an study schools), and 25,938 pesantren active in 2019 with establishment
dates spanning more than 100 years. Roughly one-third of Islamic school students are enrolled in pe-
santren and two-thirds in madrasa, according to enrollment records (column 5 of Table 1). Madrasa are
further subdivided into three levels of instruction: elementary or MI (25,533 schools), junior secondary
or MTs (18,101 schools), and senior secondary or MA (8,764 schools). We rely on an analogous registry
of secular schools maintained by the MEC. These data comprise 219,145 schools and include date of es-
tablishment, grade level, and private/public status. We address potential concerns about survival bias
in these registries using a triennial administrative census of villages (known as Podes) beginning in 1980.
   Each of these school registries includes details on the location of establishment. Most of our analysis
focuses on the district because (i) this is the level at which the SD INPRES policy rule varies, and (ii)
analyzing school choice using Susenas is only feasible at this level. However, we also explore Islam­state
competition at the village and subdistrict level when examining the supply-side response to SD INPRES.
   While pesantren may constitute an important part of the Islamic sector response to SD INPRES, they
are more difficult to study than madrasa. The Susenas data do not record pesantren attendance. Nor
does the MORA registry clarify the level at which a given pesantren organizes its instruction; many, in
fact, teach students of all ages under one roof. Moreover, pesantren do not follow the national exams
or provide public information on their course offerings. Nevertheless, it is evident that pesantren are
sharply differentiated from state schools on curriculum and other dimensions of learning.

School Curriculum. We study curriculum using an online registry of schools, called Sistem Informasi
Aplikasi Pendidikan (SIAP). This database includes detailed breakdowns of madrasa curriculum with hour-
by-hour subject timetables each week. While the data cover nearly 20% of madrasa, secular schools do
not yet report to SIAP. The timetables provide a unique window into the learning environment at Islamic


                                                    9
schools. Our main interest lies in time allocated to (i) Islamic subjects, including Arabic language and
literature, (ii) Pancasila/civic education, and (iii) Indonesian language and literature.

Downstream Outcomes.              We explore political impacts beginning with electoral returns for the state
party of the Suharto regime, Golkar, and the Islamic opposition beginning in 1971, the last election prior
to SD INPRES. We examine the ideology of legislative candidates in the 2019 election using text from
online campaign documents. These include appeals to the faith (e.g., Islam, Muslim, umma, sharia) and
references to Pancasila and related Indonesian nation-building concepts.8
      We also construct linguistic proxies for religious and national identity. Susenas 2012­2018 reports
Arabic literacy. The complete-count 2010 Population Census reports whether the national language,
Bahasa Indonesia, is the main language spoken at home. This is distinct from speaking ability: nearly
90% of Indonesians are able to speak the national language, but only 20% use it as the main language
inside the home. We view Indonesian use at home as a measure of national affinity, reflecting greater
attachment to national as opposed to ethnic or religious identity (see Bazzi et al., 2019, for validation).
      Finally, we measure Islamic piety and preferences using a nationally-representative survey con-
ducted in 2008 by Pepinsky et al. (2018), who sample 10 individuals from each contemporary district.
The survey captures a host of Islamic practices (e.g., fasting, paying zakat) and political preferences (e.g.,
support for sharia law). It also provides a measure of support for Pancasila.


4     Empirical Strategy
This section elaborates our approach to identifying the individual- and school-level responses to SD
INPRES. We defer identification checks to the results sections that follow.


4.1     Religious School Attendance and Downstream Outcomes

First, we identify effects of the SD INPRES school expansion program on religious schooling using the
standard difference-in-differences specification from Duflo (2001):

                        yijt =  +  (IN P RESj × youngit ) + (Xj t )  + µj + t + ijt ,                                        (1)

where i, j , t denote individual, district of birth, and year of birth; IN P RESj measures elementary public
schools constructed per 1,000 children from 1973 to 1978; youngit = 1 for individuals aged 2­6 in 1974; µj
and t are district and cohort fixed effects, respectively; and Xj t captures cohort effects interacted with
the district's children population, school enrollment, and exposure to a large governmental water and
sanitation program, all in 1971.9 Like Duflo (2001), we compare individuals aged 2­6 (exposed cohorts)

8
  The following are examples of nation-building appeals in candidate platforms: "[ensuring the] life of the democratic and just
  nation according to Pancasila and the 1945 constitution," and "defending and maintaining Pancasila ideology and the existence
  of the unity of the Republic of Indonesia". See Appendix C for further details.
9
  Our core sample comprises 275 districts based on boundaries at the time of SD INPRES in the 1970s. In specifications with
  controls for the water and sanitation program, Duflo (2001) reports 283 districts based on boundaries as of 1995, by which time
  8 districts from the 1970s had split in two.


                                                               10
with those aged 12­17 (comparison cohorts) in 1974. This specification identifies short-term effects for
directly exposed cohorts. In a second specification, we compare cohorts aged 6 or less (exposed) with
cohorts aged 12 or more in 1974 (comparison). This captures longer-term effects, inclusive of the market
response to SD INPRES. In both specifications, we exclude partially exposed cohorts, aged 7­11 in 1974,
as in Duflo (2001). We also trace out the response over time by estimating cohort-specific  .
      Our interest lies in how SD INPRES shaped Islamic school choice. At the primary level, the expansion
of the public sector should have pushed students away from elementary madrasa, the closest substitute in
the religious sector. That is, we expect a negative effect of INPRES intensity on elementary Islamic school
attendance for exposed cohorts. At the same time, the increase in primary completion rates identified
in prior work could have caused greater demand for secondary schooling. With the state focused on
expanding primary education, secondary Islamic schools would have been well-positioned to capitalize
on this demand shock. For this reason, we expect the policy might have increased secondary Islamic
school attendance. Whether the substitution effect at the primary level outweighs the demand effect at
the secondary level is an empirical question. The answer tells us about the overall net effect of state
school expansion on exposure to Islamic education.
      We also estimate equation (1) for the broader set of downstream outcomes described in the previous
section. These reduced form estimates capture causal effects of SD INPRES on ideology and identity
among exposed cohorts. We defer interpretation of the reduced form in this case to Section 7.


4.2     Supply-Side Responses

To identify supply-side responses to the expansion of the public school system, we estimate:

                     yijt =  +  (IN P RESj × P ost1972t ) + (Xj t )  + µj + t + ijt ,                          (2)

where yijt is a variable defined for type of school i, district j , and year of establishment t; P ost1972it is an
indicator for panel years after 1972; and Xj t includes year dummies interacted with the same district-
level baseline covariates as those in equation (1), namely the district's children population, school en-
rollment, and exposure to a large governmental water and sanitation program in 1971. We also estimate
event-study analogues of equation (2) that replace P ost1972 with semi-decade dummies.
      We first estimate equation (2) on a balanced district­year panel, using Islamic school entry as the de-
pendent variable. Here, yijt denotes the number of new schools of type i--elementary, junior secondary,
and senior secondary madrasa as well as pesantren and madrasa diniyah--created per district­year and per
1,000 children in 1971. This specification identifies the change in the number of Islamic school establish-
ments in districts with greater INPRES intensity relative to other districts after the program began.
      In a separate analysis, we explore Islamic school entry profiles in response to SD INPRES at the
village level. We use a multinomial logit specification where the outcomes capture combinations of
madrasa entry at the primary and secondary level. Compared to our main district-level analysis, this
specification measures competition within more localized education markets. This village-level analysis
is more descriptive in nature as the within-district variation in SD INPRES may reflect endogenous


                                                       11
targeting on the part of district governments.
       We also estimate competitive responses to SD INPRES in terms of curriculum differentiation. In this
case, we estimate equation (2) on an unbalanced district-year panel (see Section 6.2). We are interested
in the ideological content of the curriculum as reflected in study hours across subjects (e.g., Islam versus
Pancasila, Indonesian versus Arabic). Under the assumption that curriculum remains stable within a
given school over time, this specification identifies changes in the ideological leaning of schools estab-
lished in districts with greater INPRES intensity after the program began.


5       Effects on Religious Schooling
This section presents our first set of results pertaining to religious school choice.


5.1       Religious Schooling by Level

Table 2 reports the effects of SD INPRES on binary indicators of madrasa attendance. The outcomes
in panel (a) equal one if the respondent's highest level of education is elementary Islamic (columns 1­
2), junior secondary Islamic (columns 3­4), or senior secondary Islamic (columns 5­6). One concern
with such measures is that the share of respondents completing Islamic education could be increasing
simply because overall education levels are increasing after SD INPRES. Thus, in panel (b), we look at
a different measure equal to one if the respondent completed Islamic elementary, junior secondary, or
senior secondary, conditional on completing exactly the relevant years of education for each level (6
years for elementary, 9 for junior secondary, and 12 for senior secondary). These measures capture the
share of Islamic education at each instruction level. While such conditioning may be endogenous, these
alternative measures alleviate concerns that our results in panel (a) are driven by the general increase in
education levels. Across panels, and in all results that follow, we cluster standard errors at the historic
1970s district level of SD INPRES policy variation.
       At the elementary level, the policy pulled students away from madrasa and pushed them towards
the state system. Among cohorts aged 2­6 in 1974, INPRES intensity reduces the likelihood of Islamic
primary attendance by approximately 10% (column 1). This substitution effect becomes smaller in mag-
nitude for the long-run cohort comparison (column 2). Similar patterns arise for the conditional measure
in panel (b). The weaker substitution effect in column 2 may be due to an increase in Islamic school con-
struction over the medium to long run, a mechanism explored in Section 6.10
       At the secondary level, Islamic schools absorbed some of the increased demand for post-primary
education. This effect is apparent both in the short term (columns 3 and 5) and the long term (columns
4 and 6). However, the longer-term effect is more than twice as large in magnitude, which again points
to a potential supply-side response by the Islamic sector. The auxiliary IFLS data provides a striking


10
     Examples of this can be found in the Indonesian-language literature, e.g., Darmaningtyas (2004) notes: ". . . the tension be-
     tween government and the clerics that had built schools in the form of pesantren persisted during the entire New Order Era.
     As a result, many SD INPRES [primary schools] in Madura [a region of East Java] have few students, because communities
     prefer schools built by religious leaders."


                                                                 12
summary statistic highlighting the importance of the demand channel: 78% of those that attended Is-
lamic secondary schools did so after completing secular primary schools. The estimates in columns 3­6
suggest that SD INPRES may have catalyzed this type of schooling trajectory and ultimately increased
exposure to Islamic education.
       These results are borne out with less parametric structure in Figure 1. The graphs show the fraction of
Susenas respondents in each cohort reporting elementary (panel a), junior secondary (panel b), or senior
secondary (panel c) Islamic school as their highest level of education, separately for high-INPRES and
low-INPRES districts. Appendix Figure A.1 reports the corresponding graphs with Islamic education
defined conditional on completing the relevant years of schooling. These figures show the same key
patterns as Table 2. High-INPRES districts experience a short-run substitution away from elementary
Islamic schools and a long-run increase in the completion of secondary Islamic schooling. Both patterns
begin to materialize for those born after 1968, the first cohort fully exposed to SD INPRES.


5.2       More (Islamic) Schooling

SD INPRES increased not only total years of education but also net exposure to Islamic education. Col-
umn 1 of Table 3 (panel a) shows that each primary school constructed per 1,000 children increased years
of schooling by around 0.14 years. The corresponding male-specific estimate of 0.17 years in Appendix
Table A.3 lies between the range of estimated effects for men in Duflo (2001)--0.12 to 0.19--based on
the intercensal survey (Supas) from 1995. The effect size roughly doubles when expanding the sample to
include cohorts younger and older than the narrow-exposure window in the baseline (column 2).
       Ultimately, the increase in secondary Islamic schooling exceeds the substitution effect towards secu-
lar schools at the primary level. In the short-run, each additional INPRES school increased the likelihood
of Islamic schooling by 5% (column 3), and this grows by a factor of 4 over the long run (column 4). The
same holds for the likelihood of any Islamic schooling conditional on completing the relevant years of
education as in panel (b) of Table 2. While close to zero in the short run (column 5), the effect of SD
INPRES is positive and significant in the long run (column 6). Together, the estimates in columns 3­6 of
Table 3 (panel a) are consistent with those in panel (d) of Figure 1: high-INPRES districts experience a
diverging trend in the share of students completing any Islamic education.
       Panel (b) of Table 3 sheds further light on the counterfactual schooling outcomes, showing that SD
INPRES increased Islamic education by inducing certain types of families to pursue additional schooling
for their children. Some families would have sent their children to Islamic school in the absence of the
policy. Others may have enrolled their children precisely because of the changes in schooling options
brought by INPRES. We explore this latter, complier population by instrumenting for years of schooling
using the difference-in-difference term in equation (1).11 This identifies the local average treatment effect
of INPRES on Islamic schooling among compliers, namely children who received additional schooling as
a result of the policy. The positive IV estimates in columns 3­6 of panel (b) show that children induced
by SD INPRES to attain greater schooling were also more likely to receive an Islamic education. This
effect is driven by the increase in secondary Islamic education, since INPRES exposure increases junior
11
     This is the same instrumentation strategy that Duflo (2001) uses to study the Mincerian returns to years of schooling.


                                                                 13
and senior secondary Islamic education but decreases elementary Islamic education in the reduced form
(see Table 2). In other words, INPRES increased exposure to Islamic education by enabling children who
otherwise would not have reached junior secondary school to reach this higher level of education.

The Gender Dimension. Overall, SD INPRES increased exposure to Islamic education among both men
and women. The effects may even be slightly larger for women, at least over the long run (see Appendix
Table A.2).12 Importantly, the significant effects on Islamic schooling for both genders increase the scope
for intergenerational transmission within the family--a hypothesis we explore in Section 7.4.
     Religious school choice among women is of particular interest. In 1982, the Suharto regime imposed
a ban on the Islamic veil (hijab) in public schools. A government decree standardized the use of school
uniforms in the country, which in effect amounted to a crackdown on veiling (Jo, 2020; Shofia, 2020).
Women wishing to wear a headscarf would have faced a choice between transferring to an Islamic school
or dropping out of school. The substitution effect in columns 1­2 of Table 2 could have been offset by
this headscarf ban, specifically for female students.
     We explore this hypothesis in Appendix Table A.4, where we interact equation (1) with exposure to
the headscarf ban.13 Specifically, INPRES-exposed women who would have been too young to complete
their primary education before the ban may have transferred to an Islamic school after 1982. The top
row in Appendix Table A.4 shows women exposed to the ban were indeed more likely to complete
an Islamic elementary education relative to other cohorts exposed to SD INPRES. This holds whether
we look at the unconditional likelihood of completing an Islamic primary education (columns 1­2) or
the conditional measure (columns 3­4). This result supports the view that Islamic schools contribute to
address heterogeneous preferences--potentially cutting across genders--for different types of schooling.

Attending vs. Completing Islamic Education.                    One potential concern with these results is the low
share of individuals with Islamic schooling reported in the Susenas data. Indeed, Table 1 shows that
exposure to Islamic schooling is considerably higher in other sources. In the IFLS, Islamic education
rates range from 11% in primary to 23% in junior secondary (20% across all levels, and 25% among
enrolled cohorts). Administrative enrollment records for 2019 similarly show attendance rates ranging
from 13% in primary to 23% in junior secondary (21% overall).
     There are two reasons why the Susenas data may lead us to underestimate the effects of SD INPRES
on Islamic school exposure. First, Susenas indicates whether the final year of education took place in a
madrasa. If some of those attending secular secondary schools attended elementary madrasa, the Suse-
nas measures would be understated.14 Second, Susenas does not allow respondents to indicate pesantren
12
   These estimates are consistent with different parental preferences over the religious content of schooling for boys and girls.
   This resonates with Meyersson (2014) who finds that Islamist mayors increased educational achievement among women
   in Turkey. In our context, the smaller short-run effect on years of schooling for women (see Appendix Table A.3) suggests
   parents may have been initially more reluctant to send their daughters to the newly created public schools. Madrasa would
   then have provided a more acceptable alternative for girls' education in these families.
13
   The regression reported in Appendix Table A.4 interacts INPRES intensity and the indicator for treated cohorts (aged 2-6 in
   1974) with a gender dummy and a dummy for individuals aged less than 12 in 1982. All the relevant two-way and three-way
   interactions are included in the regression but their output suppressed.
14
   The IFLS suggests that these switcher populations could be sizable: among those continuing after Islamic primary school,
   31% attend secular junior secondary schools, and among those continuing after Islamic junior secondary school, 48% attend


                                                               14
attendance. The large supply response among pesantren that we identify below suggests that this popu-
lation could be important.
      As a validation exercise in Appendix Table A.5, we estimate the effects of SD INPRES on years of
Islamic education among Muslim respondents in the IFLS. Unlike Susenas, the IFLS reports the type
of education completed at every instruction level and also reports pesantren attendance. Overall, SD
INPRES decreased the likelihood to have completed an Islamic elementary education (columns 1­2)
as well as total years of Islamic elementary education (columns 7­8). On the other hand, the policy
increased attendance rates in Islamic secondary schools at the junior and the senior level (columns 3­6)
and increased years of secondary Islamic education overall (columns 9­10). Reassuringly, these patterns
mirror those obtained using the Susenas data.


5.3     Identification Checks

Our core results on school choice are robust to key concerns about causal inference. First, SD INPRES
was not systematically allocated towards districts with different preexisting trends in Islamic schooling.
Figure 2 demonstrates the absence of pre-trends in primary and secondary Islamic school attainment,
respectively. These graphs estimate cohort-specific  in equation (1), coloring the exposed and control
cohorts in gray and light gray, respectively, with the partially exposed cohorts in white. Figures 2 (a)
and (c) show the short-run time-path, and (b) and (d) correspond to the long-run specification. Figure 3
presents analogous patterns for total years of schooling and any Islamic education. Meanwhile, Figure
4, discussed below, presents complementary evidence against pre-trends in Islamic school construction.
      This is not to imply that the regime was entirely blind to regional variation in the size of the Islamic
education sector. In fact, Appendix Table A.1 shows that the government allocated proportionally more
INPRES schools to districts with a greater prevalence of Islamic schools as of 1972.15 What the gov-
ernment did not do at the time was strategically target districts where the Islamic education sector was
rapidly expanding. The lack of pre-trends in Figures 2­4 is consistent with this interpretation.


5.4     Why the Supply-Side Matters

In sum, SD INPRES caused an increase in Islamic education that was fueled by secondary Islamic
schools' absorption of new primary school graduates. Duflo (2004) conjectures that "the program af-
fected mostly primary school completion, whereas omitted factors would have affected other levels of
schooling." We show in the following section that a crucial omitted factor lies in the supply response of
the Islamic education sector. Here, we present motivating evidence.
      Appendix Table A.8 regresses outcomes from Tables 2 and 3 on school construction from 1973 to
1978. Odd-numbered columns replicate the baseline specification. Even-numbered columns include
analogous interactions of the young cohort indicator with state secondary, Islamic primary, and Islamic

   secular senior secondary schools. Appendix Figure A.4 further illustrates this phenomenon using repeated cohorts from
   Susenas, e.g., 12% of respondents born in 1998 attended a madrasa in 2012, but only 7% of the same cohort reported having
   completed Islamic schooling in 2018.
15
   This level difference is evident at the individual level in Figure 1 for cohorts born before 1968.


                                                            15
secondary schools constructed over the same period. These endogenous supply measures exhibit in-
formative correlations with schooling outcomes. The likelihood of completing any secondary schooling
strongly correlates with the entry of state and Islamic secondary schools, but not with new primary
schools (column 4). Any effect of SD INPRES on post-primary completion rates may have come from
additional, correlated responses by the state and the Islamic sector to the initial policy shock. Moreover,
Islamic secondary school completion is shaped not only by INPRES primary school entry but also by
entry of Islamic primary and secondary schools (column 6). It is these entry decisions that underlie the
LATE in Table 3: greater years of schooling came with greater exposure to Islamic education.


6       Supply-Side Responses
To better understand the effects of SD INPRES on school choice, we now explore how the program
shaped supply-side dynamics in education markets.16 The Islamic sector responded to the primary
school construction boom in two ways. First, Islamic society, equipped with charitable endowments
(waqf ), expanded its educational presence in districts with greater SD INPRES intensity--starting with
junior secondary schools, and ultimately at all levels of schooling. Second, Islamic schools entering high-
INPRES districts after the policy provide a greater volume of Islamic content, and a smaller volume of
civic education and instruction in the national language. Together, these results show how a landmark
mass schooling effort transformed education markets over the ensuing decades.


6.1      More Islamic Schools

This section examines the Islamic sector's response along the extensive margin: construction of new
schools. The outcomes of interest include the number of new elementary, junior secondary, and senior
secondary madrasa establishments. We also look at new madrasa diniyah and pesantren, which are Islamic
afternoon schools and boarding schools, respectively. The numbers of schools of each type created per
district-year are divided by the 1971 children population, analogous to the SD INPRES intensity measure.
       In Table 4, panel (a) shows greater entry of Islamic schools in high-INPRES districts: elementary
(column 1), junior secondary (column 2), and senior secondary madrasa (column 3), as well as diniyah
(column 4) and pesantren (column 5). One additional INPRES school per 1,000 children is associated
with 4 more Islamic elementary and junior secondary schools per year.
       Tracing out these effects over time, we uncover a dynamic Islamic sector response to the state's pri-
mary school expansion. Figure 4 estimates the effects of SD INPRES by semi-decade using an event-
study approach. High-INPRES districts experience a steadily diverging trend in entry of new secondary
madrasa and pesantren (Figure 4, panels b­d). A similar pattern holds for elementary madrasa (panel a).
Figure 4(f) shows that Islamic school entry outpaced additional state school entry from the 1980s onward
in these high-INPRES districts. This was fueled by private madrasa (see Appendix Figure A.2).

16
     In what follows, while often referring to the "supply response", we acknowledge that the long-run expansion of Islamic
     education in high-INPRES regions may well be due to changes in demand among the originally-exposed cohorts as they raise
     children of their own, as seen in Section 7.4.


                                                              16
     Several robustness checks point to a causal interpretation of the Islamic sector response. First, note
the lack of pre-trends in Islamic school construction in Figure 4, mirroring the patterns in Islamic school
completion rates in Figure 2. Second, Appendix Figure A.3 suggests that the private Islamic sector's
response is distinct from other private sector responses.17 Some private secular schools enter in response
to SD INPRES, but such entry is most concentrated at the primary level and follows a different (and more
muted) post-1970s trajectory than the Islamic sector. Third, the patterns are unlikely to be an artifact of
survivor bias in the 2019 registry of Islamic schools. Appendix Table A.10 shows that the increase in
Islamic school entry after the 1970s can be seen in historical administrative data (from Podes 1980, 1983,
1990, 1993) that is not subject to the attrition biases inherent to contemporary administrative registries.18

Local Competition. Table 5 explores the strategic Islamic sector response within local education mar-
kets. Islamic organizations may respond locally to SD INPRES entry in their village or in neighboring
ones within a subdistrict. Using a multinomial logit formulation, we consider four distinct competition
profiles: no entry, elementary madrasa entry, junior secondary madrasa entry, and both elementary and
junior secondary madrasa entry.19 We report marginal effects with no entry being the reference category.
     Table 5 suggests distinct short- and medium-run supply responses by the Islamic sector. In the short
run, new junior secondary madrasa capitalized on demand for continued education among SD INPRES
graduates. Villages with SD INPRES entry between 1973 and 1978 are 50% more likely to have built
only an Islamic junior secondary school by 1983 (column 2, panel a). SD INPRES entry in nearby vil-
lages within the same subdistrict is associated with greater junior secondary madrasa entry in one's own
village: moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of subdistrict saturation (excluding one's own vil-
lage) shifts such entry by nearly 30%. This is consistent with secondary schools serving students from
more than one village. At the same time, there is no differential elementary madrasa entry (columns 1
and 3, panel a). In other words, the Islamic sector focused its short-run efforts on absorbing some of the
growing demand for post-primary education.
     By contrast, in the remaining years of the Suharto era, the Islamic sector not only built more junior
secondary schools but also began to compete locally at the primary level. This medium-run response
can be seen in panel (b) of Table 5, which looks at Islamic school entry from 1984 to 1998. SD INPRES
construction in the 1970s is associated with an increase in the likelihood of elementary madrasa construc-
tion in the 1980s and 1990s within the same village (column 2). More junior secondary madrasa enter in
villages with SD INPRES schools (column 3), and also do so in tandem with elementary madrasa (column
4). These findings corroborate the event-study path in Figure 4.
     While suggestive of a causal competitive response, the results in Table 5 should be interpreted more
descriptively than our district-level results. The plausibly exogenous policy variation lies at the district
level where school construction funds were allocated based on the school-age population and enrollment
rate. Within district, these funds may be allocated endogenously across villages and subdistricts. One
concern might be that district officials with particular secularizing ambition targeted SD INPRES schools

17
   There are 41,969 private non-Islamic schools under MEC authority in 2019 (see Appendix C).
18
   The first round of Podes was in 1976, but this data does not distinguish Islamic schools.
19
   Similar insights obtain when allowing for all 8 possible combinations across the three grade levels, including senior secondary.


                                                                17
towards villages with Islamic schools (see Appendix Table A.1 for evidence of such targeting at the
national-to-district level). We address this concern in Appendix Table A.9, where the same patterns of
local competition hold when conditioning on Islamic schools being present in the village before 1973.

Interpretation.         Overall, the Islamic sector responded to SD INPRES by building more schools. Ap-
pendix B offers a theoretical foundation for this result. Under basic assumptions about the shape of
demand for schooling, religious and secular education can act as strategic complements (Bulow et al.,
1985). We provide a simple model that generates this prediction. In this setup, the state and the Islamic
sector compete in a Stackelberg game where the former is leader and the latter is follower. An outward
shift in demand for schooling causes the state to increase its supply of schools. This increases the supply
of religious schools since the Islamic sector's best response is upward sloping. In practice, these strategic
complementarities may arise from a variety of mechanisms seen in our setting, including, among others,
transitions in and out of the Islamic schooling system, co-location of primary and secondary madrasa,
and comparative advantage of madrasa in providing female education in conservative communities.

Financing New Islamic Schools. These supply results beg the question of how the Islamic sector fi-
nanced such an educational expansion? For decades, private Islamic organizations had financed schools
through the use of inalienable waqf land endowments. In 1963, 88% of all private elementary madrasa
were run by Islamic organizations (Lee, 1995). One of the largest, Muhammadiyah, controlled over 3,000
hectares of waqf property supporting more than 4,300 madrasa by 2004 (Jahar, 2005). We show here that
waqf endowments helped fuel the Islamic sector response to SD INPRES.
       Panel (b) of Table 4 interacts the relevant terms in equation (2) with a proxy for waqf land at the
district level in 1972: land endowed in waqf to support mosques. While a small subset of all waqf land,
this measure is the best available proxy in the time period and is likely proportional to total waqf land
in a given locality, which includes waqf land that directly supported religious schools.20 Since waqf land
correlates with the Muslim share in the local population, we also interact the relevant terms in equation
(2) with the share of Muslim individuals among cohorts born by 1972 (observed in the 1976 census).
       Districts with more waqf endowments experience a larger Islamic school supply response to SD IN-
PRES (columns 1­3). One additional km2 of waqf land is associated with 0.5 more elementary madrasa
over the ensuing 25 years. Reassuringly, districts with a larger Muslim share see a larger Islamic school
supply response to SD INPRES. This is distinct from the heterogeneous effect of initial waqf endowments
and perhaps consistent with a backlash against the secularization effort embodied in the policy. Overall,
the capital held in waqf enabled a strong, positive infrastructure response by the Islamic sector.
       Why, though, did Islamic organizations not expand their schooling network prior to INPRES if in-
deed they had the resources to do so? Part of the answer lies in the politics of competition between Islam
and the state. Absent efforts to secularize local education, Islamic leaders might have had weaker incen-
tives to push into new markets or contest existing ones. This is the essence of the simple model described
in Appendix B. It also resonates with the policy context in which the state was not only expanding access


20
     See Bazzi et al. (2020) for a detailed discussion of this measure, which comes from administrative data collected by MORA.


                                                                18
to secular schools but also pushing to secularize Islamic schools (see Section 2.2). As we show next, the
Islamic sector responded to this push not only along an extensive margin but also an ideological one.


6.2     Ideological Differentiation

Table 6 shows that Islamic schools created in high-INPRES districts after 1972 provide greater religious
content and study of Arabic at the expense of civic education and the national language. Here, we
estimate an unbalanced district-level panel where each observation is a mean outcome across all schools
entering a given grade level in a given year.
      Pooling across levels, we find that SD INPRES is associated with an increase in the share of weekly
instruction time devoted to Islamic subjects (panel a, column 1). At both the primary and junior sec-
ondary levels, each additional INPRES school is associated with a 5% increase in Islamic content among
newly created Islamic schools (panel a, columns 2 and 3). At the junior secondary level, part of this
increase in Islamic content is achieved through a reduction in classroom time devoted to Pancasila and
civic education (panel b, column 3). Panels (c) and (d) show similar patterns of substitution for the share
of instruction hours dedicated to Arabic and Bahasa Indonesia, respectively. Each additional INPRES
school is associated with a 6% increase in Arabic instruction at the primary level (panel c, column 2) and
a 5% decrease in Bahasa instruction at the junior secondary level (panel d, column 3).21
      In Appendix Table A.11, we show that the increase in Islamic content and Arabic instruction, as
well as the corresponding decrease in civic education and Bahasa instruction, hold when measuring total
instruction hours. This is important insofar as Islamic schools might have increased total classroom
time to accommodate other material besides religious subjects. Together, Tables 6 and A.11 suggest that
instruction hours dedicated to Islamic content and Arabic crowd out civic education and study of the
national language--two important inputs to the homogenizing function of mass public schooling.
      Note that our difference-in-difference-based interpretation hinges on the stability of school curricula.
That is, we assume that the curriculum observed in 2019 is highly correlated with that observed in a
school's initial year of operation. It is not possible to validate this assumption, but there are reasons to
think that a school's curriculum is closely attached to its ideology, which likely has persistent features
tied to the identity of founders. Moreover, given the legacy of conservative schools' opposition to state
oversight, we suspect that the madrasa included in the SIAP registry are those with less Islamic content
and hence more likely to be compliant with government-recommended curriculum. This could work
against our findings, presuming that such selective reporting is differential in high-INPRES districts.22

Quality. Do these patterns of curriculum differentiation affect the quality of learning in Islamic schools
created in the wake of SD INPRES? The higher volume of instruction dedicated to Islamic content and
21
   Despite these shifts at the primary and junior secondary level, we find different patterns at the senior secondary level where
   SD INPRES is associated with a reduction in Islamic content and an increase in Pancasila and Arabic instruction (panels
   a­c, column 4). This goes against some of the findings elsewhere but may be an artifact of the small number of senior
   secondary schools in SIAP. It also hints at a possible secularization of senior secondary Islamic schools aimed at capturing
   junior secondary graduates intent on going on to university where proficiency in traditional non-Islamic subjects is essential.
22
   We find some evidence against differential reporting. For example, madrasa created after 1972 in high-INPRES districts are
   no more or less likely to report to SIAP, using the baseline supply-side regression specification in equation (2). Nor do we
   observe differential reporting to SIAP by more conservative madrasa--as inferred from Islamist-oriented school names.


                                                               19
Arabic learning comes at the expense of studying standard subjects required to pass national exams.
Appendix Table A.12 shows that students in Islamic schools devoting more classroom time to religious
subjects exhibit weaker performance on standardized math and science tests.
       Our identification strategy does not allow us to disentangle this particular mechanism (or differenti-
ation along a quality margin) from selection on ability. However, in Appendix Table A.13, we show that
Islamic junior secondary schools created after 1972 in high-INPRES districts exhibit lower contemporary
test scores than those created prior to the program (though this is imprecise, see column 2). There is also
a larger test score gap between Islamic and non-Islamic schools in high-INPRES districts among schools
created after 1972 (column 4). These results are consistent with both different sorting on ability as well
as a change in instructional quality across Islamic and non-Islamic schools after SD INPRES.


7       Mass Schooling and Nation Building
Like most mass schooling efforts, Indonesia's entailed significant political and ideological objectives.
This section shows that such ambition may have come up short, frustrated in part by the dynamic
supply-side response of the Islamic education sector and by families' efforts to transmit religious val-
ues to their children in an increasingly secular political environment. We show here that SD INPRES
failed to increase support for the Suharto regime and set in motion a significant shift in religious identity
and preferences that ultimately worked against the state's secular nation-building agenda.
       In what follows, we maintain our focus on the reduced form. This allows for compelling causal in-
ference but requires careful interpretation. In particular, we do not disentangle the direct effect of SD
INPRES exposure from that of the increased Islamic school presence. For example, the policy could have
affected piety through increased exposure to religion in state schools (with their mandatory 2 hours).
While this is possible, the nexus of results below suggests that Islamic school choice likely played a sig-
nificant role in shaping the legacy of SD INPRES. Without such a strong role, it is difficult to explain why
INPRES exposure increased religiosity without simultaneously increasing attachment to the national
identity, or why exposed cohorts were more likely to send their own children to Islamic schools.


7.1       Support for the New Order Regime

In the short run, a major development initiative like SD INPRES could have bolstered electoral support
for Suharto and the New Order. We explore legislative election results during this period (in 1971, 1977,
1982, 1987, and 1992) and after Indonesia's democratic transition (in 1999, 2004, and 2009).23 Only three
parties were allowed to compete under the New Order after 1971: Suharto's Golkar party, the Muslim
umbrella United Development Party (PPP),24 and the secular nationalist Indonesian Democratic Party

23
     The final election of the Suharto era was in 1997, but we could not obtain district-level records from this round.
24
     The Suharto regime forced all Islamic political parties to combine under the PPP in 1973 while also mandating that "Islam"
     not be allowed in the party name. In the 1971 election, we capture the Islamic vote share by combining all four Islamic
     parties that were later subsumed under PPP: Nahdatul Ulama (NU), the Muslim Party of Indonesia (Parmusi), the Islamic
     Association Party of Indonesia (PSII) and the Islamic Education Movement (Perti). NU was the second-highest ranked party
     in that election (after Golkar) with 18% of the vote.


                                                               20
(PDI). Golkar obtained 70% of the vote on average across all New Order elections, while the PPP was the
main opposition with 21% of the vote. After 1999, both Golkar and the PPP garner much smaller vote
shares due to the proliferation of parties on both the secular and religious sides of the political spectrum.
      Surprisingly, SD INPRES did not increase electoral support for the regime in high-INPRES districts.
The 1971 round was the only New Order election conducted before school construction ensued. Elections
held in 1977 and 1982 would have been indirectly affected by the policy (e.g., through the increased
presence and influence of teachers), while the exposed cohorts aged less than 6 in 1974 would have first
voted in 1987. In panel (a) of Figure 5, Suharto's Golkar party experiences a marked decline in electoral
support from 1971 to 1977 in high-INPRES districts: each additional INPRES school per 1,000 children
is associated with a 2­4 percentage point (p.p.) decline in the Golkar vote share (relative to the mean of
65% in 1971). This effect appears as early as 1977 and persists until 1992.
      The Islamic opposition captured some of the declining support for Golkar. We see this for the PPP
vote share in absolute terms (panel b) and relative to Golkar (panel c). One explanation could be that the
PPP captured general opposition sentiment. Indeed, the effect of INPRES intensity on support for the
PPP becomes noisier after 1999, when the PPP was no longer the main vehicle for opposition aspirations.
However, another explanation is that the Islamic sector pushed back against secularization, which was
most salient in districts with greater INPRES school construction. The decline in Golkar support as early
as 1977 is consistent with this pushback. If instead these electoral shifts had been slower to materialize,
it would have been difficult to rule out an alternative explanation, namely that INPRES created a more
educated citizenry that was simply more opposed to the regime's authoritarian ambition. The more
plausible explanation for Figure 5 is that the Islamic sector mobilized not only by building more religious
schools but also by coordinating political opposition through its own expanding school network.
      Overall, Figure 5 shows that SD INPRES did not boost support for the Suharto regime during the
New Order era. Even under an autocratic regime with tightly controlled elections, mass schooling failed
to indoctrinate voters and instead fostered support for the main opposition party, the Islam-based PPP.
Table 8, discussed below, provides long-run, cohort-based evidence on legislative candidate entry that
aligns with these early electoral divisions.
      After 1999, the nature of the Indonesian state changes dramatically. Many more political parties
compete and capture opposition sentiment. Moreover, ideological attachment to the Indonesian nation
no longer conflates with support for the New Order regime. Understanding the long-term impacts of
SD INPRES on identity and nation building thus requires looking across a range of indicators.


7.2     Effects on National and Religious Identity

As the Islamic schooling system expanded, it counteracted the regime's intent to build a secular Indone-
sian identity. Table 7 provides initial evidence of a shift in religious and political ideology. Panel (a) ex-
plores dimensions of secular identity across Muslim and non-Muslim citizens, while panel (b) examines
religious piety and practice among Muslims. Of course, a high level of Islamic piety is not incompatible
with a high level of attachment to the secular state. Yet, as we show, INPRES exposure is associated with
greater piety but not with greater support for secular principles, which, together, point to a role for the


                                                     21
Islamic sector response in explaining the long-run effects on nation building.
     We first examine a standard marker of an individual's attachment to the national identity in multi-
lingual countries: the use of the national language at home. With the complete-count 2010 Population
Census, we observe nearly 32 million individuals in the original cohorts aged 2­6 and 12­17 in 1974.
We find null effects of SD INPRES across the full population (column 1). However, this null masks
a religious divide: 16% of Muslims use Indonesian as the main language at home compared to 28%
of non-Muslims.25 Among Muslims, INPRES-exposed cohorts report slightly less home use of the na-
tional language (column 2), while affected non-Muslim cohorts exhibit little response (column 3). These
weak effects are striking given that INPRES schools aimed to promote a single Indonesian identity built
around a common language. To be sure, SD INPRES did increase Indonesian proficiency, including
among Muslims (see Appendix Table A.14, columns 1­3). However, it did not increase attachment to
Bahasa Indonesia inside the home.
     For those exposed to Islamic education as a result of SD INPRES, immersion in the national language
may have been crowded out by the study of Arabic, the language of the Qur'an. Table 6 showed that
schools created in high-INPRES districts after 1972 devote more classroom time to Arabic and less to
Indonesian language and literature. Table 7 shows that SD INPRES increased Arabic knowledge among
exposed cohorts (column 4). Columns 5 and 6 show that the positive effects are driven by those with
any Islamic education (two-thirds of whom report Arabic literacy, compared to one-third with secular
education).26 Importantly, like the distinction between national language ability versus home use, here
too we can clarify the identity content of Arabic literacy: Appendix Table A.14 (columns 4­9) shows that
SD INPRES increased literacy in the Latin alphabet (on which Indonesian is based) but did not increase
literacy in other languages besides Arabic. Moreover, conditional on years of schooling (fixed effects),
Arabic literacy is 20­30 p.p. higher for those with Islamic education (see Appendix Table A.15).
     These shifts in national and religious identity are accompanied by broader changes in piety. In panel
(b) of Table 7, we look at a range of Islamic practices recorded by Pepinsky et al. (2018): praying 5 times
a day (column 1), fasting during Ramadan (column 2), reading the Qur'an (column 3), attending Friday
prayer (column 4), performing Sunna prayers (column 5), joining prayer groups known as pengajian (col-
umn 6), and paying zakat (column 7). While several of these are standard indicators of piety, respondents
vary widely in their practice. For example, 83% report paying zakat and 81% fast during Ramadan, while
only 23% always attend Friday prayer and 18% perform non-obligatory Sunna prayer. Column 8 pools
all practices into a single index. Overall, we find positive effects of INPRES exposure on most mea-
sures.27 The effects are somewhat larger for religious practices with a social dimension (e.g., attending
Friday prayer), perhaps reflecting the fact that individuals socialized in madrasa more regularly practice
their faith in a group setting within their community.
25
   Importantly, using this same Population Census data, we find a precise zero effect of SD INPRES on the likelihood of being
   Muslim: -0.0003(0.0011) relative to a mean of 0.878.
26
   We switch between sample splitting on religion and on religious schooling across outcomes in panel (a) because Susenas does
   not record religion, and the 2010 Population Census does not report Islamic schooling but only the level completed.
27
   These effects differ somewhat from those in Table 8 of Rohner and Saia (2019). Using the IFLS and a more expansive definition
   of INPRES exposure that includes the partially-exposed cohorts, they show that INPRES increased religiosity (on a self-
   reported 5-point scale) but had null effects on prayer. Our findings across a richer set of outcomes measuring piety and
   practice are consistent with their finding on religiosity but not with respect to prayer.


                                                              22
       Together, the results in Table 7 suggest that SD INPRES may have increased Islamic identity at the
expense of a secular national identity. For those attending Islamic schools, this could have occurred
through learning Arabic as well as Islamic thought and practice, particularly in the impressionable years
of primary and secondary schooling. Meanwhile, for those attending state schools, this could have
occurred through greater exposure to Islamic-educated peers in one's community or engagement with
the Islamic sector outside formal schooling (e.g., through parental inputs or attendance of madrasa diniyah
or mosque-based youth groups). We explore these mechanisms in Section 7.4, but fully disentangling
them is beyond the scope of our identification strategy and data. Nevertheless, their combined effects
help explain how the Islamic sector response could have been large enough to bolster religious identity
over the long run and, in turn, to shape ideology and political preferences as we show next.


7.3       Effects on Political Attitudes and Ideology

Table 8 explores additional downstream effects of SD INPRES on political ideology among citizens (panel
a) and politicians (panel b). First, we consider a direct measure of citizen support for Pancasila, the secular
national ideology advanced through states schools. The Pepinsky et al. (2018) survey asks respondents
whether Pancasila is the best ideology for the nation or whether it should be replaced with another more
suitable ideology. Column 1 in panel (a) shows that SD INPRES had a fairly precise null effect on support
for Pancasila, which stands at 84% across the population. However, this masks a large divide between
Muslims (83%) and non-Muslims (93%). This gulf widens for those exposed to SD INPRES: affected
non-Muslim cohorts exhibit greater support for Pancasila than non-affected cohorts (column 2) whereas
affected Muslim cohorts exhibit a small but precise null response (column 3). These results are suggestive
of differential effects across groups with varying exposure to the Islamic education sector. Reassuringly,
Appendix Table A.16 shows that individuals in this survey exhibit similar Islamic schooling outcomes
as those in the baseline Susenas sample from Tables 2 and 3.
       While INPRES exposure did not increase support for Pancasila among the majority Muslim popula-
tion, it also did not spur support for conservative Islamist ideology as an alternative foundation of the
state. We demonstrate this using two measures of support for Islamic law, again drawing on the Pepin-
sky et al. (2018) survey. The first, subjective measure in column 4 is an indicator for individuals reporting
strong or very strong support for sharia as the foundation of the state. The second, objective measure in
column 5 takes the mean across indicators of support for different dimensions of sharia: corporal pun-
ishment for crime, prohibition of interest, mandatory hijab, supporting polygamy, punish adultery with
stoning, and punish apostasy with death. Across both outcomes, we find null effects of SD INPRES on
affected cohorts of Muslim citizens. Appendix Tables A.17 and A.18 provide further evidence using the
six sub-components of the sharia index as well as other measures of support for Islamist ideology.
       The bottom panel (b) of Table 8 provides analogous evidence on long-run ideology among politi-
cians. We estimate the effects of INPRES exposure on candidate entry in the 2019 legislative elections,
restricting to the original cohorts (2­6 versus 12­17 in 1974, respectively).28 INPRES-exposed cohorts are

28
     Legislative candidates are required to have at least a primary education. Hence, the results here apply to a population for
     whom the secondary school response is more important than any first-order effects on primary education.


                                                                23
significantly less likely to run on a Golkar ticket and more likely to run on a PPP ticket (columns 1 and
2).29 In other words, the short-run effects on support for Golkar and the PPP seen in Figure 5 persisted
over the long run among affected cohorts of political candidates. This is despite both parties being con-
siderably less popular than in the New Order era when the PPP was the main opposition. Furthermore,
INPRES-exposed candidates, across all parties, are less likely to campaign on Pancasila or related nation-
building themes (column 3). However, they are no more likely to campaign on Islamic themes (column
4), and indeed religious appeals are not confounded with nation-building ones (column 5).


7.4       Intergenerational Transmission of Religious Values

In this final section, we highlight the role of intergenerational cultural transmission in shaping the legacy
of SD INPRES for religious schooling and values. The cohorts originally exposed to SD INPRES were
more likely to have attended an Islamic school and to subsequently report greater engagement with
Islam. Two generations after INPRES schools were built, attendance in Islamic schools remained very
high: in 2019, 21% of pupils were enrolled in a madrasa or a pesantren (Table 1). This suggests that the
shifts in religious identity and preferences for Islamic schooling set in motion by SD INPRES were likely
passed on to future generations.
       Two types of religious cultural transmission could have taken place among the cohorts exposed to
mass public schooling. On the one hand, parents wishing to maintain a strong religious identity inside
their household (potentially as a result of attending an Islamic school themselves) could have sent their
own children to an Islamic school. This would have influenced children's religiosity by affecting the type
of peers with whom a child would interact--a process that the literature since Bisin and Verdier (2000,
2001) has described as horizontal or "oblique" cultural transmission. On the other hand, parents could
also have invested in greater religious socialization at home for fear that children would fail to maintain
strong religious values in a fast-secularizing society. Such vertical transmission could either complement
or substitute for religious school choice.

Horizontal Transmission.              We explore the "oblique" transmission hypothesis in panel (a) of Table
9, which reports intergenerational effects on Islamic school choice using the complete enumeration of
household members' schooling in Susenas. This analysis focuses on the original cohorts in Tables 2 and 3
but is restricted to those with co-resident children older than 18 (i.e., those who have already completed
schooling).30 To allow for maximal sample coverage, we estimate the effects of each parent's exposure
separately rather than restricting to the particular subsample of kids with both parents in the original
cohorts. Both parent's exposures to SD INPRES in the 1970s are associated with an increase in children's
likelihood of completing secondary Islamic education (columns 3­6). However, these children are also
less likely to complete primary Islamic education (columns 1­2), much like their parents in column 1 of
Table 2. Parents may be choosing to replicate their own educational trajectories for their children a few
decades later. Appendix Table A.19 provides direct evidence of intergenerational persistence in Islamic
29
     No other party affiliations admit significant effects.
30
     This sample is comprised largely of ethnic groups with strong (post-marital) intergenerational co-residence norms. Whether
     our findings generalize to adult children living separately from their parents cannot be answered with available data.


                                                               24
schooling: the likelihood that a child completes Islamic schooling is 20 p.p. higher when either parent
has an Islamic education background (columns 4 and 8).
       These results hint at a distinction between preferences and constraints. The parents of exposed co-
horts who sent their children to public primary schools in the 1970s were often constrained to choose
Islamic secondary schools for continued education. As those children became parents themselves, they
did not face the same constrained school choice set as both Islamic primary and public secondary schools
had expanded over time (see Section 6). Yet, these parents still chose Islamic schools for their children.
In other words, the constraints faced by parents in the 1970s may have led to a shift in the demand for
Islamic schooling of their grandchildren several decades later.

Vertical Transmission.              Parents directly exposed to the secularization of education could also have
invested in greater religious socialization within their household. In panel (b) of Table 9, we study two
mechanisms for vertical religious transmission.
       First, we show that SD INPRES increased assortative mating (homogamy) among religiously edu-
cated households, which could have facilitated vertical religious transmission within the household.31
Column 1 of Table 9 (panel b) shows that exposed male cohorts are more likely to marry women with
Islamic schooling. This could be due to matching within Islamic schools, matching post-schooling, or
arranged marriages by parents who sent their children to an Islamic school. It could also be an indi-
rect consequence of the slightly larger effect of SD INPRES on madrasa education for girls (see Section
5.2). The effects are null for women's marital choice, perhaps because women face greater constraints
in selecting partners (column 2). Overall, this increased mixing of Islamic-educated individuals in the
marriage market, in turn, has implications for the transmission of religious values within the household.
       In columns 3­6 of panel (b), we explore the transmission of religious values operating outside the
Islamic school system. As our proxy for engagement with Islam, we use the Arabic literacy status of
parents and children measured in Susenas. We showed in Section 7.2 that SD INPRES increased Arabic
literacy among affected cohorts. In columns 3­4, our dependent variable is a dummy for all 3 members
of a nuclear household (the father, the mother, and the child) being literate in Arabic. Both a father's and
a mother's exposure to SD INPRES increase the likelihood that the entire household is literate in Ara-
bic, reflecting both assortative mating between the parents and a higher likelihood of religious cultural
transmission involving children.
       Finally, in columns 5­6, we look at an indicator for the child's Arabic literacy in the subsample of
(parental) respondents who are literate in Arabic and whose child has received no Islamic schooling.
While this sample split is endogenous to INPRES exposure, this test provides suggestive evidence of
vertical religious transmission outside the Islamic school classroom. Indeed, among the subset of parents
literate in Arabic, we find that children educated outside the Islamic school system are more likely to be
literate in Arabic when the parents were directly exposed to SD INPRES. This could be due to direct
instruction inside the home, extracurricular education at the local mosque or madrasa diniyah, or both.
Overall, parents exposed to mass public schooling ensure that their children maintain a strong religious

31
     A large literature studies the role of homogamy in religious cultural transmission (see Bisin et al., 2020, for a review).


                                                                   25
identity both through their choice of school, and by investing in greater vertical transmission of religious
values within the family.


8    Conclusion
One of the most ambitious educational policies ever implemented, SD INPRES pursued developmental
as well as ideological objectives. A large literature documents the policy's substantial and long-lasting
effects on human capital. In this paper, we provide the first comprehensive investigation of its effects
on education markets as well as its nation-building legacy. Our appraisal of the policy's long-term ide-
ological impacts takes into account the competitive response of Islamic schools. Before the 1970s, the
Indonesian state had sought to suppress the country's long-standing Islamic education sector to facili-
tate the emergence of a secular national identity. SD INPRES was also designed with this goal in mind,
in the context of a young political regime focused on promoting national unity and its own legitimacy.
    Our findings point to some surprising consequences of mass schooling. Despite its enormous invest-
ments, the Suharto regime reaped little electoral gain from SD INPRES. Nor did the mass public school
expansion strengthen national identity or support for the secular state over the long run. This runs
counter to the nation-building effects of mass schooling seen elsewhere historically. Part of the differ-
ence here lies in the Islamic sector response, which counteracted state investments in secular education
by capturing new primary graduates from state schools, by building more religious schools, and by ex-
panding Islamic content inside the classroom. In the long run, this increased piety may have crowded
out Indonesian identity without representing a genuine threat to the legitimacy of the Indonesian state.
Indeed, increased religiosity was not accompanied by increased support for Islamist ideology.
    The different patterns of piety and politics between this study and Bazzi et al. (2020) highlight the vast
diversity within Indonesian Islam that persists to this day. While schools borne out of the 1960s shock
advocate a more fundamentalist ideology emphasizing the importance of sharia law, those borne out of
market competition with SD INPRES schools in the 1970s provide a curriculum more accommodative
of the secular state, despite their large volume of religious content. Successive Indonesian governments
have successfully capitalized on these divisions. Moderate establishments are co-opted and incorporated
in the mainstream education system while those promoting more radical ideologies are marginalized.
Yet, more than fifty years after SD INPRES attempted to eliminate it, the dual system remains.




                                                     26
References
Akresh, R., D. Halim, and M. Kleemans, "Long-term and Intergenerational Effects of Education: Ev-
 idence from School Construction in Indonesia," Working Paper 25265, National Bureau of Economic
 Research November 2018.
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and B. Reich, "Nation-Building and Education," Working Paper 18839, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research February 2019.
Altonji, J. G., T. E. Elder, and C. R. Taber, "Selection on Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing
  the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools," Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113 (1), 151­184.
Andrabi, T., J. Das, A. I. Khwaja, and T. Zajonc, "Religious School Enrollment in Pakistan: A Look at
 the Data," Comparative Education Review, 2006, 50 (3), 446­477.
Ansell, B. and J. Lindvall, "The political origins of primary education systems: Ideology, institutions,
 and interdenominational conflict in an era of nation-building," American Political Science Review, 2013,
 107 (3), 505­522.
Ashraf, N., N. Bau, N. Nunn, and A. Voena, "Bride price and female education," Journal of Political
  Economy, 2020, 128 (2).
Bandiera, O., M. Mohnen, I. Rasul, and M. Viarengo, "Nation-building through compulsory schooling
  during the age of mass migration," The Economic Journal, 2019, 129 (617), 62­109.
Bazzi, S., A. Gaduh, A.D. Rothenberg, and M. Wong, "Unity in diversity? how intergroup contact can
  foster nation building," American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (11), 3978­4025.
  , G. Koehler-Derrick, and B. Marx, "The Institutional Foundations of Religious Politics: Evidence
  from Indonesia," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2020, 135 (2), 845­911.
Becker, S. O., N. Nagler, and L. Woessmann, "Education and religious participation: city-level evidence
  from Germany's secularization period 1890-1930," Journal of Economic Growth, 2017, 22, 273­311.
Berman, E. and A. Stepanyan, "How many radical Islamists? Indirect evidence from five countries,"
  Unpublished manuscript, 2004.
Bisin, A. and T. Verdier, ""Beyond the Melting Pot": Cultural Transmission, Marriage, and the Evolution
  of Ethnic and Religious Traits," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 08 2000, 115 (3), 955­988.
   and , "The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics of Preferences," Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory, 2001, 97 (2), 298 ­ 319.
  , , and J. P. Carvalho, "Cultural Transmission and Religion," in R. Sauer, ed., Handbook of Economics
  and Religion, World Scientific, 2020.
Boland, B.J., The Struggle of Islam in Modern Indonesia, Brill, 1982.
Bulow, J. I., J. D. Geanakoplos, and P. D. Klemperer, "Multimarket Oligopoly: Strategic Substitutes and
  Complements," Journal of Political Economy, 1985, 93 (3), 488­511.
Cantoni, D., Y. Chen, D. Y. Yang, N. Yuchtman, and Y. J. Zhang, "Curriculum and Ideology," Journal of
  Political Economy, 2017, 125 (2), 338­392.
Carvalho, J.-P. and M. Koyama, "Resisting Education," Working Paper, 2016.
Cohen-Zada, D., "Preserving religious identity through education: Economic analysis and evidence
  from the US," Journal of Urban Economics, 2006, 60 (3), 372­398.
Darmaningtyas, Pendidikan yang memiskinkan, Galang Press, 2004.


                                                      27
Dee, T. S., "Are there civic returns to education?," Journal of public economics, 2004, 88 (9-10), 1697­1720.
Duflo, E., "Schooling and labor market consequences of school construction in Indonesia: Evidence from
 an unusual policy experiment," American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (4), 795­813.
  , "The medium run effects of educational expansion: Evidence from a large school construction pro-
  gram in Indonesia," Journal of Development Economics, 2004, 74 (1), 163­197.
Glaeser, E. L. and B. I. Sacerdote, "Education and Religion," Journal of Human Capital, 2008, 2 (2), 188­
  215.
Gulesci, S. and E. Meyersson, "`For the Love of the Republic': Education, Secularism, and Empower-
 ment," Working Paper, 2016.
Hungerman, D. M., "The effect of education on religion: Evidence from compulsory schooling laws,"
 Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2014, 104, 52­63.
Jahar, A. S., "Reinterpreting Islamic Norms: The Conflict Between Legal Paradigms and Socio-Economic
  Challenges; a Case Study of Waqf and Zak^   at in Contemporary Indonesia." PhD dissertation, Verlag
  nicht ermittelbar 2005.
Jo, H., "Jilbab terlarang di era orde baru," Historia online, 2020.
Kelabora, L., "Religious Instruction Policy in Indonesia," Asian Survey, 1976, 16 (3), 230­248.
Larreguy, H. and J. Marshall, "The Effect of Education on Civic and Political Engagement in Noncon-
  solidated Democracies: Evidence from Nigeria," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2017, 99 (3),
  387­401.
Lee, K. H., Education and politics in Indonesia, 1945-1965, University of Malaya Press, 1995.
Marini, M. and G. Rodano, "Lead, Follow or Cooperate? Sequential versus Collusive Payoffs in Sym-
 metric Duopoly Games," ISRN Economics, 08 2013, 2013.
Martinez-Bravo, M., "The local political economy effects of school construction in Indonesia," American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2017, 9 (2), 256­89.
Mazumder, B., M. Rosales-Rueda, and M. Triyana, "Intergenerational Human Capital Spillovers: In-
 donesia's School Construction and Its Effects on the Next Generation," in "AEA Papers and Proceed-
 ings," Vol. 109 2019, pp. 243­49.
Meyer, J. W., D. Tyack, J. Nagel, and A. Gordon, "Public Education as Nation-Building in America:
 Enrollments and Bureaucratization in the American States, 1870-1930," American Journal of Sociology,
 1979, 85 (3), 591­613.
Meyersson, E., "Islamic Rule and the Empowerment of the Poor and Pious," Econometrica, 2014, 82 (1),
 229­269.
Mocan, N. and L. Pogorelova, "Compulsory schooling laws and formation of beliefs: Education, religion
 and superstition," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2017, 142, 509­539.
Neal, D., "The Effects of Catholic Secondary Schooling on Educational Achievement," Journal of Labor
 Economics, 1997, 15 (1, Part 1), 98­123.
Paglayan, A. S., "Civil War, State Consolidation, and the Spread of Mass Education." PhD dissertation,
  Working Paper 2017.
  , "Democracy and Educational Expansion: Evidence from 200 Years." PhD dissertation, Working Pa-
  per 2018.



                                                      28
Pepinsky, T. B., R. W. Liddle, and S. Mujani, Piety and Public Opinion: Understanding Indonesian Islam,
  New York: Oxford University Press, 2018.
Rohner, D. and A. Saia, "Education and Conflict: Evidence from a Policy Experiment in Indonesia,"
  Working Paper, 2019.
Roth, C. and S. Sumarto, "Does education increase interethnic and interreligious tolerance? Evidence
  from a natural experiment," 2015.
Sakalli, S. O., "Secularization and religious backlash: Evidence from Turkey," Technical Report, Working
  Paper 2019.
Shofia, N. M., "Why Veil? Religious Headscarves and the Public Role of Women," Working Paper, 2020.
Squicciarini, M. P., "Devotion and Development: Religiosity, Education, and Economic Progress in
  Nineteenth-Century France," American Economic Review, 2020, 110 (11), 3454­91.
World Bank, "Indonesia Basic Education Study," Report No. 7841-IND, 1989.
Zuhdi, M., "Political and Social Influences on Religious School: A Historical Perspective on Indonesian
  Islamic School Curricula." PhD dissertation, McGill University Department of Integrated Studies in
  Education 2006.




                                                  29
Figures
                                                             Figure 1: INPRES Exposure and Islamic Schooling ­ Raw Summary
                                                              (a) Elementary Madrasa                                                                                            (b) Junior Secondary Madrasa
                                          .02                                                  high-INPRES districts                                               .03                                         high-INPRES districts
                                                                                               low-INPRES districts                                                                                            low-INPRES districts




                                                                                                                            Islamic junior secondary (overall)
                                                                                  1968 birth cohort:                                                              .025
    Islamic elementary (overall)




                                                                                    first fully exposed to SD INPRES
                                         .015
                                                                                                                                                                   .02



                                                                                                                                                                  .015
                                          .01

                                                      1962 cohort                                                                                                  .01
                                                        last unexposed
                                                          to SD INPRES

                                         .005                                                                                                                     .005
                                                1950              1960   1970              1980                1990                                                      1950       1960     1970            1980           1990
                                                                         year of birth                                                                                                       year of birth



                                                        (c) Senior Secondary Madrasa                                                                                               (d) Any Level Madrasa
                                                                                                                                                                  .07
                                                                                               high-INPRES districts                                                                                           high-INPRES districts
                                                                                               low-INPRES districts                                                                                            low-INPRES districts
                                         .03


                                                                                                                            Highest education Islamic (overall)
                                                                                                                                                                  .06
    Islamic senior secondary (overall)




                                                                                                                                                                  .05
                                         .02


                                                                                                                                                                  .04

                                         .01
                                                                                                                                                                  .03



                                                                                                                                                                  .02
                                          0
                                               1950              1960    1970              1980                1990                                                     1950        1960     1970            1980           1990
                                                                         year of birth                                                                                                       year of birth



 Notes: This figure reports mean Islamic school completion rates over time for districts with above-median (high) and
 below-median (low) INPRES intensity from 1973­1978. INPRES intensity is defined as the number of SD INPRES schools
 constructed from 1973-78 per 1,000 children in 1971. The rates are computed for cohorts from 1950 to 1994, pooling across
 annual Susenas data from 2012 to 2018, and they indicate whether the final level of education is elementary Islamic in panel
 (a), junior secondary Islamic in panel (b), senior secondary Islamic in panel (c), and any level Islamic in panel (d). These
 measures are computed over all individuals, while the corresponding Appendix Figure A.1 reports results conditional
 on individuals having completed the given level of education. The outcomes in panels (a)­(c) are the same as those in
 panel (a) of Table 2, and panel (d) is the same as the outcome in columns 3­4 of Table 3. The cohorts in gray are those that
 would have fully completed primary schooling before the SD INPRES program rolled out in 1973. The vertical dotted
 line captures the first cohort, born in 1968, that would have been fully exposed to SD INPRES given that they would
 have been 6 years old just prior to school construction ensuing. The cohorts born between 1963 to 1967 correspond to the
 partially-exposed cohorts. See Section 4.1 for further discussion of these distinctions across cohorts.




                                                                                                                       30
                                      Figure 2: INPRES Exposure and Islamic Schooling ­ Effects by Cohort
                                                                             Dep. Var.: Elementary Madrasa
                                               (a) Short-Run                                                                                         (b) Long-Run
                             .002                                                                                                .002



                             .001
   90% confidence interval




                                                                                                       90% confidence interval
    INPRES x birth year: 




                                                                                                        INPRES x birth year: 
                                                                                                                                    0
                                0



                             -.001
                                                                                                                                 -.002

                             -.002



                             -.003                                                                                               -.004
                                     1958   1960   1962    1964       1966   1968   1970   1972                                          1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
                                                          year of birth                                                                                        year of birth




                                                                             Dep. Var.: Secondary Madrasa
                                               (c) Short-Run                                                                                         (d) Long-Run
                             .006


                                                                                                                                  .02
                             .004
   90% confidence interval




                                                                                                       90% confidence interval
    INPRES x birth year: 




                                                                                                        INPRES x birth year: 




                                                                                                                                 .015


                             .002                                                                                                 .01


                                                                                                                                 .005
                                0
                                                                                                                                    0


                             -.002                                                                                               -.005
                                     1958   1960   1962    1964       1966   1968   1970   1972                                          1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
                                                          year of birth                                                                                        year of birth



Notes: This figure reports age-specific estimates of  in equation (1) based on annual Susenas data from 2012 to 2018.
INPRES intensity is defined as the number of SD INPRES schools constructed from 1973-78 per 1,000 children in 1971.
The dependent variable in panels (a) and (b) is an indicator equal to one if the individual's final year of schooling was
completed in an Islamic elementary school. Panels (c) and (d) are for an Islamic secondary school. Panels (a) and (c)
correspond to the original cohort specification capturing variation in exposure to SD INPRES: fully-exposed born 1968­
1972 (dark gray), partially-exposed born 1963­1967 (white), and unexposed born 1957­1962 (light gray). Panels (b) and
(d) expand exposed and unexposed windows to 1950 and 2000, respectively, though we only include among later cohorts
those with completed schooling. The 1957 cohort serves as the reference age, given age fixed effects, in both the short-
and long-run specifications. All specifications include survey year dummies, district of birth dummies and year of birth
dummies interacted with the 1971 children population, the 1971 enrollment rate, and exposure to the water and sanitation
program in the district of birth. The dashed lines correspond to 90% confidence intervals with standard errors clustered
by district of birth.




                                                                                                  31
  Figure 3: INPRES Exposure, Total Schooling and Islamic Education ­ Effects by Cohort
                                                                             Dep. Var.: Total Years of Schooling
                                                      (a) Short-Run                                                                                              (b) Long-Run

                             .25
                                                                                                                                      .6
                               .2
   90% confidence interval




                                                                                                            90% confidence interval
    INPRES x birth year: 




                                                                                                             INPRES x birth year: 
                             .15                                                                                                      .4


                               .1
                                                                                                                                      .2
                             .05


                               0                                                                                                       0


                             -.05
                                                                                                                                      -.2
                                        1958   1960    1962     1964       1966   1968   1970   1972                                        1950   1955   1960   1965   1970 1975 1980    1985   1990   1995
                                                               year of birth                                                                                              year of birth




                                                                                  Dep. Var.: Any Level Madrasa
                                                      (c) Short-Run                                                                                              (d) Long-Run


                             .004
                                                                                                                                        .02
   90% confidence interval




                                                                                                            90% confidence interval
    INPRES x birth year: 




                                                                                                             INPRES x birth year: 




                                                                                                                                      .015
                             .002
                                                                                                                                        .01


                                                                                                                                      .005
                                    0


                                                                                                                                            0


                             -.002
                                                                                                                                      -.005
                                        1958   1960     1962    1964       1966   1968   1970   1972                                            1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
                                                               year of birth                                                                                          year of birth



Notes: This figure reports results from the same specification as in Figure 2, looking here at total years of schooling in
panels (a) and (b) and any Islamic schooling in panels (c) and (d). See the notes to Figure 2 for further details.




                                                                                                       32
                                                              Figure 4: INPRES Intensity and Entry of Islamic Schools
                                                                                          New schools per 1,000 children
                                                (a) Elementary Madrasa                                                                                       (b) Junior Secondary Madrasa
                                .008                                                                                                           .006



                                .006
                                                                                                                                               .004
     INPRES x semi-decade: 




                                                                                                                    INPRES x semi-decade: 
      90% confidence interval




                                                                                                                     90% confidence interval
                                .004

                                                                                                                                               .002

                                .002


                                                                                                                                                      0
                                   0



                                -.002                                                                                                          -.002
                                        1950   1955    1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995                                              1950   1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995



                                           (c) Senior Secondary Madrasa                                                                                                    (d) Pesantren

                                                                                                                                               .008
                                .003



                                                                                                                                               .006
     INPRES x semi-decade: 




                                                                                                                    INPRES x semi-decade: 
      90% confidence interval




                                .002                                                                                 90% confidence interval



                                                                                                                                               .004
                                .001



                                                                                                                                               .002
                                   0


                                                                                                                                                  0
                                -.001
                                        1950   1955    1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995                                          1950       1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995



                                                      (e) Madrasa Diniyah                                                                                  (f) Madrasa as % of new schools
                                 .02                                                                                                           .08



                                .015                                                                                                           .06
     INPRES x semi-decade: 




                                                                                                                    INPRES x semi-decade: 
      90% confidence interval




                                                                                                                     90% confidence interval




                                 .01                                                                                                           .04



                                                                                                                                               .02
                                .005



                                                                                                                                                 0
                                   0


                                                                                                                                               -.02
                                -.005
                                        1950   1955    1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995                                          1950       1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995

Notes: This figure reports semi-decade-specific estimates of  in equation (2) on a balanced district­year panel. INPRES in-
tensity is defined as the number of SD INPRES schools constructed from 1973-78 per 1,000 children in 1971. The dependent
variable measures the number of elementary madrasa (panel a), junior secondary madrasa (b), senior secondary madrasa (c),
madrasa diniyah (Islamic afternoon schools) (d), pesantren (Islamic boarding schools across all levels) (e), and madrasa in a­c as
a share of total schools (Islamic, non-Islamic private, and secular public) (f) established by semi-decade and by district per
1,000 children in 1971. The 1965-1969 period is the reference period given district fixed effects. The gray shading captures the
INPRES construction period from 1973-78. The dot corresponds to the period-specific  , and the bars correspond to 90% confi-
dence intervals with standard errors clustered by district. All specifications include district fixed effects and year fixed effects
interacted with the 1971 children population, the 1971 enrollment rate, and exposure to the water and sanitation program.

                                                                                                               33
                                            Figure 5: INPRES Intensity and Electoral Support for Islam vs. the State
                                      (a) State (Golkar, Suharto's Party)                                                                                               (b) Islam (United Development Party, PPP)
                              .08           1973: beginning of      First exposed cohorts                                Democratic era                                             .08
                                                  SD INPRES         vote in 1987

                              .06                                                                                                                                                   .06

                              .04                                                                                                                                                   .04
   INPRES x election year: 




                                                                                                                                                         INPRES x election year: 
    90% confidence interval




                                                                                                                                                          90% confidence interval
                              .02                                                                                                                                                   .02

                                0                                                                                                                                                     0

                              -.02                                                                                                                                                  -.02

                              -.04                                                                                                                                                  -.04

                              -.06                                                                                                                                                  -.06

                              -.08                                                                                                                                                  -.08
                                     1971       1977        1982   1987      1992                                 1999    2004       2009                                                  1971    1977    1982   1987   1992   1999   2004   2009



                                                                                                             (c) Islam vs. State (PPP minus Golkar)
                                                                                                           .08

                                                                                                           .06

                                                                                                           .04
                                                                                INPRES x election year: 
                                                                                 90% confidence interval




                                                                                                           .02

                                                                                                             0

                                                                                                           -.02

                                                                                                           -.04

                                                                                                           -.06

                                                                                                           -.08
                                                                                                                  1971      1977          1982   1987   1992                               1999   2004    2009



Notes: This figure reports legislative-election-year-specific estimates of  in equation (2) on a balanced district­year panel.
INPRES intensity is defined as the number of SD INPRES schools constructed from 1973-78 per 1,000 children in 1971. The
dependent variable measures vote shares for Golkar, the party of Suharto and the New Order regime (panel a), the Islamic
opposition party/ies (panel b), and the difference in vote shares between the two (panel c). In 1971, there were four Islamic
parties that we group together, but from 1973 onward, the regime only allowed a single umbrella Islamic party, the United
Development Party or PPP. The 1971 election was the last just prior to SD INPRES and serves as the reference election
given district fixed effects. The gray area captures elections conducted under the New Order regime. The elections in 1987
and 1992 are the first in which INPRES-exposed cohorts would have been eligible to vote. The elections from 1999 onward
took place after the fall of Suharto when the country democratized and both secular and Islamic parties proliferated. The
bars correspond to 90% confidence intervals with standard errors clustered at the district level. All specifications include
district fixed effects and year fixed effects interacted with the 1971 children population, the 1971 enrollment rate, and
exposure to the water and sanitation program.




                                                                                                                                                 34
Tables

                                   Table 1: Exposure to Islamic Education
            Source                        IFLS, 1993­2014            Susenas, 2012­18         Admin., 2019
            Exposure Definition            at given level              at final level           enrolled
            Cohort                         all    in school           all       in school      in school
                                           (1)        (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)
            Education Level
              All                         20%          25%            7%           10%              21%
                                        N=64,141     N=10,573     N=5,240,958   N=1,652,990      N=59,387,784


              Primary                     11%          16%            4%            6%              13%
                                        N=55,912     N=10,572     N=3,187,724    N=1,263,12      N=29,309,849


              Junior Secondary            23%          28%           12%           14%              23%
                                        N=32,221      N=4,282     N=1,394,572    N=629,061       N=13,708,973


              Senior Secondary            20%          24%            6%            7%              11%
                                        N=21,522      N=2,587     N=1,476,917    N=389,880       N=12,412,256



 Notes: This table summarizes Islamic education rates across multiple levels of schooling using three different sources. The
 `All' row includes madrasa enrollment as well as (where possible) pesantren enrollment which cannot be assigned to specific
 grade levels. Hence Islamic education includes only madrasa in the Primary, Junior Secondary and Senior Secondary
 rows. The sample sizes reflect the total number of observations over which the percent exposed to Islamic education is
 computed. Columns 1 and 2 used the Indonesian Family Life Survey (IFLS) longitudinal records from 1993, 1997, 2000,
 2007 and 2014. This data is representative of 83% of the Indonesian population and does not cover many districts. This
 survey records the complete educational history of respondents. Column 1 reports the exposure across all individuals
 spanning the five survey rounds. Column 2 restricts to the 2014 round and looks only at currently enrolled students. The
 `All' row includes any pesantren enrollment. Columns 3 and 4 use the nationally-representative annual Susenas data from
 2012­2018, which covers all districts and which we deploy in our main empirical analysis. Unlike the IFLS, this data only
 captures the type of the final year of schooling completed by respondents and only allows respondents to indicate madrasa
 but not pesantren. Column 3 reports the exposure across all individuals spanning the six Susenas rounds. The Primary,
 Junior Secondary, and Senior rows are restricted to individuals that completed exactly 6, 9, and 12 years of education,
 respectively. Column 4 restricts to individuals currently enrolled in school in each round of the survey. These estimates
 are computed using the sampling weights to obtain national representativeness. Column 5 uses administrative data for
 the 2019 school year from the Ministry of Education (MEC) and Ministry of Religion (MORA). The former records madrasa
 attendance while the latter records pesantren attendance. The `All' row includes pesantren enrollment.




                                                             35
                            Table 2: INPRES Exposure and Islamic Schooling
                                                (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)

                                                         (a) Highest Education Level: [. . . ] Islamic
                                                  Elementary          Junior Secondary          Senior Secondary

   INPRES × young                            -0.0013**      -0.0006    0.0020***    0.0047***    0.0011***    0.0033***
                                              (0.0005)      (0.0008)    (0.0005)     (0.0011)     (0.0003)     (0.0007)

   Observations                               839,026      3,938,728    839,026     3,938,728     839,026     3,938,728
   Dependent Variable Mean                     0.014         0.010       0.011        0.016        0.008        0.012
   R2                                          0.027         0.019       0.011        0.023        0.007        0.014

                                                              (b) Highest Education Level is Islamic,
                                                                (b) Conditional on Completing [. . . ]
                                                      6 Years                 9 Years                  12 Years

   INPRES × young                           -0.0021***       0.0011    0.0053***    0.0097***      0.0005     0.0057***
                                             (0.0006)       (0.0013)   (0.0018)      (0.0021)     (0.0011)    (0.0015)

   Observations                               457,020      2,918,805    121,758     1,313,827     169,914     1,349,798
   Dependent Variable Mean                     0.025         0.030       0.073        0.103        0.038        0.056
   R2                                          0.044         0.049       0.076        0.081        0.036        0.049

   Number of Districts                          275           275         275          275          275          275
   Cohorts aged 2-6 vs. 12-17 in 1974
   ------"----­ 6 vs. 12 in 1974

Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) based on annual Susenas data from 2012 to 2018. INPRES refers to SD
INPRES schools constructed from 1973-78 per 1,000 children in 1971. The dependent variables include an indicator equal
to one if the individual's final year of schooling was completed in an Islamic elementary (columns 1­2), junior secondary
(columns 3­4), and senior secondary (columns 5­6). Panel (a) includes all individuals regardless of their years of schooling.
Panel (b) includes only individuals with the given years of schooling corresponding to each level such that columns 1­2
look at Islamic elementary completion among individuals with 6 years of schooling, columns 3­4 look at Islamic junior
secondary completion for those with 9 years, and columns 5­6 look at Islamic senior secondary completion for those with
12 years. All specifications include survey year dummies, district of birth dummies and year of birth dummies interacted
with the 1971 children population, the 1971 enrollment rate, and exposure to the water and sanitation program in the
district of birth. In odd-numbered columns, the sample is composed of all individuals aged 2­6 (young) or 12­17 in 1974.
In even-numbered columns, the sample is composed of all individuals aged less than 6 (young) or more than 12 in 1974.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




                                                             36
             Table 3: Effects of INPRES Exposure on Quantity and Type of Schooling
                                              Years of Schooling       Highest Level Islamic        Islamic | Highest Level
                                                (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)               (5)         (6)

                                                                           (a) Reduced Form

 INPRES × young                             0.1392***     0.2824***    0.0017**      0.0070***       0.0005       0.0054***
                                             (0.0267)      (0.0479)    (0.0007)       (0.0020)      (0.0007)       (0.0016)

                                                                      (b) Two Stage Least Squares

 Years of Schooling                                                    0.0120**      0.0247***       0.0065       0.0480***
                                                                       (0.0056)       (0.0064)      (0.0102)       (0.0177)
 [weak-instrument-robust p-value]                                       [0.022]        [0.000]       [0.489]        [0.001]

 Observations                                839,019      3,938,710     839,019      3,938,710      717,583       3,185,314
 Number of Districts                           275           275          275           275           275            275
 Cohorts aged 2-6 vs. 12-17 in 1974
 ------"----­ 6 vs. 12 in 1974
 Dependent Variable Mean                       7.456        7.664        0.031         0.037         0.036          0.046
 R2 (panel a)                                  0.163        0.376        0.030         0.040         0.034          0.044
 First-stage F-statistic (panel b)                                       27.11         34.70          7.45          15.70
 Underidentification Test, p-value                                       0.000         0.000         0.011          0.001

Notes: This table reports (in panel a) estimates of equation (1) based on annual Susenas data from 2012 to 2018. INPRES
refers to SD INPRES schools constructed from 1973-78 per 1,000 children in 1971. The dependent variables include total
years of schooling (columns 1­2), an indicator equal to one if the individual's final year of education is in an Islamic school
(columns 3­4), conditional on the given years of schooling completed (columns 5­6). The dependent variable in columns
3­4 aggregates over all levels in panel (a) of Table 2, and columns 5­6 aggregate over panel (b). The specification in panel
(a) is otherwise identical to that in Table 2; see the notes therein for details. Panel (b) reports two-stage least squares (2SLS)
estimates of years of schooling on the likelihood to complete an Islamic education overall (columns 3­4) or conditional on
the highest level attained (columns 5­6). We instrument for years of schooling using the IN P RESj × youngij interaction
in equation (1). The endogenous regressor (years of schooling) is identical to the outcome used in panel (a), columns 1­2.
We report the Kleibergen-Paap first-stage F statistic computed using standard errors clustered at the district of birth level.
The null of the underidentification test is that the equation is underidentified. The weak-instrument robust p-value is
based on the Anderson-Rubin test. The 2SLS specification otherwise includes the same set of controls and fixed effects as
those included in equation (1).
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




                                                               37
                           Table 4: INPRES Intensity and Entry of Islamic Schools
                                               New schools per 1,000 children

                                                                          New Madrasa                           New Pesantren
                                                     Elementary       Junior Sec. Senior Sec.       Diniyah         All
                                                         (1)              (2)         (3)             (4)           (5)

                                                                                    (a) Baseline

  INPRES × post-1972                                   0.0043***      0.0042***      0.0023***     0.0095***       0.0029***
                                                        (0.0009)       (0.0010)       (0.0006)      (0.0028)        (0.0007)

  Observations                                          27,500          27,500         27,500        27,500          27,500
  Number of Districts                                     275             275            275           275            275
  Avg. new establishments/year                          0.008           0.006          0.003         0.019           0.005
  R2                                                     0.168           0.192          0.233         0.238          0.224

                                                        (b) Heterogeneity by Islamic Assets (waqf ) and Muslim Share

  INPRES × post-1972                                     -0.0008      -0.0022***     -0.0009**     -0.0073**         -0.0009
                                                        (0.0010)        (0.0007)      (0.0004)      (0.0030)        (0.0009)
  INPRES × post-1972 × waqf, 1972                      0.0209**        0.0221***      0.0108**      -0.0133           0.0061
                                                        (0.0096)        (0.0084)      (0.0051)      (0.0397)        (0.0073)
  INPRES × post-1972 × Muslim share, 1972              0.0050***       0.0064***     0.0032***     0.0235***        0.0046**
                                                        (0.0017)        (0.0017)      (0.0010)      (0.0066)        (0.0018)

  Observations                                          27,300          27,300         27,300        27,300          27,300
  Number of Districts                                     273             273            273           273            273
  Avg. new establishments/year                          0.008           0.006          0.003         0.019           0.005
  R2                                                     0.187           0.221          0.266         0.270          0.248
Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (2). This specification is estimated on a panel at the district-year level spanning
1920­2019. INPRES refers to SD INPRES schools constructed from 1973-78 per 1,000 children in 1971. The dependent variables
are measured as new schools of a given type created per district per year and per 1,000 children in 1971. Madrasa diniyah and
pesantren are Islamic afternoon schools and Islamic boarding schools, respectively. Panel (a) is the baseline while panel (b)
allows the effects of INPRES to vary with the size of Islamic endowments (waqf ) at the district-level in 1972. The measure
captures total waqf land (in square kilometers) held by mosques. All specifications include district fixed effects and year
fixed effects interacted with the 1971 children population, the 1971 enrollment rate, and exposure to the water and sanitation
program. We lose two districts in panel (b) on account of missing data on waqf endowments.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district.




                                                                 38
                          Table 5: Islam­State Competition at the Local Level
                                                                           Islamic School Entry
                                                                  Elem.=1        Elem.=0       Elem.=1
                                                                 Jun. Sec.=0 Jun. Sec.=1 Jun. Sec.=1
                                                                     (1)            (2)           (3)

                                                                             (a) Entry 1973­1983

          SD INPRES built in village, 1973­78                       0.002           0.005***         0.0001
                                                                   (0.002)           (0.001)        (0.0005)
          SD INPRES saturation at subdistrict level                -0.012           0.009***          0.002
                                                                   (0.017)           (0.002)         (0.002)

          Number of Villages                                                         75,090
          Share of Villages with Given Profile                      0.049            0.009            0.004

                                                                             (b) Entry 1984­1998

          SD INPRES built in village, 1973­78                      0.006***         0.015***         0.004***
                                                                    (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.001)
          SD INPRES saturation at subdistrict level                0.029***         0.022***         0.011***
                                                                    (0.007)          (0.007)          (0.003)

          Number of Villages                                                         75,090
          Share of Villages with Given Profile                      0.035            0.039            0.009

Notes: This table presents average marginal effects from a village-level multinomial logit regression relating SD INPRES
entry to Islamic school entry at the village level with four categorical outcomes: no madrasa entry (the base, reference),
elementary madrasa but not junior secondary madrasa, junior secondary madrasa but not elementary madrasa, and entry of
both elementary madrasa and junior secondary madrasa. The reported regressors are an indicator for whether the given
village had any SD INPRES schools constructed from 1973 to 1978, and the share of all villages in the subdistrict (a proxy
for the local education market) with any SD INPRES construction from 1973 to 1978. The latter excludes the own village
from the subdistrict share calculation. Panel (a) reports estimates from a regression with the dependent variable capturing
entry from 1973­1983, and panel (b) looks at the remaining years of the Suharto regime from 1984­1998. We end in 1983
as this was the culmination of the five-year planning horizon under the initial SD INPRES plan. The marginal effects are
with reference to villages with no madrasa entry over the given time horizon. Each regression also includes controls for the
usual district-level controls (1971 children population, the 1971 enrollment rate, and exposure to the water and sanitation
program).
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district.




                                                            39
                         Table 6: Curriculum Differentiation in Islamic Schools
                                                     All Levels      Primary       Jun. Sec.     Sen. Sec.
                                                         (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)

                                                                  (a) Islamic Subject Share

                 INPRES × post-1972                    0.012*         0.012*       0.021***      -0.050**
                                                       (0.007)        (0.006)       (0.007)       (0.023)

                 Dependent Variable Mean                0.262          0.255         0.269         0.268

                                                                  (b) Pancasila/Civic Share

                 INPRES × post-1972                    -0.001           n/a         -0.004*      0.008***
                                                       (0.001)                      (0.002)       (0.003)

                 Dependent Variable Mean                0.026                        0.060         0.041

                                                                      (c) Arabic Share

                 INPRES × post-1972                     0.002         0.003*         0.001       0.014***
                                                       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.004)

                 Dependent Variable Mean                0.056          0.051         0.064         0.057

                                                                (d) Bahasa Indonesia Share

                 INPRES × post-1972                    -0.003*        -0.001        -0.006*        0.002
                                                       (0.002)        (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.002)

                 Dependent Variable Mean                0.055          0.007         0.121         0.081

                 Number of Observations                16,889          8,559         5,077         3,251
                 Number of Districts                    263             245           250           225

Notes: This table presents estimates from a modified version of equation (2). We use an unbalanced panel at the school-
grade × district × year level, including only years in which the given district had any schools enter. The estimating
equation is ysjt =  +  (IN P RESj × P ost1972t ) + (Xj × P ost1972t )  + s + µj + t + isjt , where s is a school-grade
and other terms are defined as in equation (2). The dependent variable measures the mean share of weekly instruction
time devoted to Islamic subject material in panel (a), Pancasila and civic education in panel (b), Arabic instruction in panel
(c), and instruction of the national language and literature, Bahasa Indonesia in panel (d). The measures come from the
SIAP registry for the 2018­19 school year, and we categorize subject material using a procedure detailed in Appendix C.
It is not possible to identify Pancasila and civic subjects for primary schools (see the discussion in the text) and hence the
omission of column 2 in panel (b). All specifications include district fixed effects, grade level fixed effects, year-of-entry
fixed effects, and a post-1972 dummy interacted with the 1971 children population, the 1971 enrollment rate, and exposure
to the water and sanitation program.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district.




                                                             40
                                                   Table 7: INPRES Exposure, Identity, and Religiosity

                                                                                (a) Identity, Proxied by Language
                                                          National Language Use at Home                        Arabic Literacy
               Which Sub-Sample?                          All       Muslims Non-Muslims                    All    Islamic- Secular-
                                                                                                                       Educated
                                                          (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)       (5)       (6)

               INPRES × young                          -0.0018        -0.0040**         -0.0001         0.0046*      0.0179*      0.0038
                                                       (0.0014)        (0.0017)         (0.0020)        (0.0028)     (0.0103)    (0.0027)

               Observations                           31,678,510     27,811,101        3,867,324        839,026       25,935     813,087
               Number of Districts                       273            273               273             275          275         275
               Dep. Var. Mean                           0.166          0.150             0.275           0.343        0.688       0.332

                                                                                  (b) Islamic Piety and Practice
                                         Pray 5x     Fast during      Reads the                      Prayer:                        Pay        Index
41




                                          daily       Ramadan          Qur'an            Friday         Sunna         Group        Zakat
                                           (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)

               INPRES × young             0.0615        0.0029         0.0666**         0.0614**       0.0886***     0.0847**     -0.0138    0.0537***
                                         (0.0400)      (0.0217)        (0.0318)         (0.0280)        (0.0239)     (0.0343)    (0.0220)     (0.0149)

               Observations                1,864         1,865          1,860            1,856            1,846       1,859        1,860        1,866
               Number of Districts          150           150            150              150              150         150          150          150
               Dep. Var. Mean              0.655         0.811          0.267            0.226            0.176       0.246        0.832        0.436

     Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) using data from multiple sources. The dependent variable in columns 1­3 of panel (a) is an indicator for
     whether the individual speaks the national language, Bahasa Indonesia, as his/her main language at home. The data come from the complete-count 2010
     Population Census. Columns 4­6 in panel (a) look at an indicator for whether an individual reports literacy in Arabic in the annual Susenas data from 2012
     to 2018. Panel (a) sample splits across Muslims and non-Muslims in the Population Census (where we do not observe Islamic education) and across Islamic-
     educated and non-Islamic-educated in Susenas (where we do not observe religion). The specifications in panel (a) are restricted to mothers and fathers (husbands
     and wives) that fall within the original birth cohorts: aged 2­6 (young) or 12­17 in 1974. The dependent variables in panel (b) include indicators for whether an
     individual reports partaking in a range of Islamic practices as reported in the Pepinsky et al. (2018) survey data from 2008. The final column is a mean index
     across all 7 prior outcomes. The sample in panel (b) is restricted to Muslim respondents and compares individuals aged 6 or less (young) in 1974 with individuals
     aged 12 or more in 1974. The national language regressions in columns 1­3 of panel (a) also include around 1,200 ethnicity fixed effects. The specification is
     otherwise identical to that in Table 2; see the notes therein for details.
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district (of birth).
                                  Table 8: INPRES Exposure and Ideology
                                    (1)             (2)                  (3)                (4)                (5)

                                                                       (a) Citizens
                                                Supports Pancasila                             Supports sharia
                                                                                        Subjective     Objective
  Which Sub-Sample?                 All      Non-Muslims              Muslims            Muslims        Muslims

  INPRES × young                  0.0025         0.2450**              0.0088            -0.0040             -0.0311
                                 (0.0315)        (0.1179)             (0.0378)           (0.0222)           (0.0328)

  Number of Individuals           2,034             205                 1,798              1,790              1,703
  Number of Districts              159              33                   145                145                145
  Dep. Var. Mean                  0.840            0.927                0.829              0.433              0.681

                                                                     (b) Candidates
                                 Golkar         United                          Platform Appeal
                                 Party       Development          Nation Building     Islam   Nation Building
                                              Party (PPP)                                       Excl. Islam

  INPRES × young                 -0.0106*        0.0073*              -0.0112*            0.0019           -0.0111**
                                 (0.0059)        (0.0043)             (0.0059)           (0.0021)           (0.0055)

  Number of Candidates            17,710          17,710               17,710             17,710             17,710
  Number of Districts              273             273                  273                273                273
  Dep. Var. Mean                  0.119           0.046                0.117              0.027              0.111
Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) for ideological outcomes. The dependent variable in columns 1­3 of
panel (a) is an indicator for whether the individual supports the national, inclusive secular ideology of Pancasila, or thinks
some other ideology would be preferable. The data come from the Pepinsky et al. (2018) survey data from 2008, and we
examine the outcome separately for Muslims and non-Muslims. Columns 4 and 5 consider measures of support for the
sharia law. Column 4 is an indicator for whether the Muslim respondent express strong or very strong support for the
implementation of sharia law. Column 5 is a mean index across several specific components of sharia law (e.g., prohibiting
interest, mandating hijab for women), each of which is elaborated in Appendix Table A.17. The specification in panel (a)
compares individuals aged 6 or less (young) in 1974 with individuals aged 12 or more in 1974. The dependent variables
in panel (b) are based on legislative candidates in 2019. Columns 1 and 2 are indicators for whether the candidates are
running on the party tickets of Golkar (Suharto's party) and the Islamic United Development Party (PPP), respectively.
Columns 3­5 are indicators for whether the candidate's campaign platform mentions concepts that appeal to Indonesian
nation building and Pancasila (column 3), to Islam and religious themes (column 4), and nation building exclusive of Islam
and religious themes. The specifications in panel (b) are restricted to the original birth cohorts: aged 2­6 (young) or 12­17
in 1974. The specification is otherwise identical to that in Table 2; see the notes therein for details.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district.




                                                             42
                  Table 9: INPRES Exposure and Religious Cultural Transmission
                                               Horizontal Transmission: Child Islamic Education
                                          Elementary Islamic    Jun. Sec. Islamic      Sen. Sec. Islamic
                                          (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)          (6)

     INPRES × young (Father)          -0.0010**                         0.0011*                0.0025**
                                       (0.0004)                         (0.0006)               (0.0012)
     INPRES × young (Mother)                          -0.0009**                     0.0007                   0.0021**
                                                       (0.0004)                    (0.0006)                  (0.0010)

     Observations                      304,048         246,060          304,048    246,060      304,048      246,060
     Number of Districts                 275             275              275        275          275          275
     Dependent Variable Mean            0.005           0.005            0.026      0.026        0.034        0.033
     R2                                 0.014           0.014            0.026      0.028        0.029        0.028

                                                                     Vertical Transmission
                                          Marriage Matching                           Arabic Literacy
                                      Islamic-Educated Partner          Arabic in the Home        Child's Arabic
                                                                        Parents & Children     No Islamic Schooling
                                          (1)             (2)             (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)

     INPRES × young (Father)           0.0019**                         0.0049*                0.0069*
                                       (0.0009)                         (0.0027)               (0.0036)
     INPRES × young (Mother)                            0.0000                     0.0053**                   0.0053
                                                       (0.0007)                    (0.0026)                  (0.0046)

     Observations                      725,803         544,174          304,048    246,060      95,678        77,068
     Number of Districts                 275             275              275        275          272           272
     Dependent Variable Mean            0.039           0.024            0.213      0.268       0.877         0.887
     R2                                 0.035           0.024            0.111      0.137        0.047         0.042

Notes: This table reports estimates of a modified version of equation (1) where young now denotes the INPRES exposure
of a parent (father or mother). INPRES refers to SD INPRES schools constructed from 1973­78 per 1,000 children in 1971.
In panel (a), the dependent variable is no longer an individual's own Islamic education exposure but their children's
education. In panel (b), we look at spouses' Islamic education in columns 1­2. In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable
is an indicator for all 3 members of the household (father, mother, and child) being literate in Arabic. In columns 5 and 6,
the dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if the child is literate in Arabic, conditional on the parent being literate
in Arabic and the child having received no Islamic schooling. All specifications are restricted to children with mothers
and fathers (or to husbands and wives) that fall within the original birth cohorts: aged 2­6 (young) or 12­17 in 1974. We
restrict to co-resident children that are at least 18 years old and hence likely to have completed their secondary schooling.
The regressions additionally control for child birth cohort fixed effects. The specification is otherwise identical to that in
Table 2; see the notes therein for details.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by the parent's district of birth.




                                                                43
Appendix

A Further Empirical Results                                                                                                                   45
  Figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                               45
  Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                              49

B A Stackelberg Model of Competition in Education Markets                                                                                     63

C Data Sources and Construction                                                                                                               65

List of Tables
   A.1 INPRES Allocation and Baseline Madrasa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                               .   .   .   .   .   49
   A.2 INPRES Exposure and Islamic Schooling by Gender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                  .   .   .   .   .   50
   A.3 Effects of INPRES Exposure on Quantity and Type of Schooling by Gender . . . .                                     .   .   .   .   .   51
   A.4 INPRES Exposure, Islamic Schooling and the 1982 Headscarf Ban . . . . . . . . .                                    .   .   .   .   .   52
   A.5 INPRES Exposure and Islamic Schooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                .   .   .   .   .   53
   A.6 INPRES Exposure and Islamic Schooling Using Podes 1980 . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                   .   .   .   .   .   54
   A.7 Effect of INPRES Exposure on Quantity and Type of Schooling Using Podes 1980                                       .   .   .   .   .   55
   A.8 Why the Supply Side Response to SD INPRES Matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                    .   .   .   .   .   55
   A.9 Islam­State Competition at the Local Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                             .   .   .   .   .   56
   A.10 New Islamic Schools Over Time in Historical Administrative Data . . . . . . . . .                                 .   .   .   .   .   57
   A.11 Curriculum Differentiation in Islamic Schools (Total Hours) . . . . . . . . . . . .                               .   .   .   .   .   58
   A.12 Correlations of Curriculum and Test Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                            .   .   .   .   .   59
   A.13 INPRES Intensity and Test Score Differentials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                           .   .   .   .   .   59
   A.14 INPRES Exposure and Linguistic Ability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                            .   .   .   .   .   60
   A.15 Correlations of Islamic Education and Literacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                            .   .   .   .   .   60
   A.16 INPRES Exposure and Schooling in the Pepinsky et al. (2018) Sample . . . . . . .                                  .   .   .   .   .   61
   A.17 Null Effects of INPRES Exposure on Religious Political Preferences (I) . . . . . .                                .   .   .   .   .   61
   A.18 Null Effects of INPRES Exposure on Religious Political Preferences (II) . . . . . .                               .   .   .   .   .   61
   A.19 Intergenerational Transmission of Islamic Schooling (OLS) . . . . . . . . . . . . .                               .   .   .   .   .   62

List of Figures
   A.1   INPRES Exposure and Islamic Schooling | Years of Schooling . . .             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   45
   A.2   INPRES Intensity and Entry of Private and Public Islamic Schools             .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   46
   A.3   INPRES Intensity and Entry of Private non-Islamic Schools . . . .            .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   47
   A.4   Islamic School Attendance vs. Completion in Repeated Cohorts .               .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   48




                                                         44
A                   Further Empirical Results

Figures


                                                           Figure A.1: INPRES Exposure and Islamic Schooling | Years of Schooling
                                                             (a) Elementary Madrasa                                                                               (b) Junior Secondary Madrasa

                                                                                                                                                     .12
                                              .03




                                                                                                           Islamic junior secondary (conditional)
    Islamic elementary (conditional)




                                                                                                                                                      .1
                                             .025




                                                                                                                                                     .08
                                              .02



                                                                                                                                                     .06

                                             .015
                                                    1950       1960     1970            1980   1990                                                        1950       1960     1970            1980   1990
                                                                        year of birth                                                                                          year of birth



                                                           (c) Senior Secondary Madrasa                                                                              (d) Any Level Madrasa
                                             .08
                                                                                                                                                     .08
                                                                                                           Highest education Islamic (conditional)
    Islamic senior secondary (conditional)




                                             .06
                                                                                                                                                     .06




                                             .04                                                                                                     .04




                                             .02                                                                                                     .02
                                                   1950        1960     1970            1980   1990                                                        1950       1960     1970            1980   1990
                                                                        year of birth                                                                                          year of birth




 Notes: This figure reports analogous results to those in Figure 1, but here we restrict to individuals that completed the
 given years of education corresponding to the level at hand: 6 for elementary, 9 for junior secondary, and 12 for senior
 secondary. The outcomes in panels (a)­(c) are the same as those in panel (b) of Table 2, and panel (d) is the same as the
 outcome in columns 5­6 of Table 3.




                                                                                                      45
                                Figure A.2: INPRES Intensity and Entry of Private and Public Islamic Schools
                                                                                               Elementary Madrasa
                                                           (a) Private                                                                                                        (b) Public
                              .006                                                                                                           .002




                              .004
   INPRES x semi-decade: 




                                                                                                                  INPRES x semi-decade: 
    90% confidence interval




                                                                                                                   90% confidence interval
                                                                                                                                             .001



                              .002


                                                                                                                                                0

                                 0




                              -.002                                                                                                          -.001
                                      1950   1955   1960    1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995                                           1950       1955   1960   1965    1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995




                                                                                        Junior Secondary Madrasa
                                                           (c) Private                                                                                                        (d) Public
                              .006                                                                                                           .0015




                              .004                                                                                                             .001
   INPRES x semi-decade: 




                                                                                                                  INPRES x semi-decade: 
    90% confidence interval




                                                                                                                   90% confidence interval




                                                                                                                                             .0005
                              .002



                                                                                                                                                     0
                                 0



                                                                                                                                             -.0005
                              -.002
                                      1950   1955   1960    1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995                                               1950   1955   1960    1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995




                                                                                        Senior Secondary Madrasa
                                                           (e) Private                                                                                                        (f) Public
                              .003                                                                                                           .0015




                              .002                                                                                                             .001
   INPRES x semi-decade: 




                                                                                                                  INPRES x semi-decade: 
    90% confidence interval




                                                                                                                   90% confidence interval




                              .001                                                                                                           .0005




                                 0                                                                                                                   0




                              -.001                                                                                                          -.0005
                                      1950   1955   1960    1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995                                               1950   1955   1960    1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995



Notes: This figure disaggregates the Islamic school entry outcomes in Figure 4 (panels a­c) into private and public Is-
lamic schools. The latter comprise 8% of all Islamic schools. All dependent variables are normalized by the 1971 child
population.
                                                                                                             46
                                         Figure A.3: INPRES Intensity and Entry of Private non-Islamic Schools
                                                            (a) All                                                                                                  (b) Primary
                                                                                                                                             .01
                               .01



                                                                                                                                            .005
                              .005
   INPRES x semi-decade: 




                                                                                                                 INPRES x semi-decade: 
    90% confidence interval




                                                                                                                  90% confidence interval
                                 0                                                                                                             0




                              -.005                                                                                                         -.005




                               -.01                                                                                                          -.01

                                      1950   1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995                                           1950   1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995



                                                (c) Junior Secondary                                                                                          (d) Senior Secondary
                              .004                                                                                                          .003



                              .003
                                                                                                                                            .002
   INPRES x semi-decade: 




                                                                                                                 INPRES x semi-decade: 
    90% confidence interval




                              .002                                                                                90% confidence interval

                                                                                                                                            .001

                              .001


                                                                                                                                               0
                                 0



                              -.001                                                                                                         -.001
                                      1950   1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995                                           1950   1955   1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995



Notes: This figure reports semi-decade-specific estimates of  in equation (2) on a balanced district­year panel. The
dependent variable measures: the number of private non-Islamic schools across all levels (panel a), elementary (b), junior
secondary (c), and senior secondary (d). Appendix C describes how we isolate secular schools among all private schools
in the MEC registry.




                                                                                                            47
          Figure A.4: Islamic School Attendance vs. Completion in Repeated Cohorts
                                                                         .15                                       Enrolled in 2012
                                                                                                                   Completed in 2018




                            Highest Schooling Islamic, share of cohort
                                                                          .1




                                                                         .05




                                                                          0
                                                                               1994   1995   1996    1997   1998    1999     2000



Notes: This figure uses repeated observations of identical cohorts in the 2012 and 2018 Susenas rounds. We focus on cohorts
born between 1994 and 1999 which were young enough to have been enrolled in school in 2012 but old enough to have
completed high school by 2018. Black bars show Islamic attendance rates measured in 2012 while grey bars indicate
Islamic completion rates in 2018.




                                                                                                    48
Tables

                         Table A.1: INPRES Allocation and Baseline Madrasa
                                                INPRES Schools          INPRES Schools per 1,000 children
                                                     (1)               (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)
    Madrasas in District by 1971                     5.628***
                                                      (1.168)
    Madrasas by 1971 (per 1,000 children)                            2.248*                 1.025*      1.367**
                                                                     (1.271)                (0.524)     (0.577)

    School Enrollment in 1971                                                   0.064***    0.049***    0.042***
                                                                                 (0.015)     (0.010)     (0.008)
    Child Population in 1971                                                    0.008***    0.008***    0.006***
                                                                                 (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.002)
    Enrolled Child Population                                                  -0.001***   -0.001***   -0.001***
                                                                                 (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
    Water and Sanitation Program                                                            0.847***    1.327***
                                                                                             (0.220)     (0.137)
    Waqf Assets in District by 1971                                                           0.308      0.580*
                                                                                             (0.377)     (0.330)

    Observations                                       273             273        273         273         273
    Policy Controls
    Other Controls
    Province Fixed Effects
    R2                                                0.156           0.028      0.263       0.388       0.718
 Notes: This table reports OLS estimates from a regression of the number of SD INPRES schools built between 1973­78
 on district-level covariates. SD INPRES schools and madrasa are measured in absolute terms in column 1 and per 1,000
 children in columns 2­5.
 * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                         49
                  Table A.2: INPRES Exposure and Islamic Schooling by Gender
                                               (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)      (5)          (6)

                                                         Highest Education Level: [. . . ] Islamic
                                                 Elementary        Junior Secondary           Senior Secondary

                                                                          (a) Women

   INPRES × young                           -0.0011*      0.0001     0.0023***     0.0059***   0.0011**    0.0031***
                                            (0.0006)     (0.0011)    (0.0006)       (0.0013)   (0.0005)    (0.0007)

   p-value (women=men)                        0.350        0.068        0.249        0.000       0.985       0.598

   Observations                              416,125     1,986,758    416,125      1,986,758    416,125    1,986,758
   Dependent Variable Mean                    0.016        0.011       0.011         0.018       0.007       0.013
   R2                                         0.034        0.023       0.013         0.026       0.009       0.017

                                                                               (b) Men

   INPRES × young                          -0.0015***    -0.0012**   0.0018***     0.0035***   0.0011***   0.0033***
                                            (0.0005)      (0.0006)   (0.0005)       (0.0008)   (0.0003)    (0.0007)

   Observations                              422,901     1,951,970    422,901      1,951,970    422,901    1,951,970
   Dependent Variable Mean                    0.011        0.008       0.010         0.014       0.008       0.012
   R2                                         0.022        0.016       0.011         0.020       0.007       0.013

   Number of Districts                         275          275         275              275      275         275
   Cohorts aged 2-6 vs. 12-17 in 1974
   ------"----­ 6 vs. 12 in 1974

Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) based on annual Susenas data from 2012 to 2018. Panels (a) and (b)
report results separately for women and men, respectively. The dependent variables (as in panel (a) of Table 2) include an
indicator equal to one if the individual's final year of schooling was completed in an Islamic elementary (columns 1­2),
junior secondary (columns 3­4), and senior secondary (columns 5­6). All specifications include survey year dummies,
district of birth dummies and year of birth dummies interacted with the 1971 children population, the 1971 enrollment
rate, and exposure to the water and sanitation program in the district of birth. In odd-numbered columns, the sample
is composed of all individuals aged 2­6 (young) or 12­17 in 1974. In even-numbered columns, the sample is composed
of all individuals aged less than 6 (young) or more than 12 in 1974. The p-values in panel (a) correspond to a test of the
difference in coefficients across the two panels.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




                                                           50
   Table A.3: Effects of INPRES Exposure on Quantity and Type of Schooling by Gender

                                          Years of Schooling      Highest Level Islamic      Islamic | Highest Level
                                            (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)

                                                                            (a) Women

 INPRES × young                          0.0925***    0.2616***   0.0021**       0.0086***    0.0005      0.0058***
                                          (0.0291)     (0.0524)   (0.0009)        (0.0023)   (0.0009)      (0.0017)

 p-value(women=men)                        0.007        0.323       0.190         0.000       0.987         0.336

 Observations                             416,123     1,986,749    416,125       1,986,758   349,899      1,564,984
 Dependent Variable Mean                   6.864        7.373       0.034          0.041      0.041         0.052
 R2                                        0.202        0.420       0.035          0.045      0.041         0.050

                                                                              (b) Men

 INPRES × young                          0.1735***    0.2772***    0.0012*       0.0053***    0.0004      0.0048***
                                          (0.0308)     (0.0485)    (0.0007)       (0.0016)   (0.0007)      (0.0015)

 Observations                             422,896     1,951,961    422,901       1,951,970   367,684      1,620,329
 Dependent Variable Mean                   8.039        7.959       0.028          0.034      0.032         0.040
 R2                                        0.143        0.350       0.027          0.036      0.030         0.038

 Number of Districts                        275          275         275           275         275           275
 Cohorts aged 2-6 vs. 12-17 in 1974
 ------"----­ 6 vs. 12 in 1974

Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) based on annual Susenas data from 2012 to 2018. Panels (a) and (b)
report results separately for women and men, respectively. The dependent variables (as in Table 3) include total years
of schooling (columns 1­2), an indicator equal to one if the individual's final year of education is in an Islamic school
(columns 3­4), conditional on the given years of schooling completed (columns 5­6). All specifications include survey
year dummies, district of birth dummies and year of birth dummies interacted with the 1971 children population, the
1971 enrollment rate, and exposure to the water and sanitation program in the district of birth. In odd-numbered columns,
the sample is composed of all individuals aged 2­6 (young) or 12­17 in 1974. In even-numbered columns, the sample is
composed of all individuals aged less than 6 (young) or more than 12 in 1974.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




                                                           51
         Table A.4: INPRES Exposure, Islamic Schooling and the 1982 Headscarf Ban
                                                            (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)

                                                        Highest Education Level:       Highest Level is Islamic
                                                          Elementary Islamic            | on Completing 6 Yrs

      INPRES × young × woman × (12 in 1982)              0.0008*        0.0010**        0.0016*        0.0011
                                                         (0.0004)       (0.0004)        (0.0009)      (0.0008)

      INPRES × young                                      -0.0007         0.0003         -0.0006       0.0002
                                                         (0.0004)       (0.0005)         (0.0007)     (0.0008)
      INPRES × young × woman                              -0.0006        -0.0003        -0.0015**     -0.0009
                                                         (0.0004)       (0.0004)         (0.0008)     (0.0007)
      INPRES × young × (12 in 1982)                     -0.0009***     -0.0012***      -0.0021***      0.0008
                                                         (0.0003)       (0.0004)         (0.0008)     (0.0015)

      Observations                                        839,026       3,938,728       457,020      2,918,805
      Number of Districts                                   275            275            275           275
      Cohorts aged 2-6 vs. 12-17 in 1974
      ------"----­ 6 vs. 12 in 1974
      Dependent Variable Mean                              0.014          0.010          0.025         0.022
      R2                                                   0.027          0.020          0.044         0.049

Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) fully interacted with a gender dummy and a dummy for cohorts aged
12 or less in 1982, based on annual Susenas data from 2012 to 2018. INPRES refers to SD INPRES schools constructed
from 1973­78 per 1,000 children in 1971. The headscarf ban in public schools was adopted in 1982. Women aged 12
or less in 1982 would have been too young to complete their primary education before the ban came into force. The
dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if the individual's final year of schooling was completed in an Islamic
elementary. Columns 1 and 2 include all individuals regardless of their years of schooling. Columns 3 and 4 include only
individuals with 6 years of completed schooling. The regression includes all two-way and three-way interactions between
the IN P RES and the young terms in equation (1), a dummy for women, and a dummy for cohorts aged 12 or less in 1982.
All specifications also include survey year dummies, district of birth dummies and year of birth dummies interacted with
the 1971 children population, the 1971 enrollment rate, and exposure to the water and sanitation program in the district
of birth. In odd-numbered columns, the sample is composed of all individuals aged 2­6 (young) or 12­17 in 1974. In
even-numbered columns, the sample is composed of all individuals aged less than 6 (young) or more than 12 in 1974.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




                                                          52
                                                   Table A.5: INPRES Exposure and Islamic Schooling
                                                                 Muslim respondents in the IFLS
                                                    (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)        (9)        (10)

                                                             Highest Education Level: [. . .] Islamic                             Years of Islamic Education
                                                      Elementary              Junior Sec.             Senior Sec.            Elementary               Secondary

       INPRES × young                             -0.0173   -0.0222***     0.0311     0.0313**     0.0311    0.0321*      -0.0637     -0.0907**    0.1506    0.1001**
                                                 (0.0108)    (0.0076)     (0.0218)    (0.0155)    (0.0338)   (0.0189)    (0.0620)      (0.0392)   (0.1048)   (0.0507)

       Observations                               6,124       41,818        3,164      23,875      2,206      15,407      6,124        41,818      3,318      25,184
       Number of Districts                         205         252           197        247         188        238         205          252         198        248
       Cohorts aged 2-6 vs. 12-17 in 1974
       ------"----­ 6 vs. 12 in 1974
       Dependent Variable Mean                    0.110        0.122        0.217      0.274       0.186       0.244      0.589        0.622       0.950      1.101
       R2                                         0.136        0.145        0.144      0.121       0.150       0.123      0.132        0.137       0.136      0.120
53




     Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) based on Muslim respondents in the IFLS (1993­2015). The binary outcome variables in columns 1­6 are akin
     to those in panel (b) of Table 2, and the outcomes in columns 6­10 are continuous years of education at the given level. All specifications include district of birth
     dummies and year of birth dummies interacted with the 1971 children population, the 1971 enrollment rate, exposure to the water and sanitation program in
     the district of birth, and the share of Muslim respondents in the 1972 census. In odd-numbered columns, the sample is composed of all individuals aged 2­6
     (young) or 12­17 in 1974. In even-numbered columns, the sample is composed of all individuals aged less than 6 (young) or more than 12 in 1974.
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.
              Table A.6: INPRES Exposure and Islamic Schooling Using Podes 1980
                                              (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)            (6)

                                                      (a) Highest Education Level: [. . . ] Islamic
                                               Elementary          Junior Secondary          Senior Secondary

 INPRES (Podes 80) × young                 -0.0016*       -0.0013    0.0023***   0.0064***   0.0017***    0.0051***
                                           (0.0008)       (0.0013)    (0.0007)    (0.0016)    (0.0005)     (0.0011)

 Observations                              836,694       3,928,356    836,694    3,928,356    836,694     3,928,356
 Dependent Variable Mean                    0.014          0.010       0.011       0.016       0.008        0.012
 R2                                         0.027          0.019       0.011       0.023       0.007        0.014

                                                            (b) Highest Education Level is Islamic,
                                                              (b) Conditional on Completing [. . . ]
                                                    6 Years                 9 Years                  12 Years
 INPRES (Podes 80) × young                -0.0026***      -0.0013      0.0018     0.0090**     0.0008     0.0084***
                                           (0.0010)       (0.0020)    (0.0031)    (0.0044)    (0.0020)     (0.0029)

 Observations                              456,193       2,912,066    121,460    1,310,220    169,080     1,344,561
 Dependent Variable Mean                    0.025          0.030       0.073       0.103       0.038        0.056
 R2                                         0.044          0.049       0.076       0.081       0.036        0.048

 Number of Districts                         273            273         273         273         273          273
 Cohorts aged 2-6 vs. 12-17 in 1974
 ------"----­ 6 vs. 12 in 1974

Notes: This table reports estimates of Table 2 using an alternative measure of INPRES schools from village-level admin-
istrative data in 1980 aggregated to the district-level for comparison with our baseline measure from Duflo (2001). The
specification is otherwise identical to that in Table 2; see the notes therein for details.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




                                                           54
Table A.7: Effect of INPRES Exposure on Quantity and Type of Schooling Using Podes 1980
                                          Years of Schooling      Highest Level Islamic      Islamic | Highest Level
                                            (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)

 INPRES (Podes 80) × young               0.1176***    0.2541***   0.0023**     0.0097***      0.0007      0.0074***
                                          (0.0443)     (0.0756)   (0.0012)      (0.0032)     (0.0011)      (0.0024)

 Observations                             836,687     3,928,338    836,694     3,928,356     715,696      3,177,841
 Number of Districts                        273          273         273          273          273           273
 Cohorts aged 2-6 vs. 12-17 in 1974
 ------"----­ 6 vs. 12 in 1974
 Dependent Variable Mean                   7.450        7.658       0.031        0.037        0.036         0.046
 R2                                        0.162        0.375       0.030        0.040        0.034         0.044

Notes: This table reports estimates of Table 3 using an altenrative measure of INPRES schools from village-level admin-
istrative data in 1980 aggregated to the district-level for comparison with our baseline measure from Duflo (2001). The
specification is otherwise identical to that in Table 3; see the notes therein for details.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




                Table A.8: Why the Supply Side Response to SD INPRES Matters
                                                 Years of           Any Secondary              Any Islamic
                                                Schooling             Schooling                Secondary
      School Construction, '73-8              (1)        (2)         (3)      (4)             (5)       (6)

      INPRES primary × young              0.138***     0.140***      0.006       0.006     0.003***     0.003***
                                           (0.027)      (0.027)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.001)      (0.001)
      state secondary × young                            0.472                  0.185*                    -0.015
                                                        (0.950)                 (0.109)                  (0.023)
      Islamic primary × young                            0.063                   -0.026                 0.016***
                                                        (0.156)                 (0.017)                  (0.005)
      Islamic secondary × young                        3.484***                 0.350**                  0.063*
                                                        (1.270)                 (0.158)                  (0.036)

      Number of Observations               836,687     836,687     836,687     836,687      836,687     836,687
      Number of Districts                    273         273         273         273          273         273
      Dependent Variable Mean               7.450       7.450       0.414       0.414        0.018       0.018

Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) for years of schooling (columns 1­2), an indicator for any secondary
schooling (columns 3­4), and an indicator for any Islamic secondary schooling (columns 5­6). The specification in odd-
numbered columns is identical to that in Tables 2 and 3. We consider cohorts aged 2­6 (young) or 12­17 in 1974. The
even-numbered columns include additional interactions of the young (exposed cohort) dummy with the number of state
secondary, Islamic primary, and Islamic secondary schools constructed (per 1,000 children in 1971) from 1973 to the 1978,
the same window in which INPRES primary schools were constructed. The specification is otherwise identical to that in
Tables 2 and 3; see the notes therein for details.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




                                                           55
                        Table A.9: Islam­State Competition at the Local Level
                         Conditional on Pre-INPRES Islamic School Presence
                                                                          Islamic School Entry
                                                                 Elem.=1        Elem.=0       Elem.=1
                                                                Jun. Sec.=0 Jun. Sec.=1 Jun. Sec.=1
                                                                    (1)            (2)           (3)

                                                                            (a) Entry 1973­1983

          SD INPRES built in village, 1973­78                      0.002          0.005***         0.00004
                                                                  (0.002)          (0.001)        (0.0005)
          SD INPRES saturation at subdistrict level               -0.012          0.009***         0.001
                                                                  (0.017)          (0.002)        (0.002)
          any elem. madrasa in village pre-1973                   0.015**         0.014***        0.005***
                                                                  (0.007)          (0.002)        (0.001)
          any jun. sec. madrasa in village pre-1973              0.046***         -0.008          0.007***
                                                                  (0.011)         (0.009)          (0.002)

          Number of Villages                                                       75,090
          Share of Villages with Given Profile                     0.049           0.009            0.004

                                                                            (b) Entry 1984­1998

          SD INPRES built in village, 1973­78                    0.006***         0.015***        0.004***
                                                                  (0.002)          (0.002)        (0.001)
          SD INPRES saturation at subdistrict level              0.029***         0.020***        0.011***
                                                                  (0.007)          (0.006)        (0.003)
          any elem. madrasa in village pre-1973                    0.006          0.048***        0.007***
                                                                  (0.006)          (0.004)        (0.002)
          any jun. sec. madrasa in village pre-1973              0.038***          0.004           -0.008
                                                                  (0.008)         (0.010)          (0.009)

          Number of Villages                                                       75,090
          Share of Villages with Given Profile                     0.035           0.039            0.009

Notes: This table reports average marginal effects from the multinomial logit regression as in Table 5 but here including
two additional regressors capturing Islamic school presence prior to INPRES: any elementary madrasa and any junior
secondary madrasa pre-1973.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district.




                                                           56
        Table A.10: New Islamic Schools Over Time in Historical Administrative Data

                                                          Islamic Schools                              Secular Schools
                                              Prim.     Jun. Sec. Sen. Sec.      pesantren     Prim.      Jun. Sec. Sen. Sec.
                                               (1)         (2)       (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)       (7)
Effect of No. of INPRES Schools on. . .
 1980 level                                 0.258***        ­           ­         0.044*     0.492***     -0.064***   -0.060***
                                             (0.063)                              (0.023)     (0.088)      (0.020)     (0.015)

  1980 - 1983                                 0.022         ­           ­          0.008       -0.077       0.023      -0.006
                                             (0.019)                              (0.006)     (0.056)      (0.016)     (0.008)

  1983 - 1990                               0.126***        ­           ­          0.015     0.282***       0.011       0.005
                                             (0.032)                              (0.012)     (0.086)      (0.030)     (0.021)

  1990 - 1993                                 0.015      0.009*      0.012***     0.011**      -0.028       0.015       0.011
                                             (0.022)     (0.005)     (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.047)      (0.017)     (0.013)

Number of Districts                            273         273         273         273          273         273         273
Mean 1980 level                                93.4         ­           ­          19.1        424.1        46.9        18.7
Mean 1980 - 1983                              -0.05         ­           ­          0.7         47.5         15.2        9.9
Mean 1983 - 1990                               20.5         ­           ­          9.1         52.9          8.9        11.6
Mean 1990 - 1993                               -4.3        1.8         0.9         2.0          0.3         -1.3        -2.3

Notes: This table examines supply-side responses to INPRES using historical administrative data from the 1980, 1983, 1990
and 1993 rounds Podes, which asked about the number of schools of different types. Each cell shows the coefficient from
a separate district-level cross-sectional regression of the given outcome on the number of SD INPRES primary schools
constructed from 1973 to 1978. The first row looks at the number of schools of each level in 1980, and subsequent rows
look at the difference in the stock reported between the initial and final year of the difference. The district-level number
of pesantren are computed by adding up the number of villages that report having any pesantren. Secondary Islamic
schools were not recorded until the 1990 round of Podes. The regressions control for the 1971 children population, the 1971
enrollment rate, and exposure to the water and sanitation program.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors.




                                                            57
            Table A.11: Curriculum Differentiation in Islamic Schools (Total Hours)

                                                    All Levels     Primary     Jun. Sec.    Sen. Sec.
                                                        (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)

                                                                (a) Islamic Subject Hours

                  INPRES × post-1972                  0.274*        0.250*       0.341      -2.058**
                                                      (0.141)       (0.147)     (0.318)      (0.864)

                  Dependent Variable Mean              7.060         5.651       7.999        9.300

                                                                (b) Pancasila/Civic Hours

                  INPRES × post-1972                   -0.024        n/a       -0.208**      0.204*
                                                      (0.019)                   (0.081)      (0.104)

                  Dependent Variable Mean              0.817                     1.804        1.426

                                                                    (c) Arabic Hours

                  INPRES × post-1972                  0.038*        0.059*       -0.062     0.375***
                                                      (0.023)       (0.033)     (0.068)      (0.102)

                  Dependent Variable Mean              1.536         1.131       1.917        2.009

                                                               (d) Bahasa Indonesia Hours

                  INPRES × post-1972                  -0.096*        -0.015    -0.334***      0.088
                                                      (0.051)       (0.062)     (0.118)      (0.140)

                  Dependent Variable Mean              1.719         0.148       3.634        2.865

                  Number of Observations              16,889         8,559       5,077        3,251
                  Number of Districts                  263            245         250          225
Notes: This table reports analogous specifications to those in Table 6 with the dependent variable measured in total hours
of instruction time per subject rather than subject-specific shares of total instruction time.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district.




                                                           58
                        Table A.12: Correlations of Curriculum and Test Scores
                                                                               Test Scores in [...]
                                                                                 Math       Science
                                                                                  (1)          (2)

                           Islamic curriculum share                            -0.0539**     -0.0398*
                                                                                (0.0217)     (0.0221)
                           Pancasila and Civics curriculum share                 0.0550       0.0553
                                                                                (0.0758)     (0.0833)

                           Number of Observations                               1,371         1,371
                           Dep. Var. Mean                                        0.0           0.0
Notes: This table reports correlations of test scores in math and science (the combination of which is the dependent variable
in panel c of Table 6) and the share of weekly instruction time devoted to Islamic and Pancasila/civics curriculum (the
dependent variables in panel a and b of Table 6). There are only 1,371 junior secondary schools for which we can link test
scores and curriculum registries. The regressions include district and year-of-school-entry fixed effects.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district.




                       Table A.13: INPRES Intensity and Test Score Differentials
                                                           Math and Science Test Scores in [...]
                                                    All Schools Islamic Non-Islamic  I-NI
                                                         (1)        (2)           (3)            (4)

                 INPRES × post-1972                     0.001        -0.122         0.0002         -0.623**
                                                       (0.025)       (0.117)       (0.0241)         (0.249)

                 Number of Observations                10,055         2,486          9,252          1,681
                 Number of Districts                    273            209            273            186
                 Dependent Variable Mean                0.00          0.00           0.00           0.00

Notes: This table examines science and math test score outcomes at the junior secondary level in the 2014 school year. The
unit of analysis is a district­year-of-entry, and the panel is unbalanced, including only years in which the given district had
any schools enter. The dependent variables capture the standardized test score for all schools (column 1), Islamic (column
2), non-Islamic schools (column 3), and the difference between Islamic and non-Islamic schools in the given district­year-
of-entry (column 4). This specification include district fixed effects, year-of-entry fixed effects, and a post-1972 dummy
interacted with the 1971 children population, the 1971 enrollment rate, and exposure to the water and sanitation program.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




                                                              59
                               Table A.14: INPRES Exposure and Linguistic Ability
                             Able to Speak Indonesian                   Latin Alphabet Literacy                           Other Literacy
                         All       Muslims Non-Muslims          All       Islamic-Educ. Secular-Educ.         All      Islamic-Educ. Secular-Educ.
                         (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)             (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)

INPRES × young        0.0182***     0.0242***      0.0049     0.0194***      0.0111***       0.0196***       0.0034       -0.0003        0.0034
                      (0.0052)       (0.0068)     (0.0041)    (0.0042)       (0.0039)         (0.0042)      (0.0023)     (0.0050)       (0.0023)

Observations          31,678,510    27,811,101    3,867,324   839,026         25,935          813,087       839,026       25,935        813,087
Number of Districts      273           273           273        275            268              275           275          268            275
Dep. Var. Mean          0.931         0.933         0.918      0.914          0.985            0.912         0.060        0.045          0.061

Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) using data from the 2010 Population Census (columns 1­3) and Susenas
2012­18 (columns 4­9). The specification in columns 1­3 is the same as in columns 1­3 of panel (a) in Table 7 with the
outcome here being whether the respondent is able to speak Indonesian. The specification in columns 4­9 is the same as
in columns 4­6 of panel (a) in Table 7 with the other literacy outcomes here.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




                          Table A.15: Correlations of Islamic Education and Literacy
                                                 Years-of-Schooling Fixed Effects
                                                                           Literacy in . . . Alphabet
                                                                        Arabic      Latin         Other
                                                                         (1)         (2)           (3)

                                   Islamic primary                    0.1992***        0.0144***    -0.0109***
                                                                       (0.0118)         (0.0020)     (0.0025)
                                   Islamic junior secondary           0.2627***          0.0003       -0.0021
                                                                       (0.0093)         (0.0013)     (0.0030)
                                   Islamic senior secondary           0.2842***          -0.0004      -0.0012
                                                                       (0.0085)         (0.0012)     (0.0053)

                                   Number of Observations               839,019          839,019         839,019
                                   Number of Districts                    275              275             275
                                   Dependent Variable Mean               0.343            0.914           0.060

Notes: This table regresses indicators for literacy in different languages/alphabets on indicators for whether the respon-
dent's final level of schooling was Islamic primary, junior secondary or senior secondary. The data come from our baseline
Susenas data from 2012 to 2018, and the sample is restricted to our baseline cohort specification used throughout the paper.
The regressions are conditional on total years-of-schooling fixed effects such that the coefficients identify the differential
literacy rates for those completing Islamic versus non-Islamic school with the same total years of schooling. The specifica-
tion omits the interaction of INPRES and the exposure dummy but is otherwise identical to that used in column 4 of panel
(a) in Table 7.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




                                                                        60
      Table A.16: INPRES Exposure and Schooling in the Pepinsky et al. (2018) Sample
                                                              Highest Education Level:
                                  Any Elementary       Islamic Elementary Islamic Jun. Sec.             Islamic Sen. Sec
                                        (1)                    (2)                 (3)                        (4)
         INPRES × young               0.0829**                   0.0067             0.0380**                 -0.0020
                                      (0.0389)                  (0.0207)            (0.0152)                (0.0087)

         Observations                   1,785                    1,694               1,694                   1,694
         Number of Districts             145                      145                 145                     145
         Dep Var. Mean                  0.773                    0.029               0.037                   0.021
         R2                             0.390                    0.250               0.202                   0.258
Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) using data from Pepinsky et al. (2018). The sample is restricted to
Muslim respondents and compares individuals aged 6 or less in 1974 (young) with individuals aged 12 or more in 1974.
All specifications include district fixed effects and year fixed effects interacted with the number of children in the district
in 1971, the 1971 enrollment rate, and exposure to the water and sanitation program.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




      Table A.17: Null Effects of INPRES Exposure on Religious Political Preferences (I)
                         Corporal       Prohibit     Hijab            Support    Punish     Punish          Index       Index
                        Punishments     Interest   Mandatory         Polygamy   Adultery   Apostasy       Subjective   Objective
                             (1)          (2)         (3)               (4)        (5)        (6)             (7)         (8)
 INPRES × young            -0.0174      -0.0438       0.0414          0.0142    -0.0182      -0.0006        -0.0040         -0.0311
                           (0.0474)     (0.0469)     (0.0355)        (0.0578)   (0.0516)     (0.0281)       (0.0222)       (0.0328)
 Observations                1,722        1,625       1,740            1,777      1,740       1,714          1,790           1,703
 Number of Districts          143          143         143              145        145         145            145             145
 Dep. Var. Mean              0.312        0.452       0.826            0.388      0.433       0.183          0.433           0.681
Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) using data from Pepinsky et al. (2018). The outcomes in columns 1­6
correspond to the sub-components of the objective index of support for sharia law used in Table 8 and reproduced here in
column 8. The specification is otherwise identical to that in Table 8; see the notes therein for details.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




     Table A.18: Null Effects of INPRES Exposure on Religious Political Preferences (II)
                                  Muslim     Religiosity                             Support:
                                 President   President     Islam in Politics    Islamic Economics       Islam in Society
                                    (1)          (2)              (3)                   (4)                    (5)
          INPRES × young          -0.0204       -0.0219            0.1129           -0.0269                 -0.0311
                                  (0.0358)      (0.0350)          (0.0726)          (0.0610)                (0.0328)
          Observations             1,771         1,769              1,564             1,583                  1,703
          Number of Districts       145           145                144               144                    145
          Dep. Var. Mean           0.664         0.774              2.280             2.133                  0.681
Notes: This table reports estimates of equation (1) using data from Pepinsky et al. (2018). The outcomes are indicators
for whether the respondent believes the president should be Muslim (column 1), religiosity of the president is important
(2), Islam should play a central role in politics (3), in the economy (4), and in society (5). The sample is restricted to
Muslim respondents and compares individuals aged 6 or less (young) in 1974 with individuals aged 12 or more in 1974.
All specifications include district fixed effects and year fixed effects interacted with the number of children in the district
in 1971, the 1971 enrollment rate, and exposure to the water and sanitation program.
* p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by district of birth.




                                                                61
                                       Table A.19: Intergenerational Transmission of Islamic Schooling (OLS)
                                                                                       Child's Education: [. . . ] Islamic
                                                    Elem.        Jun. Sec.      Sen. Sec.      Any        Elem.         Jun. Sec.          Sen. Sec.         Any
                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)                (7)            (8)
             Father's education:
               elementary Islamic                 0.0946***      0.0914***      0.0764***
                                                   (0.0088)       (0.0072)       (0.0076)
               junior secondary Islamic             0.0013       0.0834***      0.0947***
                                                   (0.0023)       (0.0076)       (0.0085)
               senior secondary Islamic             0.0016       0.0233***      0.1545***
                                                   (0.0020)       (0.0072)       (0.0118)
               any Islamic                                                                     0.2015***
                                                                                                (0.0090)

             Mother's education:
               elementary Islamic                                                                            0.0897***      0.0932***      0.0826***
62




                                                                                                              (0.0076)       (0.0074)       (0.0068)
               junior secondary Islamic                                                                        0.0036       0.0625***      0.1003***
                                                                                                              (0.0024)       (0.0066)       (0.0109)
               senior secondary Islamic                                                                       -0.0004        0.0109*       0.1390***
                                                                                                              (0.0019)       (0.0059)       (0.0113)
               any Islamic                                                                                                                                0.2008***
                                                                                                                                                           (0.0093)

             Observations                          304,048        304,048        304,048        304,048       246,066        246,066        246,066        246,066
             Number of Districts                     275            275            275            275           275            275            275            275
             Dependent Variable Mean                0.005          0.026          0.034          0.061         0.005          0.026          0.033          0.060

     Notes: This table reports correlations of parental Islamic schooling and children's Islamic schooling. Columns 1­4 are for father's Islamic schooling and 5­8 for
     mother's. The sample in columns 1­4 (5­8) is the same as in odd-numbered (even-numbered) columns 3­8 of Table 9. The outcomes parallel those in panel (a)
     of Table 2. All of these specifications are restricted to children with mothers and fathers fall within the original birth cohorts: aged 2­6 (young) or 12­17 in 1974.
     The regressions additionally control for child birth cohort fixed effects. The specification is otherwise identical to that in Table 2; see the notes therein for details.
     * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered by the parent's district of birth.
B        A Stackelberg Model of Competition in Education Markets
This section describes a simple model to rationalize the increase in the supply of Islamic schools in
response to SD INPRES. The model leverages insights from Bulow et al. (1985) and Marini and Rodano
(2013) on strategic complementarities in Cournot and Stackelberg duopolies.
       Suppose two players j = s, i compete in a Stackelberg game. The state (s) is the Stackelberg leader
and the Islamic sector (i) is the follower. Both players maximize the number of students enrolled in their
respective schools. The payoff of player j is:

                                                       (qj , Q) = (1 + Q)-b qj

where P (Q) = (1 + Q)-b , b > 1 is the inverse demand for schooling and Q = qs + qi is the total supply
of schools across both sectors.
       We solve recursively for a Stackelberg (subgame perfect) equilibrium. The Islamic sector solves:

                                               ri (qs ) = arg max(1 + qs + qi )-b qi ,                                            (B.1)
                                                                 qi


taking the state's choice of qs as given. The FOC with respect to qi yields:

                                                                      1 + qs
                                                       ri (qs ) =            = qi ,                                               (B.2)
                                                                      b-1

which implies that i and s are strategic complements (ri (qs ) is upward sloping). Given the Islamic
sector's best response, the state solves:

                                                qs = arg max(1 + qs + ri (qs ))-b qs                                              (B.3)
                                                            qs


The equilibrium number of state schools is then:

                                                                        1
                                                             qs =          ,                                                      (B.4)
                                                                       b-1
                     = b/(b - 1)2 Islamic schools are produced in equilibrium.
which implies that qi
       Now, suppose that an outward shift in demand for education leads the state to increase its provision
of schools. Specifically, s and i now face inverse demand P (Q) = (1 + Q)-b , b > b > 1. In this case, the
                        1         1                                                                        b             b
state produces        b -1   >   b-1   schools and the Islamic sector responds by supplying             (b -1)2
                                                                                                                  >   (b-1)2
                                                                                                                               schools.
This result provides a microfoundation for the Islamic sector's positive supply response discussed in
Section 6.1




1
    Of course, the model makes several simplifying assumptions, including an assumption of zero marginal costs. This assump-
    tion ensures a closed-form solution but may not be innocuous. In particular, the results in Section 6.1 suggest that the Islamic
    sector indeed may have faced different costs of constructing new madrasa across districts owing to differences in the availability
    of Islamic charitable assets (waqf ).


                                                                      63
Proof of B.2: The FOC of B.1 yields

                                                                                                      1 + qs
    -b(1 + qs + qi )-b-1 qi + (1 + qs + qi )-b = (1 + qs + qi )-b-1 (-bqi + 1 + qi + qs ) = 0  qi =
                                                                                                      b-1


Proof of B.4: The FOC of B.3 yields

                                                     -b-1                            -b
                        b                   1 + qs                          1 + qs
                  -b             1 + qs +                   qs + 1 + qs +                 =0
                       b-1                  b-1                             b-1
                                         -b-1
                                1 + qs                 b                       1 + qs
                       1 + qs +                 -b             qs + 1 + qs +          =0
                                b-1                   b-1                      b-1
                                                 -b2 qs + b - 1 + bqs - qs + 1 + qs = 0
                                                                     -b2 qs + b + bqs = 0
                                                                                             1
                                                                                     qs =
                                                                                            b-1

i's equilibrium strategy is then obtained by plugging B.4 into B.2.




                                                       64
C     Data Sources and Construction
We describe here the key variables and data sources used in the paper.


Education: Survey and Administrative Data

Surveys.      We measure years and type of schooling using the annual National Socioeconomic Survey
(Susenas) from 2012, 2013, 2014, 2016, 2017, and 2018. These enumerate schooling measures for all house-
hold members and also record the birth district for each, which we merge with the district-level INPRES
intensity measure collected by Duflo (2001). We additionally use Islamic school attendance data from
the Indonesia Family Life Survey (IFLS) in 1993, 1997, 2000, 2007, and 2014. The IFLS is too limited geo-
graphically for our econometric analysis, but we use it for descriptive purposes in Table 1 and elsewhere
in the text.
    Susenas reports the type of education (Islamic or secular) for the final level of schooling certification
(primary, junior secondary, and senior secondary) as well as the final year of schooling attended if falling
between certification levels. Our measure of Islamic schooling is based on the union of these two, but
results are nearly identical when restricting to final level certified or final level attended. For example,
some individuals report completing secular primary school and attending two years of Islamic junior
secondary but not completing the full three years at that level. Our approach identifies this individual
as having secular primary school and, separately, Islamic junior secondary school.

Registries.    We use data from numerous administrative sources provided by the Government of In-
donesia. Table 1 used data on total non-pesantren enrollment in 2019 from the Ministry of Educa-
tion (MEC) and Ministry of Religious Affairs (MORA) as reported at the following website: http:
//apkapm.data.kemdikbud.go.id (accessed March 22, 2020). Pesantren enrollment in 2019 is com-
puted from school-level records that we scraped from the MORA portal: https://ditpdpontren.
kemenag.go.id/pbsb/ (accessed November 15, 2018). These records also indicate the district and
year of establishment for each pesantren (see Bazzi et al., 2020, for additional details).
    Data on madrasa come from MORA registries provided to us by MORA officials in August 2019 and
January/February 2020.1 These include village, district, and year of establishment for all formal madrasa
(primary, junior secondary, and senior secondary) as well as informal madrasa diniyah. The latter are en-
tirely privately-run. The former are majority private with a small fraction (around 8%) that are publicly-
run by MORA. Overall, 6% of madrasa and 22% of pesantren, respectively, have missing establishment
years. This missing-ness is uncorrelated with SD INPRES intensity.
    Data on non-Islamic schools come from a MEC registry known by its Indonesian acronym Dapodik.2
These data include village, district, and year of establishment for all formal schools not administered by
MORA. These include 166,257 publicly-run schools and 52,888 privately-run schools. Among the latter,
10,919 schools have Islamic names, indicating that they are likely religious schools operating under the

1
  We are grateful to the following individuals for graciously sharing these data: Dodi Irawan, Aziz Saleh, Dr. Abdullah Faqih,
  and Doni Wibowo.
2
  We are grateful to Wisnu Harto Adiwijoyo for graciously sharing these data.


                                                             65
MEC instead of MORA. These schools are subject to different regulations on curriculum and also have
access to other sources of state funding than the Islamic schools under MORA oversight. We distinguish
secular from Islamic-named private schools in the MEC data by identifying the latter as having any
of the following terms appearing in the school name: Islam, Darussalam, Darul, Muhammada, Salam,
Sunna, Kuran, Jihad, Umma, Madrasa Halal, or Imam. We use this distinction to examine private secular
schools in Appendix Figure A.3.
   We measure curriculum content at the school­grade level using data from the Sistem Informasi Ap-
likasi Pendidikan (SIAP) registry of schools. We scraped data from this registry's online portal over
several months in Fall 2019: http://siap-sekolah.com/. As of April 2020, SIAP only included de-
tailed curriculum timetables for madrasa. We link these madrasa to the MORA registry using school IDs
reported in both sources. The SIAP report detailed course timetables for every hour of every schoolday
in a typical week for the 2018­2019 academic year. There are over 3,000 distinct course titles with many
being (spelling) variations on the same topic. We coded up each course as being Islamic or non-Islamic
and also identified courses associated with civic education and Pancasila, which are known by their In-
donesian acronym of PPKN. These course codings are available upon request. SIAP includes data for
around one-fifth of all madrasa, but as noted in footnote 22, this selective reporting likely works against
our core findings with respect to INPRES intensity.
   We measure test scores using data collected by the MEC on the national exam scores in 2014 for
science and math. We scraped these data in March 2015 from the MEC portal: http://referensi.
data.kemdikbud.go.id. We link these data to the Dapodik and MORA registries using school IDs
available across datasets.


Electoral Outcomes: Vote Shares and Legislative Candidates

Vote Shares. First, we draw upon district-level vote shares by party from the national legislative elections
in 1971, 1977, 1982, 1987, 1992, 1999, 2004, and 2009. These data were graciously shared with us by
individuals that worked with Dwight King. In 1971, one observes the following Islamic parties: NU,
PSII, Perti, and the Muslim Party of Indonesia (Partai Muslimin Indonesia or Parmusi). From 1977 to 1992,
the only Islamic party was the United Development Party (Partai Persatuan Pembangunan or PPP), which
was forged out of a forced merger of the four Islamic parties contesting the 1971 election. We study the
vote shares for the PPP and the Suharto regime party, Golkar.

Legislative Candidates. We use data on the universe of legislative candidates in the 2019 election. Thanks
to Nicholas Kuipers for scraping and sharing these data from the Indonesian Electoral Commission:
http://www.kpu.go.id/. These include candidates for national, provincial, and district legislatures.
We use information on candidate age, district, and party ticket. We also categorize their campaign mo-
tivation and platform statements as appealing to Islamic themes as reflected in the following words:
umma, dawah, Muslim, Islam, sharia, and jihad. We separately classify appeals to nation building as
reflected in the following words: Pancasila, Indonesia, NKRI, bangsa (nation), bhinneka (diversity), and
satuan (unitary). The latter three terms are staples in the nation-building corpus of Indonesian leaders


                                                    66
and literature. NKRI is an acronym for the Indonesian homeland in a popular nationalistic slogan.


Linguistic Proxies for Identity

We proxy for national identity using an indicator of whether an individual speaks the national language,
Bahasa Indonesia, as his/her main language at home (instead of his/her native ethnic language). This is
distinct from Indonesian speaking ability, which we also observe. These data--along with religion, age,
and district of birth--are recorded in the complete-count 2010 Population Census, which we obtained
from the Harvard Library.
   We view Arabic language proficiency as one indicator of Islamic identity. The Susenas data described
above record literacy in Latin, Arabic, and other alphabets.


Religiosity and Religious Political Preferences

We use rich individual-level survey data from Pepinsky, Liddle and Mujani (2018), which is based on a
2008 survey conducted by the authors in which 10 individuals were sampled from each contemporary
district. These data include individual age, religion, years and type of education, a host of questions on
Islamic piety, practice, and political preferences. Seven Islamic practices are explored in Table 7. The
survey also record dimensions of support for Islamic law (sharia) and religious politics more generally.
We also use a measure of stated support for Pancasila.




                                                   67
