                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        INCENTIVIZING BEHAVIORAL CHANGE:
                          THE ROLE OF TIME PREFERENCES

                                      Shilpa Aggarwal
                                     Rebecca Dizon-Ross
                                       Ariel D. Zucker

                                     Working Paper 27079
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27079


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




This research was funded by the government of Tamil Nadu, the Initiative for Global Markets, J-
PAL USI Initiative, the Chicago Booth School of Business, the Tata Center for Development, the
Chicago India Trust, and the Indian School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Shilpa Aggarwal, Rebecca Dizon-Ross, and Ariel D. Zucker. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Incentivizing Behavioral Change: The Role of Time Preferences
Shilpa Aggarwal, Rebecca Dizon-Ross, and Ariel D. Zucker
NBER Working Paper No. 27079
May 2020
JEL No. D9,I12,I15

                                           ABSTRACT

How should the design of incentives vary with agent time preferences? We develop two
predictions. First, "bundling" the payment function over time ­ specifically by making the
payment for future effort increase in current effort ­ is more effective if individuals are impatient
over effort. Second, increasing the frequency of payment is more effective if individuals are
impatient over payment. We test the efficacy of time-bundling and payment frequency, and their
interactions with impatience, using a randomized evaluation of an incentive program for exercise
among diabetics in India. Consistent with our theoretical predictions, bundling payments over
time meaningfully increases effort among the impatient relative to the patient. In contrast,
increasing payment frequency has limited efficacy, suggesting limited impatience over payments.
On average, incentives increase daily steps by 1,266 (13 minutes of brisk walking) and improve
health.

Shilpa Aggarwal                                   Ariel D. Zucker
Indian School of Business                         University of California, Berkeley
Gachibowli, Hyderabad 500032                      adzucker@berkeley.edu
India
shilpa_aggarwal@isb.edu

Rebecca Dizon-Ross
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
rdr@chicagobooth.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27079
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1818
1         Introduction
        Incentive design is of core economic interest. Most contracting models pay limited at-
tention to the role of agent patience. However, growing evidence that many people are
"impatient" (i.e., they discount the future heavily) raises an important question: What are
the implications of agent impatience for the design of incentives? In this paper, we derive
predictions about contract variations that should improve the relative e cacy of incentives
for impatient agents relative to patient ones. We then implement the variations in a random-
ized controlled trial (RCT) incentivizing exercise among 3,200 diabetics and pre-diabetics in
India and assess the quantitative importance of adjusting incentives for impatience.
        When formulating our predictions, we distinguish between discount rates over eort and
over financial payments. The literature has long emphasized that while agents use "primi-
tive" discount rates from their utility functions to make intertemporal decisions about eort
and consumption, their intertemporal decisions about financial payments should instead be
driven by the available borrowing and saving opportunities (Cubitt and Read, 2007). For
example, with perfect credit markets, even the most impatient utility-maximizing agents dis-
count future payments at only the market interest rate. While this stark prediction requires
that people exploit all arbitrage opportunities, which they may not do in practice (Andreoni
et al., 2018), empirical evidence suggests that individuals do often discount eort dierently
from financial payments (Augenblick et al., 2015). In light of this, we develop two contract
variations, one whose e cacy increases with the discount rate over eort and a second whose
e cacy increases with the discount rate over payments.
        Our first contract variation is based on the following prediction: contracts in which the
payment for future eort is increasing in current eort, which we call "time-bundled" con-
tracts, induce more eort from individuals with high discount rates over eort. To illustrate
the intuition, imagine you need a worker to perform two days of work. Consider first a time-
bundled contract that pays a lump sum if and only if she works both days. For the contract
to induce two days of work, the total payment must exceed the worker's present discounted
cost of eort.1 For example, if her daily cost of eort is $10, and she discounts future eort
by 50%, the payment must be at least $15: $10 for the first day plus a discounted $5 for the
second. In contrast, if you pay her separately for each day of work, the minimum payment
to induce two days of work would be $20: $10 per day of eort. Time-bundled contracts
    1
        We assume a zero short-run interest rate on payments for simplicity.


                                                        1
thus exploit the fact that, when individuals have high eort discount rates, it is "cheaper"
to buy their future (discounted) eort than their current eort.
      One advantageous feature of time-bundled contracts is that they are predicted to induce
extra eort from all types of people with high discount rates over eort, notably including
"naive" time-inconsistents - a common type that are traditionally di cult to motivate (e.g.,
Bai et al. (2017)).2 Time-bundled contracts also induce extra eort from "sophisticated"
time-inconsistent individuals and those who are time-consistent but impatient.
      The broad e cacy of time-bundled contracts contrasts with commitment contracts, the
standard "solution" for motivating time-inconsistent people, which are only eective for so-
phisticates. While commitment contracts require self-awareness about one's future self's
discount rates, time-bundled contracts directly leverage present-day discount rates. High
present-day discount rates (over eort) make future work attractive, and time-bundled con-
tracts oer better opportunities for future work to those who work today, thereby motivating
all those with high discount rates ­ even naifs ­ to work today. Since time-bundled contracts
are broadly eective, our empirical analyses pool people with high discount rates over eort.
      Our second contract variation is to increase the frequency of payment, motivated by
the (less novel) prediction that if individuals are impatient over payments, more frequent
payment increases e cacy. Scholars have long theorized that because people are impatient,
"the more frequent the reward, the better" (Cutler and Everett, 2010). However, there are
reasons to question whether frequency increases will matter much in practice. One reason is
that impatience over payments may be limited even if impatience over eort is not, since the
discount rate over payment should only equal the market interest rate for individuals with
access to borrowing and saving. However, if individuals irrationally ignore financial arbitrage
opportunities (Andreoni et al., 2018), or if access to credit and liquidity is limited (Carvalho
et al., 2016), the discount rate over payment may approach that over consumption.
      After presenting our theoretical predictions, we evaluate time-bundled contracts and
payment frequency using an experiment oering incentives for behavior change, a particularly
apt setting for introducing these contract variations. Incentives are increasingly being used by
policymakers to encourage behavior that may be in an individual's or a society's best interest.
The motivation is often present bias itself, as present bias can cause underinvestment in
behaviors with short-run costs and long-run benefits (such as exercise, diet, and studying).
  2
      Naive time-inconsistent people are unaware of their own time-inconsistency, while sophisticates are aware.



                                                        2
Incentives can mitigate this underinvestment by better aligning behaviors with long-run self-
interest. The use of incentives to address present bias makes it particularly important to
understand how to tailor incentives for present bias ­ an issue on which the evidence is thin.
   Our incentives are designed to encourage walking among diabetics and prediabetics.
Lifestyle diseases like diabetes are exploding problems in both developing and developed
countries. The estimated cost of diabetes is 0.9% of global GDP and 4.5% of GDP in India.
There is widespread agreement that promoting lifestyle changes, such as better exercise and
diet, is essential to address the growing economic and health burdens of diabetes (Inter-
national Diabetes Federation, 2019). However, a large portion of diabetes patients fail to
adopt recommended lifestyle changes, and existing evidence-based interventions promoting
lifestyle change are intensive and prohibitively expensive (Howells et al., 2016). Governments
are thus interested in scalable interventions to promote lifestyle change among diabetics, and
the government of Tamil Nadu, one of the southern states of India, supported and partially
funded this study in an eort to develop such an intervention.
   Our program monitors participants' walking using pedometers and, if they achieve a daily
step target of 10,000 steps, provides them with small financial incentives in the form of mobile
phone credits. We randomly assign participants to an "incentive" group that receives both
pedometers and walking incentives, a "monitoring only" group that receives pedometers but
no incentives, or a control group that receives neither pedometers nor incentives.
   Within the incentive group, we randomly implement our two contract variations: time-
bundled contracts and more-frequent payment. First, we randomize whether payment is a
linear function of the number of days the participant meets the 10,000 step target (i.e., step-
target compliance), or whether payment is instead a time-bundled function that only rewards
step-target compliance if the step target is met a minimum number of days that week. We
use two minimum compliance thresholds: four days and five days. The variation in time-
bundling allows us to both explore its average e cacy and test for heterogeneous impacts by
impatience over eort. Second, we randomize three payment frequencies: monthly, weekly,
and daily. This variation allows us to both assess the importance of payment frequency and
to investigate the shape of payment discount rates over time.
   We design our experiment to assess the quantitative importance of our theoretical pre-
dictions and present three main empirical results. Our first result is that, consistent with
our theoretical prediction, making the contract time-bundled meaningfully increases relative


                                               3
e cacy for those who are impatient over eort. Heterogeneity analysis using a baseline
measure of impatience shows that, relative to linear contracts, time-bundled contracts in-
crease compliance with the step target by 6 percentage points (pp) more for people with
above-median impatience than for those with below-median impatience, a large dierence
relative to the sample-average eect of either contract (20 pp). We also calibrate a model
using experimental estimates of the distribution of walking costs and find consistent results:
projected compliance in the most eective time-bundled contract increases by 3 pp relative
to the linear for each 10 pp decrease in the discount factor.
   We also explore the overall e cacy of our time-bundled contracts. Our second result is
that by adding a performance threshold, our time-bundled contracts generate more extreme
outcomes, working better for some but worse for others. This variation in e cacy makes it
important to determine for whom the contracts work well, highlighting the significance of
our finding that they work better for the impatient.
   Our third result is that increasing payment frequency has limited e cacy in our set-
ting, apparently because individuals have low discount rates over the contract payments.
Incentives delivered at daily, weekly, and monthly frequencies have equally large impacts on
walking, indicating that the model that best fits our sample is one of patience over financial
payments. We find additional evidence in support of this conclusion: there is little stated
demand for high-frequency payments, and step-target compliance does not increase as the
date of payment delivery approaches. We thus find that in contrast with the conventional
wisdom, increasing incentive frequency is not always an eective way to adjust incentives
for impatience. This result is consistent with Augenblick et al. (2015), who find limited
impatience in monetary choices among American college students, but is perhaps surprising
in light of the prevalence of liquidity constraints in settings like ours and prior evidence that
liquidity constraints can lead to impatience over financial payments (Carvalho et al., 2016).
   We supplement our primary analysis with a program evaluation of the incentive scheme.
Our sample has high rates of diabetes and hypertension; regular exercise can prevent compli-
cations from both. We find that incentives are highly eective at inducing exercise. Providing
just 20 INR (0.33 USD) per day of compliance with the daily step target increases compliance
by 20 pp o of a base of 30%. Average daily steps increase by 1,266 --roughly 13 minutes
of brisk walking. The large increases in walking induced by incentives moderately improve
an index of health risk that includes blood sugar and body mass index and boost mental


                                               4
health. Much of the eect of incentives on exercise also persists after the intervention ends.
These impacts are important for policy, suggesting incentives may be a cost-eective way to
decrease the burden of chronic disease in India and beyond.

1.1     Contributions to the Literature
      This paper contributes to three strands of literature: on contract design for impatience,
nonlinear incentives, and incentives for health behaviors.
      Our primary contribution is to the literature on contract design for impatient agents: we
develop and validate time-bundled contracts as a novel strategy for motivating a wide range
of people with impatient or time-inconsistent discount rates over eort. Researchers have
previously motivated impatient and time-inconsistent agents primarily with commitment
contracts that allow individuals to restrict their future selves (e.g. Ashraf et al. (2006);
Kaur et al. (2015); Royer et al. (2015)).3 Although commitment is a useful tool, it is not
a panacea. Take-up of commitment contracts is modest (Laibson, 2015) and often reflects
errors in judgement (Carrera et al., 2019), which undermines their use as an eective policy
solution. Moreover, commitment contracts are only predicted to be eective for sophisticated
time-inconsistents; they are less eective--and can even be harmful--for naive agents (Bai
et al., 2017), who make up a large share of individuals (Augenblick and Rabin, 2019). In
contrast, time-bundled contracts are eective for multiple types of impatience, including
partial and full naivete. Our theoretical insights about time-bundled contracts are related to
theoretical work by Jain (2012), who shows that firms can increase productivity by oering
multi-period quotas to salespeople who are present-biased over both payments and eort.4
      This is also one of the first papers to study the implications of domain-specific discounting
for contract design, and the first to examine this distinction empirically. Although many
papers show that discount rates over payment and eort should in theory be dierent (Cubitt
and Read, 2007), and Augenblick et al. (2015) provide evidence of an empirical distinction,
the vast majority of dynamic contracting models use the same discount rate for both payment
and eort (e.g., Chassang, 2013; Lazear, 1981).5 Our work studies whether allowing these
  3
     O'Donoghue and Rabin (1999b) design "temporal incentive schemes," which reward agents based on
when they complete a single task. Their aim is to avoid delay, not maximize compliance.
   4
     Jain (2012)'s starting point is that people are present-biased over both payment and eort, assuming
that people discount payment and eort identically. In contrast, we allow for dierent discount rates over
payment and eort and demonstrate that the e cacy of time-bundled contracts for the impatient is driven
by high discount rates over eort, not present-biased time preferences per se.
   5
     The one exception, Edmans et al. (2012), derives optimal CEO contracts in the presence of savings,


                                                   5
discount rates to dier has implications for contract design and shows that it does.
    We also contribute to a better understanding of the role of payment frequency in contracts
for impatient agents. We point out a natural implication of the distinction between discount
rates over money and consumption: increasing payment frequency is only eective if people
are impatient over payments, which those with high primitive discount rates may not be. We
then evaluate the eect of increasing payment frequency. Most of the previous evidence on
frequency is indirect: several papers show that worker performance improves at the end of
pay cycles (Kaur et al., 2015; Oyer, 1998), suggesting that payment frequency could increase
eort. We perform a direct test by randomizing payment frequency, holding the frequency of
feedback constant across treatment arms to isolate the payment discounting channel. This
test complements Gardiner and Bryan (2017)'s work in the psychology literature, which
finds that simultaneously increasing payment frequency and feedback frequency improves
e cacy. Since we isolate the payment frequency channel and find no eect, Gardiner and
Bryan (2017)'s findings could reflect the salience eect of receiving frequent feedback.
    Our contribution to the literature on nonlinear contracting is to experimentally compare
the e cacy of contracts with linear and nonlinear incentive structures. Other experiments
comparing linear and nonlinear contracts focus on the selection eects (Kaur et al., 2015;
Larkin and Leider, 2012). In contrast, we examine the eect of thresholds conditional on
selection and detect a potential pitfall: thresholds do not work well for everyone and so create
dispersion in performance. This finding complements other work examining the advantages
and disadvantages of contract nonlinearities, especially a rich theoretical literature starting
with Lazear (1981) showing that many optimal dynamic contracts display nonlinearities over
time, and an empirical literature showing that in practice nonlinearities often suboptimally
distort behavior and promote cheating in the workplace and in schools (e.g. Jacob and Levitt,
2003). Our work adds evidence on both sides of the ledger, documenting a new disadvantage
of nonlinear schemes (excess dispersion) as well as a new advantage of some dynamic or
time-bundled nonlinear schemes (eectiveness when eort discount rates are high).
    Finally, we make several contributions to the growing literature on incentives for health,
such as exercise (e.g., Royer et al., 2015) and weight loss (e.g., Volpp et al., 2008). We are
which introduces a wedge between the payment and eort discount rates. Our work contrasts with theirs
in three ways. First, their optimality result is sensitive to the exact model environment. We depart from
optimality to examine how variations to a benchmark linear contract impact performance in a way that is
more environmentally robust and has broader empirical relevance. Second, they assume that the payment
discount rate is the interest rate, while we allow it to be flexible. Third, we empirically test our results.


                                                     6
the first to implement walking incentives among diabetics and prediabetics and the first trial
of incentives for exercise in a developing country. While previous work generally finds that
incentives increase walking among non-diabetic populations (Bachireddy et al., 2019; Burns
and Rothman, 2018; Finkelstein et al., 2016; Patel et al., 2016), our incentives increased
walking by more--and at less cost--than previously studied walking incentive interventions.
Moreover, while many previous studies of walking incentives do not find health impacts, our
program led to moderate gains in cardiovascular wellness and mental well-being.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our theoretical predictions. Sections 3
and 4 discuss the study setting and design. Section 5 presents empirical results on incentive
design and impatience. Section 6 shows the overall program impacts. Section 7 concludes.


2         Theoretical Predictions
        In this section, we show how the "eectiveness" of two features of incentive contracts--
time-bundling and payment frequency--depends on time preferences. Taking the perspective
of a policymaker whose objective is to maximize compliance subject to a budget constraint,
we define eectiveness as the average compliance for a given payout.6
        The setup is as follows. On each day, an individual chooses whether to complete a binary
action. Define wt as an indicator for whether the individual "complies" (i.e., completes the
action) on day t. In our experiment, wt is an indicator for walking 10,000 steps on day t.
The incentive contracts we consider pay individuals based on compliance over a sequence of
T days. We call this sequence of days the payment period and index its days t = 1, .., T .
Payments are delivered on day T .
        We consider two types of incentive contracts:
1. Separable contracts have payment functions that are separable across days. That is,
    payment for wt depends only on wt and not on any wt0 for t0 6= t. We assume these
    contracts pay m per day of compliance. Total payment is thus

                                                            T
                                                            X
                                           Payment = m             wt .                                  (1)
                                                             t=1
2. Time-bundled contracts have payment functions that are not separable across days.
    6
    Our approach is analogous to the standard contract theory approach of maximizing eort subject to
incentive and budget constraints. While there is a question of whether this is the socially optimal objective
function, we discuss its appropriateness for this and other settings in Section 5.4.



                                                     7
  Their defining feature is that the payment function displays at least one "dynamic comple-
  mentarity" (i.e., a day on which the payment for future compliance is increasing in current
  compliance). We focus on a type of "threshold" time-bundled contract, where there is a
  minimum threshold level of compliance C below which no incentive is received, and above
                                                                          P
  which payment is a linear function of the number of days of compliance, T  t=1 wt :

                                     8 P                          PT
                                     <m T wt               if (          wt   C)
                                         t=1                       t=1
                           Payment =                                                         (2)
                                     :0                    otherwise.

      We first specify the agent's problem and solve for compliance under a "base case" separa-
ble contract. We then examine two variations to the base case contract. The first variation
makes the contract time-bundled while maintaining the same payment period length. The
second maintains the separable payment function from the base case and instead varies the
payment period length T . We pay particular attention to how the e cacy of these variations
depends on agent discount rates over eort and payments.

2.1     Utility and Discounting
      To solve for compliance, we consider the following simple specification of agent utility:
                                        1
                                        X
                                   U=         ( t ) (ct   et  wt ) ,                         (3)
                                        t=0


where et is the utility cost of complying on day t, ct is consumption, and (t) represents
the structural discount factor over eort and consumption: individuals discount eort costs
and consumption t days in advance by (t), with (t)  1. We assume utility is linear in ct ,
which is likely a good approximation in our setting, as payment amounts are small relative
to overall consumption. We also assume for simplicity that et is weakly positive and is
known in advance. However, the model's qualitative predictions are robust to relaxing these
assumptions. The individual's problem is to choose ct and wt to maximize utility subject to
a budget constraint.

Discounting payments vs. eort We dierentiate the discount rate over payments k
days in advance, which we denote as dm (k ), from the discount rate over eort and con-
sumption, (k ). While (k ) comes directly from the utility function, the discount rate over
payments depends on the availability of borrowing and savings in the budget constraint.


                                                   8
In perfect credit markets with borrowing and saving at interest rate r, individuals should
discount future payments at the interest rate by financial arbitrage arguments.7 At the oppo-
site extreme, with no savings or borrowing, day k payments are immediately consumed and
future payments are discounted by the consumption discount factor (k ). We accommodate
both these (and other)8 cases by defining dm (k ) as the reduced-form payment discount fac-
tor that encompasses both the "primitive" discount factor and any financial frictions. With
                                          1  k
perfect credit markets, dm (k ) =        1+r
                                               ,   whereas with no savings or borrowing, dm (k ) = (k ).

Sophistication Individuals will have time-inconsistent preferences if either (k ) or dm (k )
are non-exponential functions of k or if (k ) 6= dm (k ). We follow O'Donoghue and Rabin
(1999a) and define a sophisticate as one who is fully aware of her own discount factors (over
both eort and money) and a naif as one who "believe(s) her future selves' preferences will
be identical to her current self's."

2.2     Compliance under a Separable Contract (the Base Case)
      We now solve for compliance under the base case separable contract defined in Equation
1. On day t, the individual complies if the present discounted value of being paid m on day
T outweighs the eort cost of compliance:

                                    wt |Separable = {et < dm (T          t)m}.                                 (4)

This compliance decision holds for both naifs and sophisticates since it never involves fore-
casting future behavior. Total compliance within a payment period is thus

                             T
                             X                        T
                                                      X
                                    wt |Separable =         {e t < d m ( T    t)m}.                            (5)
                              t=1                     t=1


2.3     Variation 1: Time-Bundled Contracts
      We now examine the eect, relative to the base case, of making the contract time-bundled
while maintaining the same payment period length. Time-bundling makes an individual's
decision more complicated, as the marginal payment for compliance on a given day--and
hence the decision to comply--depends on compliance on other days in the payment period.
   7
     Define mt as income on day t. With perfect credit markets, the lifetime budget constraint is
P 1  1 t           P 1  1 t                                                                          
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                            k
  t=0 1+r    ct = t=0 1+    r  m t . The value of a payment of size m delivered in k days is thus       1+r      m.
   8
                                                                            P1                        1(wt =1)
     For example, our approach nests domain-specific time preferences: U = t=0 dm (t)ct        ( t) e t        .


                                                        9
For simplicity, we examine a threshold time-bundled contract with a two-day payment period
and a two-day minimum threshold of compliance (i.e., T = 2 and C = 2 in Equation 2),
which are smaller than those used in our experiment. The individual thus receives 2m if she
complies with the step target on both days; otherwise she receives nothing.
   Whether adding a time-bundled threshold increases or decreases average compliance with
the step target is theoretically ambiguous, depending on several factors such as the distribu-
tion of et . However, we can derive an unambiguous prediction regarding heterogeneity in the
performance of the time-bundled threshold by discount rates over eort. The prediction is
also empirically relevant: under many cost distributions, the discount rate over eort is piv-
otal to the relative performance of the threshold and linear contracts, with the time-bundled
threshold having higher average compliance for some values of (1) and lower for others.

Prediction 1. Among both sophisticates and naifs, holding all else equal, average compliance
in the time-bundled threshold contract relative to the separable contract is weakly decreasing
in the discount factor over eort, (k ).

Proof. See Appendix B.1 for full proof. We provide a sketch here.
   The result stems from the fact that while compliance in the separable contract is inde-
pendent of (k ), compliance in the time-bundled threshold contract is decreasing in (k ).
   To see that compliance in the separable contract is independent of (k ) (conditional on
dm (k )), consider our two-period example. The individual will comply on day 1 if e1 < dm (1)m
and on day 2 if e2 < m, neither of which depend on (1).
   In contrast, with the time-bundled threshold, compliance depends on (1). On day 1, the
individual decides if it is worth it to comply on both days in order to be paid, comparing the
present discounted cost of eort on both days, e1 + (1)e2 , with the value of the payment,
dm (1)2m. She wants to comply on both days if the costs are low enough, i.e., if

                                   e1 + (1)e2 < dm (1)2m.                                  (6)

Prediction 1 is driven by the fact that equation 6 is more likely to hold if (1) is small.
Holding all else constant, the lower is (1), the less costly are two days of eort from the
day 1 perspective since day 2 eort is discounted. Importantly, this statement holds for
both sophisticates and naifs, underlying the broad e cacy of time-bundled thresholds for
impatients. For both types, the lower (1), the higher the compliance in a threshold contract,
because those with a lower (1) have a lower discounted cost of reaching the threshold.

                                             10
         To illuminate how the eect of time-bundled thresholds depends on discount rates, we
compare the minimum payment needed to achieve full compliance under two contracts: first,
a separable contract with variable payments across days (m1 for day 1 and m2 for day 2);
and second, a threshold contract paying m1 + m2 for compliance on both days:
                                                                   8
                                                                   <    e1
                                                                                + e2           if separable
                                                                       dm (1)
                  argmin m1 + m2 s.t. (w1 = 1)&(w2 = 1) =
                   m1 ,m2                                          :    e1
                                                                                +     (1)
                                                                                          e9   if threshold.
                                                                       dm (1)       dm (1) 2


           (1)
If       dm (1)
                  < 1, as Augenblick et al. (2015) suggest is common, then the threshold contract
achieves compliance at a lower cost than the separable contract because it allows the principal
                                                             (1)
to buy day 2 eort at the discounted rate of                      e
                                                           dm (1) 2
                                                                      (the agent's "day 1-valued" day 2 eort
cost) rather than having to pay the larger "day 2-valued" day 2 eort cost, e2 .
         Time-bundled thresholds thus leverage the fact that it is cheaper to buy future eort
than current eort from eort-impatient agents.
2.3.1             Robustness of Prediction 1
         Appendix B.2 explores whether Prediction 1 holds for other time-bundled contracts with
2-day payment periods besides thresholds. We show that Prediction 1 holds when agents
believe on day 1 that day 1 compliance is pivotal for day 2 compliance. The day 1 compliance
decision then becomes a decision of whether to comply on both days.
         Interestingly, the exact contract features that produce this condition are dierent for
naifs and sophisticates. Time-bundled contracts are eective for naifs when day 1 compliance
generates lucrative "options" for day 2 compliance, i.e., when day 1 compliance is pivotal to
the day 1 self wanting her day 2 self to comply. In contrast, contracts that are eective for
sophisticates generate "commitment" (i.e., day 1 compliance is pivotal to whether the day 2
self actually complies).
         Some contracts, like thresholds, are "eective" (i.e., have compliance decreasing in (1))
for both types because they feature both option and commitment. That is, day 1 compliance
is pivotal to both whether the day 1 self wants her day 2 self to comply and whether the
day 2 self actually complies. Other contracts are only eective for one type. Contracts that
generate commitment without option (i.e., day 1 compliance is pivotal to whether the day
2 self actually complies but not whether the day 1 self wants her day 2 self to comply)
     9                                                                                      e1        (1)
         This assumes for simplicity that e2 < e1 + e2 ; if not, the payment would be max{ dm (1) + dm (1) e2 , 2m}.




                                                          11
only generate extra eort from impatient sophisticates, while contracts that generate option
without commitment only generate extra eort from impatient naifs.
      Reassuringly, no two-day time-bundled contracts produce "procrastination" among naifs,
wherein naifs delay compliance from day 1 to day 2 and then fail to follow through on day
2. Procrastination occurs when day 1 eort is a substitute with day 2 eort (e.g., when
people are paid for the completion of one task only between both days). This can cause
naifs, who are overoptimistic about future eort, to decrease day 1 eort. In contrast, in
two-day time-bundled contracts, day 1 eort and day 2 eort are complements by definition.
      The rest of Appendix B explores the robustness of Prediction 1. Section B.3 shows that,
under reasonable assumptions about the distribution of et , the prediction also holds when the
agent is uncertain about future eort cost realizations but knows the distribution of eort
costs. Section B.4 relaxes the assumption that time-bundled threshold contracts require
100% compliance to earn payment (i.e., we allow for C < T ). In a simple model where costs
each day can either be high or low and the agent has to comply at least two days out of
a three-day payment period to receive payment, we show that compliance in the threshold
contract relative to the non-threshold contract is weakly higher for those with                 < 1 than
those with      = 1. The intuition is the same as above: those who discount future walking
costs still have a lower discounted total cost to achieve the threshold. Again, the prediction
holds for both naifs and sophisticates, time-consistents and time-inconsistents.10

2.4     Variation 2: Payment Frequency
      We now return to the base case separable linear contract from Equation 1 and analyze
compliance under dierent payment frequencies by changing the length of the payment pe-
riod T . To simplify notation, we assume eort costs et are independently and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) across t, with cumulative distribution function F (·).
      Recall that individuals in separable contracts comply on day t as long as the discounted
value of the payment outweighs eort costs (i.e., if et < dm (T               t)m). The probability of
compliance on day t is thus

                             P r (wt = 1|Separable) = F (dm (T         t) m) ,                         (7)
  10
     Note that Section B.4 examines a threshold contract where C /T is relatively high. Thresholds where
C /T is very low may not always be better for impatient naifs than patient people because they include more
days where current and future eort are substitutes and hence where naifs may procrastinate.




                                                    12
and the average fraction of days complied is
                     "    T
                                            #     T
                       1X                      1X
                   E         (wt )|Separable =       F (dm (T                 t) m) .                    (8)
                       T t=1                   T t=1

         Using these equations, we can make two intuitive predictions.

Prediction 2. If agents are impatient over the receipt of financial payments (i.e., if dm (k ) <
1 and d0m (k )  0), then average compliance is increasing in the payment frequency. If agents
are su ciently patient (dm (k )  1), then payment frequency does not aect compliance.11

Proof. This proof follows from Equation (8). The average fraction of days complied is
increasing in the discount factor over payment dm (T                t). If agents are "impatient" and
d0m (T       t)  0, then the the discount factor is (weakly) decreasing in the delay to payment
T         t. Increasing payment frequency weakly decreases the delay to payment T                 t on each
day t, which weakly increases average compliance for impatients. If agents are patient, then
the discount factor is nearly 1 irrespective of the delay to payment T                   t and increasing
payment frequency has no detectable eect on average compliance.

         The quantitative importance of Prediction 2 depends not only on average discount factors
over payment but also on the shape of dm (k ) for the specific range over which T varies between
contracts. For example, say dm (k ) has a quasi-hyperbolic or "beta-delta" shape, with a large
one-time decrease between dm (0) and dm (1), but is relatively flat for further increases in k .
Then increasing frequency would only meaningfully increase compliance if payments were
made daily. In contrast, if dm (k ) decays more gradually with k , then more intermediate
increases in frequency--say from monthly to weekly--could also be quantitatively important.

Prediction 3. If the discount factor over payments dm (k ) is decreasing in k , then average
compliance increases as the payday approaches.

Proof. This proof follows from Equation (7): as the payment date approaches, the time to
payment T          t decreases, and so the probability of compliance increases.

2.5        Empirical Tests
         We design our experiment in light of the predictions above. We assess the quantitative
importance of Prediction 1, that compliance with the time-bundled threshold relative to
    11
    Although the stark prediction for patient agents relies on linear utility, the prediction that the impact
of higher-frequency payments is increasing in the discount rate over payments does not.


                                                     13
the linear contract is decreasing in the discount factor over eort, in two ways. We first
randomly vary whether the contract has a time-bundled threshold or is a separable linear
contract and test for heterogeneity in threshold eectiveness based on a baseline measure of
impatience over eort (we address potential confounds to this impatience measure in Section
5.2.2). Second, we calibrate a model using our experiment data and examine how predicted
compliance in the threshold relative to linear contract varies with eort discount rates.
       To shed light on our predictions regarding impatience over payments, our experiment
randomizes three payment frequencies: monthly, weekly, and daily. We compare the average
compliance across these treatments to understand whether varying payment frequency has a
quantitatively important impact, and thereby (per Prediction 2) also understand if agents are
meaningfully impatient over payments. In addition, we compare changes in compliance when
moving from monthly to weekly to daily to understand both whether intermediate increases
in payment frequency (from monthly to weekly) can be eective and whether discount rates
over payment decay quickly. Finally, Prediction 3 allows us to use within-treatment variation
to shed further light on the shape of the discount factor.

3        Experimental Design
3.1      Sample Selection and Pre-Intervention Period
       We conducted our experiment in an urban area of South India. India is facing a diabetes
epidemic, and prevalence is higher both in southern than northern states and in urban than
rural areas. We selected our sample through a series of public screening camps in the city
of Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu. To recruit diverse socioeconomic groups, we held the camps in
locations ranging from the government hospital to markets, religious institutions, and parks.
During the camps, trained surveyors took health measurements; discussed each individual's
risk for diabetes and hypertension; and conducted an eligibility survey. To be eligible for
the study, individuals needed to have a diabetes diagnosis or elevated blood sugar, have
low risk of injury from regular walking, be capable with a mobile phone, and be able to
receive payments in the form of "mobile recharges".12 After screening, we contacted eligible
individuals by phone and invited them to participate in a program encouraging walking.
  12
     The full list of eligibility criteria was: must be diabetic or have elevated random blood sugar (> 130
if has not or > 150 if has eaten in previous two hours); be 30­65 years old, physically capable of walking
30 minutes, literate in Tamil, and not pregnant or on insulin; have a prepaid mobile number used solely by
them, without unlimited calling; reside in Coimbatore; not have blindness, kidney disease, type 1 diabetes,
or foot ulcers; not have had major medical events such as stroke or heart attack.


                                                    14
       Surveyors visited the participants at their homes or workplaces to conduct a baseline
health survey, deliver lifestyle modification advice, and enroll them in a one-week phase-in
period designed to collect baseline walking data and to familiarize participants with program
procedures. Surveyors demonstrated how to properly wear a pedometer, report steps, and
check text messages from our reporting system (described in Section 3.3). Surveyors asked
respondents to wear the pedometer and report their steps each day of the phase-in period.13
       At the end of the phase-in period, surveyors visited respondents to sync the data from
the pedometers, conduct a baseline time-preference survey, and then (after all baseline data
were collected) tell participants what treatment group they had been randomly assigned to
for the intervention period. To do so, they walked participants through a contract describing
their assigned treatment group. We exclude from the sample all participants who withdrew
or were found ineligible prior to randomization, leaving a final experimental sample of 3,192
individuals. The sample represents 41% of the screened, eligible population (see Table A.1
for the share of people dropped in each stage of the enrollment process).

3.2      Experimental Design and Contract Launch
       Our interventions encouraged participants to walk at least 10,000 steps a day. We chose
this daily step target to match exercise recommendations for diabetics; it is also a widely
quoted target among health advocates and a common benchmark in health studies.
       We randomized participants into the incentive group or one of two comparison groups.
1. Incentive: Receive a pedometer and incentives to reach a daily target of 10,000 steps.
2. Monitoring: Receive a pedometer but receive no incentive contract.
3. Control: Receive neither a pedometer nor an incentive contract.
Within the incentive group, we randomized participants into one of six incentive contracts
for walking, as shown in Figure 1 and described next.
3.2.1      Incentive Groups
       All incentive groups received payments for accurately reporting steps above the daily
10,000 step target through the automated step-reporting system. We delivered all incentive
payments as mobile recharges (credits to the participant's mobile phone account).14 After

  13
    Respondents received 50 INR for consistently wearing the pedometer and reporting steps in this period.
  14
    The relevant payment discount rate is therefore over mobile recharges, which could be higher, lower, or
the same as that over cash (e.g., it could be the same for people whose baseline daily mobile usage is higher
than the payment amount: payment would decrease money spent on recharges and increase cash on hand).


                                                     15
                                                       Sample


                            Comparison                                                  Incentives
                              groups                                                      groups


                                                                      Payment                                                 Payment
                                               Base                                                    Threshold
                                                                     Frequency                                                Amount
                                              Contract                                                 Treatments
                                                                     Treatments                                              Treatment



                                   Monitor-    Base                                            4 - Day         5 - Day        Small
                         Control                            Daily           Monthly
                                     ing       Case                                           Threshold       Threshold      Payment
16




     Pedometers            No        Yes       Yes              Yes               Yes           Yes                  Yes         Yes
     Incentives            No        No         Yes             Yes               Yes            Yes                 Yes         Yes
     Incentive Details
         Frequency        N/A        N/A      Weekly        Daily             Monthly          Weekly           Weekly         Weekly
         Threshold         N/A       N/A       None         None                  None         4 Days               5 Days      None
         Amount (INR)      N/A       N/A        20              20                 20            20                  20          10

      Sample Sizes         585       203        902             166               164            794                 312         66



                                                 Figure 1: Experimental Design
reporting steps, participants immediately received text-message confirmations of their step
report, payment earned, and the payment date. We also sent participants weekly text
messages summarizing their walking behavior and total payments earned.
   When surveyors explained the incentive contract to participants, they explained the
step target in the context of health recommendations, saying, "Remember that doctors
recommend that you walk at least 10,000 steps a day, and more is always better! We
recommend that you try to walk at least 10,000 steps a day and build up."
   Within the incentive group, we randomly assigned participants to one of six groups. Each
group received a dierent incentive contract, with three dimensions of variation: whether the
contract was separable or time-bundled, the payment frequency, and the payment amount.

The Base Case This group received a separable, linear contract paying 20 INR per day
of compliance with the 10,000 step target. Payments were made at a weekly frequency.
   We call this the base case contract because all other contracts dier from it in exactly one
dimension: separability, payment frequency, or payment amount. We can compare any other
group to the base case group to assess the eect of changing a single contract dimension.

Our next treatment groups dier from the base case group in one of the two dimensions that
we predict will interact with time preferences.

Payment Frequency Two groups, the daily and monthly groups, dier from the base
case only in the payment frequency. In the daily group, recharges were delivered at 1:00
am the same night participants reported their steps. In the monthly group, recharges were
delivered every four weeks for all days of compliance in the previous four weeks.
   Receiving payments more frequently could increase the salience of step target compliance
and trust in the payment system. To hold salience and trust in the payment system constant,
all incentive groups both received daily feedback on step target compliance and received a
test payment of 10 INR the night before their incentive contract launched, respectively.

Time-Bundled Threshold Contracts Two other treatment groups, the 4-day threshold
and the 5-day threshold groups, dier from the base case incentive group only in separability.
The base case is a separable linear contract, paying out 20 INR for each day of compliance.
In contrast, the threshold contracts use time-bundled threshold payment functions. The
4-day threshold group received 20 INR in payment for each day of compliance only if they
met the target at least four days in the week-long payment period. So, a 4-day threshold


                                             17
participant who met the step target on only three days in a payment period would receive
no payment, while one who met it on five days would receive 5  20 = 100 INR. Similarly,
the 5-day threshold group received 20 INR in payment for each day of compliance if they
met the target at least five days in the week.
   The threshold contracts implicitly gave participants a goal of how many days to walk
per week. To control for goal eects, surveyors verbally encouraged all incentive groups to
walk at least four or five days per week when initially explaining the contracts. For those
in the threshold groups, the target days-per-week was the same as their assigned threshold
level; for those in the other groups, it was randomly assigned in the same proportion as the
threshold groups are divided between the 4- and 5-day groups.
Payment Amount Finally, we included a treatment group, the small payment group, that
diers from the base case group only by the amount of incentive paid. This group received
10 INR, instead of the base case 20 INR, for each day of compliance. We included this
treatment to learn about the distribution of walking costs and to benchmark the size of our
other treatments eects.
Incentive Group Sample Sizes We determined the relative sizes of the incentive groups
through power calculations. Since the base case group serves as the reference group for all
other contracts, we made it the largest group. Recall that our theoretical predictions for
thresholds regard heterogeneity, whereas for frequency they regard main eects. As a result,
we allocated larger sample sizes to the threshold treatments than the frequency treatments
to be able to detect heterogeneous eects of the threshold treatments. For the frequency
treatments, our analysis is powered instead for main eects.
3.2.2   Comparison Groups
   The incentive program could aect behavior because it provides incentive payments or
simply because it monitors behavior. We include two control groups in our experiment, a
monitoring group and a pure control, to allow us to shed light on these two channels.
Monitoring Monitoring participants were treated identically to the incentive groups ex-
cept that they did not receive incentives. They received pedometers and were encouraged
to wear the pedometers and report their steps every day. They also received the same daily
step report confirmations texts and weekly text message summaries that the incentive groups
received. Finally, during the upfront explanation of the contract, surveyors also delivered
to the monitoring group the same verbal step target of 10,000 daily steps and the same

                                             18
encouragement to walk at least four or five days per week.

Pure Control The pure control group received neither pedometers nor incentives during
the intervention period (they returned their pedometers at the end of the phase-in period).
Because most incentive programs bundle the "monitoring" eect of a pedometer with the
eect of incentives, the pure control group is a useful benchmark from a policy perspective.15

3.3      The Intervention Period and After
       To measure steps, we gave monitoring and incentive group participants Fitbit Zip pe-
dometers for the duration of the intervention. Although these pedometers could be synced to
a central database with an internet connection, most participants did not have regular inter-
net access, and so these data were not available in real time. Instead, we asked participants
to report their daily step count to an automated calling system, which called participants
every evening and prompted them to enter their daily steps from the pedometer. Incentive
payments were based on these reports. To verify the reports, we visited participants ev-
ery two to three weeks to manually sync their pedometers, cross-check the pedometer data
against the reported data, and discuss any discrepancies. Anyone found to be chronically
overreporting was suspended from the program. All empirical analysis is based on the synced
data from the Fitbits, not the reported data.16
       We visited all participants three times during the 12-week intervention period. The
primary purpose was to sync pedometers, but we also conducted short surveys to collect
biometric and mobile phone usage data (we conducted these visits even with pure control
group participants who did not have a pedometer in order to hold survey visits constant
across participants). At the end of the 12-week intervention period, we conducted an endline
survey. Figure A.1 shows the intervention timeline.
       Finally, to assess the persistence of our treatment eects on exercise, we gave pedometers
to the final 1,171 participants enrolled in our experiment (including control group partici-
pants) for 12 weeks after the intervention period had ended. Participants no longer reported
steps daily, but surveyors still returned every four weeks to sync their pedometers.
  15
     To accommodate a request from our government partners, we also tested one additional intervention. Ten
percent of the sample, cross-randomized across all other treatments, received the "SMS treatment," which
consisted of weekly text message reminders to engage in healthy behaviors such as eating right and exercising.
We control for the SMS treatment in our main regressions and test its eects in the Online Supplement
(available at faculty.chicagobooth.edu/rebecca.dizon-ross/research/papers/IncentiveDesignSupp.pdf.)
  16
     Appendix C contains detailed statistics on misreporting. Misreporting rates are similar across monitoring
and incentive groups, suggesting misreports were primarily accidental.


                                                     19
4       Data and Summary Statistics
4.1     Baseline Data: Health, Walking, and Time Preference
      We use three baseline datasets: a baseline health survey, a week of baseline walking data,
and a time-preference survey. The baseline health survey, conducted at the first household
visit, contains information on respondent demographics, health, fitness, and lifestyle. Health
measures include Hba1c, a measure of blood sugar control over the previous three months;
random blood sugar (RBS), a measure of more immediate blood sugar control; body mass
index (BMI) and waist circumference, two measures of obesity; blood pressure, a measure of
hypertension; and a short mental health assessment. The baseline also includes two fitness
measures (time to complete five stands from a seated position, and time to walk four meters),
diet, and substance use. During the phase-in period between the baseline health survey and
randomization, we collected one week of pedometer data consisting of daily step counts.
      Following the phase-in period, we conduct a baseline time-preference survey to measure
impatience over eort in order to test Prediction 1. As highlighted in Kremer et al. (2019),
"time preferences [over eort and consumption] are di cult to measure, and the literature has
not converged on a broadly accepted and easily implementable approach." Since our sample
is somewhat elderly and has di culty with the more complicated screen-based measures used
in the literature, we included simple measures that the full sample could comprehend.
      Our primary measure of impatience over eort and consumption is a standardized index
of survey-based measures of impatience and procrastination taken from the psychology liter-
ature. The questions, listed in Panel A of Table A.2, are a subset of the Tuckman (1991) and
Lay (1986) scales, with the specific subset chosen by our field team as being most appropriate
for our setting. The questions ask respondents to respond on a Likert scale of agreement
with statements such as "I'm continually saying `I'll do it tomorrow'."
      The questions in the index are tilted toward procrastination-style behaviors and hence
should better detect naive time-inconsistent impatience than other types of impatience. Our
empirical heterogeneity tests using this measure may thus tilt toward testing whether the
contracts are eective for naifs in particular. Since naifs and partial naifs appear to constitute
a large share of impatient individuals (Augenblick and Rabin, 2019; Bai et al., 2017), and
since we consider the e cacy for naifs to be a nice advantage of our time-bundled contracts,
this limitation is likely minor.
      These questions have two key benefits. First, they are simple for respondents to un-

                                                20
derstand. Second, the psychology literature has validated that they predict real behaviors,
such as poor academic performance (Kim and Seo, 2015). Reassuringly, the measures also
correlate well with behavior in our sample. For example, those with higher values of our
impatience index have worse diets and lower levels of baseline walking (Table A.2).
       We began collecting our impatience index partway through the data collection17 and so
it is only available for the latter 54% of the sample. To check the robustness of our results
in the full sample, we also create a "predicted index" using a LASSO prediction based on
three similar survey questions on self-control in the lifestyle domain that we developed and
included in the baseline for all participants (e.g., "In the past week, how many times have
you found yourself exercising less than you had originally planned?"). Panel B of Table A.2
lists the questions used for prediction and shows that the predicted index correlates in the
expected direction with behavior measures such as the health risk index.
       To measure discounting in a consistent way across multiple domains, we also adapted the
convex time budget (CTB) methodology of Andreoni and Sprenger (2012) to measure time
preferences over walking and mobile recharges, as described in Appendix E. However, these
measures are di cult to implement in the field, and we had several logistical challenges. For
example, it was hard to get respondents to understand the paradigm, and likely as a result,
we have an order of magnitude more law of demand violations than lab-based studies with
college students.18 Further, as described in Appendix E, the impatience measures estimated
using this methodology do not correlate in the expected direction with any behaviors. Thus,
we judged our implementation unsuccessful and do not use these measures for analysis.
       Although the CTB measures were unreliable, we collected other baseline data that may
proxy for impatience over mobile-recharge payments: recharge balances, recharge usage, and
a measure of the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) recharges (we asked how much
additional credit participants would use if they were gifted 30 extra INR of recharges daily
over the intervention period). People who have higher balances, usage, and/or a lower MPC
are less likely to be credit constrained and may have a lower discount rate over recharges.

4.2      Summary Statistics
       The baseline characteristics of the full experimental sample are reported in the first
column of Table 1. Our sample is, on average, 49.4 years old and has slightly more males
  17
    Challenges surfaced during our field implementation of Andreoni and Sprenger (2012) (described below).
  18
    Other suggestions of a lack of understanding include our estimates not converging for roughly 44% of
the sample and respondents failing to follow through on their chosen allocations.


                                                   21
than females. The average monthly household income is approximately 16,000 INR (about
200 USD) per month; for comparison, in 2015, the median urban household in India earned
10,000 to 20,000 INR per month (Ministry of Labour and Unemployment, 2016). Panel B
shows that our sample is at high risk for diabetes and its complications: 65% of the sample
has been diagnosed with diabetes by a doctor, 81% have Hba1c levels that strongly indicate
diabetes, and the RBS measures show poor blood sugar control. The sample also has high
rates of comorbidities: 49% have hypertension and 61% are overweight. Panel C shows
that on average, participants walked just under 7,000 steps per day in the phase-in period,
comparable to average daily steps in many developed countries (Bassett et al., 2010). Panels
D and E show our measures of impatience over eort and our measures of mobile recharge
usage (See Table A.3 for a summary of the components of the impatience index).
      Baseline measures are balanced across treatment groups. Columns 2­4 of Table 1 show
means for the pure control, monitoring, and incentive groups, while columns 5­10 show means
separately for each incentive subgroup. To explore balance, we jointly test the equality of
all characteristics in each of our three "comparison" groups (control, monitoring, and the
base case incentive groups­the reference group for all incentive subgroups) with each of the
treatment groups. All tests fail to reject the null that all dierences are zero.

4.3     Outcomes
      Our outcomes come from two datasets. The first contains time-series data of daily steps
walked by each participant with a pedometer during the intervention period and (for a subset
of the sample) for the 12-week period after that. We do not have daily steps for the control
group during the intervention period because they did not have pedometers.
      A potential issue with the daily step data is that we only observe steps taken while
participants wear the pedometer. Because participants in the incentive groups are rewarded
for taking 10,000 steps in a day with the pedometer, they have an additional incentive to
wear the pedometer on days that they expect to walk more. This could lead to a potential
selection issue: if the incentive groups selectively make an eort to wear the pedometer
when they think they will walk more but the monitoring group does not, then we will see a
spurious positive relationship between incentives and observed daily steps.
      To minimize selective pedometer-wearing, we incentivize all monitoring and incentive
participants to wear their pedometers even on days with few steps. We do this by oering a
cash bonus of 200 INR (about 3 USD) if participants wear their pedometer (i.e., have nonzero


                                              22
                           Table 1: Baseline Summary Statistics in Full Sample and by Treatment Group

                                         Full     Control    Monitoring   Incentives    Daily      Base      Monthly    4 - Day    5 - Day      Small
                                       sample                              pooled                  case                   TH         TH        payment

                                         (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)         (10)

A. Demographics
 Age (from BL)                          49.54      49.78        50.28       49.44       49.57      49.60      48.80      49.31       49.67       49.11
                                       (8.52)     (8.19)       (8.95)      (8.55)      (8.60)     (8.33)     (8.94)     (8.68)      (8.77)      (7.84)
 Female (=1)                             0.42      0.46          0.43        0.41        0.44       0.41       0.38       0.42        0.38       0.48
                                       (0.49)     (0.50)       (0.50)      (0.49)      (0.50)     (0.49)     (0.49)     (0.49)      (0.49)      (0.50)
 Labor force participation (=1)          0.75       0.73         0.72        0.75        0.75       0.74       0.81       0.74        0.77        0.70
                                       (0.44)     (0.45)       (0.45)      (0.43)      (0.43)     (0.44)     (0.39)     (0.44)      (0.42)      (0.46)
 Per capita income (INR/month)          4463       4488         4620        4447        4068       4477       4599       4454        4480        4341
                                       (3638)     (4483)       (3160)      (3447)      (2765)     (3496)     (3235)     (3590)      (3525)      (2615)
 Household size                          3.91      3.94          3.82        3.91       3.92        3.89       3.74       3.96        3.96       3.58
                                       (1.62)     (1.54)       (1.51)      (1.64)      (1.45)     (1.70)     (1.59)     (1.64)      (1.68)      (1.29)
B. Health
 Diagnosed diabetic (=1)                 0.67       0.67        0.68         0.66        0.62       0.68       0.62       0.67       0.68        0.59
                                        (0.47)     (0.47)      (0.47)       (0.47)      (0.49)     (0.47)     (0.49)     (0.47)     (0.47)      (0.50)
 Hba1c (mmol/mol)                        8.68       8.67        8.76         8.68        8.58       8.72       8.66       8.68       8.69        8.35
                                        (2.33)     (2.36)      (2.40)       (2.32)      (2.36)     (2.29)     (2.44)     (2.32)     (2.38)      (2.14)
 Random blood sugar (mmol/L)           192.42     191.32      196.07       192.51      195.58     193.26     193.30     192.12     192.50      177.38
                                       (89.39)    (88.73)     (86.67)      (89.87)     (91.54)    (88.25)    (98.14)    (89.96)    (91.75)     (77.00)
 Systolic BP (mmHg)                    133.35     133.33      134.06       133.34      135.25     133.27     134.18     132.49     133.71      135.62
                                       (19.15)    (20.34)     (17.68)      (18.99)     (21.55)    (19.07)    (19.13)    (18.00)    (19.20)     (21.42)
 Diastolic BP (mmHg)                    88.47      88.54       88.53        88.46       89.30      88.19      88.60      88.23      89.01       90.00
                                       (11.11)    (11.50)     (10.10)      (11.09)     (12.79)    (10.75)    (10.10)    (10.73)    (11.96)     (13.19)
 BL BMI                                 26.42      26.52       26.47        26.40       26.41      26.47      26.39      26.34      26.19       26.99
                                        (4.35)     (4.34)      (3.67)       (4.39)      (5.35)     (4.53)     (4.81)     (4.21)     (3.70)      (4.10)
 HbA1c: Diabetic (=1)                    0.82       0.82        0.81         0.82        0.77       0.84       0.79       0.81       0.82        0.77
                                        (0.38)     (0.38)      (0.39)       (0.38)      (0.42)     (0.36)     (0.41)     (0.39)     (0.38)      (0.42)
 BP: Hypertensive (=1)                   0.49       0.46        0.51         0.49        0.53       0.49       0.51       0.48       0.50        0.45
                                        (0.50)     (0.50)      (0.50)       (0.50)      (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.50)     (0.50)      (0.50)
 Overweight (=1)                         0.61       0.62        0.66         0.60        0.57       0.60       0.58       0.61       0.59        0.67
                                        (0.49)     (0.48)      (0.47)       (0.49)      (0.50)     (0.49)     (0.50)     (0.49)     (0.49)      (0.48)
C. Walking - Phase-in
 Exceeded step target (=1)              0.25       0.25         0.24        0.25        0.25       0.23       0.27       0.26        0.25        0.27
                                       (0.32)     (0.31)       (0.32)      (0.32)      (0.32)     (0.30)     (0.33)     (0.32)      (0.34)      (0.34)
 Average daily steps                    6999       7066         6892        6998        7046       6810       7449       7128        6950        7018
                                       (3980)     (3946)       (3697)      (4014)      (4195)     (3969)     (3857)     (4015)      (4087)      (4195)
D. Impatience over eort
 Impatience index (SD's)                  0.09      0.00         0.05       0.12          0.04      0.14       0.18       0.13        0.00        0.26
                                        (0.99)     (1.00)      (0.89)      (0.99)       (0.95)     (1.05)     (0.91)     (1.01)     (0.88)      (0.91)
 Predicted index (SD's)                  -0.05      0.00        -0.15       -0.06        -0.09      -0.02      -0.02      -0.08      -0.09       -0.12
                                        (1.00)     (1.00)      (0.94)      (1.01)       (1.02)     (1.00)     (1.09)     (1.00)     (1.01)      (0.97)
E. Mobile Recharges
 Yesterday's talk time (INR)              6.61      7.22         6.47        6.44         5.86       6.58       7.67       6.43       6.01        4.94
                                         (8.79)    (10.14)      (8.95)      (8.36)       (6.25)     (8.77)     (9.19)     (8.05)     (8.87)      (5.77)
 Marginal talk time, if gifted (INR)     41.32      28.19       24.14       45.62        73.03      54.96      35.44      29.63      44.77       70.27
                                       (191.61)   (156.15)    (144.56)    (201.65)     (256.44)   (222.00)   (178.92)   (159.66)   (199.78)    (252.13)
 Mobile balance (INR)                    29.26      30.80       29.48       28.98        28.61      29.69      28.55      28.57      28.14       30.05
                                        (49.42)    (48.79)     (48.68)     (49.88)      (38.54)    (52.08)    (63.65)    (49.10)    (44.98)     (36.59)
F-tests for Joint Orthogonality
 P-value (relative to control)          N/A        N/A         0.35         0.50        0.47       0.19       0.63       0.79        0.55        0.43
 P-value (relative to monitoring)       N/A        0.35        N/A          0.18        0.28       0.10       0.17       0.13        0.76        0.70
 P-value (relative to base case)        N/A        0.19        0.10         N/A         0.15       N/A        0.53       0.75        0.90        0.60
Sample size
 Number of individuals                  3,192       585         203         2,404        166        902        164       794         312         66
 Percent of sample                      100.0       18.3        6.4         75.3         5.2        28.3       5.1       24.9        9.8         2.1
 Number of ind. with ped. data          2,582        ­          200         2,359        163        890        163        775        304          64

      Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. BMI is body mass index, and BP is blood pressure. Overweight means BMI above 25. Hypertensive
      means systolic BP above 140 or diastolic BP above 90. The F -statistic tests the joint orthogonality of all characteristics to treatment assignment
      relative to the comparison group.
                                                                              23
recorded steps) on at least 70% of days in the intervention period. The rates of pedometer-
wearing are high and the dierence between treatment groups is small in magnitude (85% in
monitoring versus 88% in incentives); however, the dierence is statistically significant with
a p -value of 0.045 (column 2 of Table A.4). To address the imbalance, we report Lee (2009)
bounds accounting for missing step data due to not wearing pedometers when comparing the
incentive and monitoring groups.19 Our primary specifications do not condition on wearing
the pedometer (instead setting steps and compliance to 0 on days when the pedometer was
not worn) but we show that our results are robust to conditioning on wearing.
       Since the pedometers record data on minute-wise (instead of day-wise) step counts for
a subset of days, we can also test whether, on the days participants wore the pedometers,
the incentive groups wore it for more minutes. Reassuringly, the start and end times are
balanced across groups, as shown in Table C.3.
       Another potential concern would be if participants gave their pedometers to someone
else; we believe this concern is limited for two main reasons. First, we performed 836
unannounced audit visits with participants at their homes to verify that they were wearing
their pedometers or could demonstrate where they were. In 99.6% of cases, participants
were not sharing their pedometers. Second, we check whether participants' minute-wise step
counts exceed what would be expected from participants of their age range and find that
this is extremely rare and is balanced across incentive and monitoring groups (Table C.3).
       The second outcomes dataset--the endline survey--gathered health, fitness, and lifestyle
information similar to the baseline health survey. The completion rate is 97% in each of the
control, monitoring, and incentive groups (p -value for equality 0.99).


5        Empirical Results: Incentive Design
       This section empirically examines the implications of impatience for incentive design. We
first show that our incentive program increases compliance with the step target, making this
a good laboratory to explore our contract variations. Second, we explore the eect of adding
a time-bundled threshold and test our prediction that it will be more eective for those who
  19
    We do not have participant pedometer data (e.g. because the pedometer broke or the sync was unsuc-
cessful) on 6% of days. Missing pedometer data is balanced across incentive and monitoring groups (column
2, Table A.4). While our main specifications drop days with missing pedometer data, Table A.5 shows
robustness to alternate specifications and Lee bounds. While missing data is balanced overall, one specific
source of missing data (mid-intervention withdrawals) is imbalanced (column 5 of Table A.4), but results
are robust to Lee bounds accounting specifically for that source (column 5 of Table A.5).


                                                    24
are more impatient over eort. Third, we analyze the eect of varying payment frequency
and use the analysis to shed light on discount rates over payment. Finally, we discuss the
potential welfare implications of improving contract eectiveness.

5.1     Incentives and Compliance
      We first test whether providing financial incentives increases compliance with the 10,000-
step target. To answer this question, we compare average compliance in the pooled incentive
groups with the monitoring group, thus isolating the impact of the financial incentives alone
(i.e., holding monitoring and other aspects of the full intervention constant).
      We estimate regressions of the following form:

                         yit =  +     incentivesi + X 0i + X 0it + "it ,                     (9)

where yit is either individual i's steps on day t during the intervention period or an indicator
for whether individual i surpassed the 10,000-step target on day t; incentivesi is an indicator
for being in the incentive group; and X i and X it are vectors of individual- and day-level
controls, respectively, described in the notes to Table 2. We cluster the standard errors
"it at the individual level. The coe cient of interest,     , is the average treatment eect of
incentives relative to monitoring only. Panel A of Table 2 shows the results. Figure 2 also
shows the results graphically, with the 95% confidence interval depicted on the incentives
bar representing a test for equality between the incentive and monitoring groups (as is the
case for all the graphs in this section).
      Incentives have large impacts on walking, increasing the share of days that participants
reach their 10,000 step target by 20 pp (column 1 of Table 2). This eect does not simply
reflect participants shifting steps from one day to another: column 2 shows that incentives
increase walking by 1,266 steps per day, roughly a 20 percent increase that is equivalent to
approximately 13 minutes of extra brisk walking, on average, each day. We demonstrate the
robustness of this result to dierent specifications, including Lee bounds, in Section 6.1.1.
      Figure 3 shows that incentives have a striking impact on the distribution of daily steps.
Although there is bunching at 10,000 steps in both groups, the bunching in the incentive
group is substantially more pronounced. This indicates that the incentives are motivating
individuals to comply with their daily step targets.
      Because we deliver incentives for walking at least 10,000 daily steps, the incentives are
particularly high-powered on days when individuals would otherwise walk just under 10,000

                                                25
                   Table 2: Impacts of Incentives on Walking

   Dependent variable:          Compliance         Daily steps        Daily steps
                                                                       (if > 0)
                                    (1)                (2)                (3)

   A. Pooled incentives

   Incentives                     0.197             1265.6             1155.9
                                  [0.0179]           [208.8]            [186.3]
   B. Unpooled incentives

   Base case                      0.208             1388.7             1197.7
                                  [0.0196]           [222.1]            [197.3]
   Daily                          0.202             1123.6             1196.9
                                  [0.0300]           [331.3]            [273.2]
   Monthly                        0.181             1272.1             1209.6
                                  [0.0282]           [307.5]            [265.0]
   5-Day threshold                0.208             1307.0             1229.1
                                  [0.0250]           [263.9]            [230.0]
   4-Day threshold                0.188             1180.0             1112.2
                                  [0.0203]           [229.9]            [203.0]
   Small payment                  0.124              724.2               508.2
                                  [0.0382]           [386.3]            [328.3]


   Monitoring mean                 0.294              6774               7986
   Controls                         Yes               Yes                Yes


   P-value for base case vs
     Daily                          0.82              0.35               1.00
     Monthly                        0.27              0.65               0.96
     4-Day threshold                0.98              0.68               0.85
     5-Day threshold                0.19              0.17               0.50
     Small payment                  0.02              0.05               0.02
   # Individuals                   2,559              2,559             2,557
   #Observations                  205,732            205,732           180,018

Notes: We report incentive eects pooled in Panel A and separately by treatment group
in Panel B. The columns show coe cient estimates from regressions based on Equations 9
(Panel A) and 10 (Panel B) using daily intervention-period pedometer data. Individual-
level controls are a second order polynomial of age and weight, gender, height, and the
average of the dependent variable during the phase-in period (before randomization).
Day-level controls are month-year and day-of-week fixed eects. The sample includes the
incentive and monitoring groups. The omitted category in all columns is the monitoring
group. The sample size diers from Table 1 because a few participants in both the
incentive and monitoring groups withdrew immediately. The likelihood of immediate
withdrawal is not significantly dierent between treatment groups (p -value > 0.7), see
Table A.4 column 5. Standard errors, in brackets, are clustered at the individual level.
Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%.
                                             26
      (a) Probability Exceeded Step Target                          (b) Average Daily Steps

                          Figure 2: Incentives Increase Average Walking
Notes: The figure displays the impact of the pooled incentive treatments on walking during the intervention
period. The confidence interval represents the test of equality between the incentive and monitoring groups
with the same controls as Table 2. Panel A shows the average probability of exceeding the daily step target;
Panel B shows average daily steps walked.




             Figure 3: Incentives Shift the Distribution of Steps Walked per Day
Notes: The figure displays the impact of the pooled incentive groups relative to the monitoring group during
the intervention period. The confidence intervals represent tests of equality between the incentive and
monitoring groups with the same controls as Table 2.



                                                    27
steps and low-powered on days when they would otherwise walk far fewer steps or would
reach the target no matter what. Therefore, our incentive program could in theory only
improve compliance on days when individuals would have otherwise walked nearly 10,000
steps. Figure 3 provides evidence that this is not the case. Incentives shift the entire
distribution of daily steps rather than simply pushing marginal participants over the step
target: there is less mass everywhere below the step target and more mass everywhere above.
      Having established that our incentives increase compliance, we next use the experiment
to explore the eectiveness of incentive contract variations designed to improve performance
in the face of impatience over eort and over financial payments, respectively.

5.2     Time-Bundled Threshold Contracts
      In this section, we first analyze the eects of time-bundled thresholds in the full sample
and then explore the heterogeneity in their eects by impatience over eort. Our primary pre-
diction is about heterogeneity: relative to linear contracts, time-bundled thresholds should
increase compliance among those who are impatient over eort relative to those who are not.
      The impact of threshold contracts on average compliance, in contrast, is theoretically
ambiguous. That said, many simple models yield predictions about the impact of threshold
contracts on cost-eectiveness and dispersion. While we do not derive these predictions
formally, we lay out the intuition here. First, threshold contracts often decrease the cost of
achieving a given level of compliance. The reason is that threshold contracts pay the same
as linear contracts when people meet their threshold and less (nothing) when people do not.
Second, threshold contracts often increase dispersion. To see this, imagine people who would
walk two days less than the threshold in a linear contract in a given week. For some of these
people, adding the threshold would cause them to increase their compliance to reach the
threshold; for others, they would give up on the incentives and decrease walking. Dispersion
at the person-week level (the unit for the contract) would thus go up.
      Evidence on both the cost-eectiveness and dispersion impacts of thresholds is scant. We
begin by exploring these eects, as well as the sample-average eect on compliance, before
testing our prediction about the heterogeneity in the impact of thresholds by impatience.




                                               28
5.2.1    Average Eectiveness, Cost-Eectiveness, and Dispersion
    Panel B of Table 2 evaluates the average eects of all of our incentive contract variations
relative to the monitoring group, estimating regressions of the following form:

                        yit =  +     j    incentivesj    i
                                                             + X 0i + X 0it  + "it ,                  (10)

where yit are daily walking outcomes and (incentivesj )i is an indicator for whether individual
i is enrolled in incentive treatment group j 2 (daily, base case, monthly, 4-day threshold,
5-day threshold, small payment). Recall that all other treatments vary from the base case
contract on exactly one dimension (time-bundling, payment frequency, or payment amount);
the bottom rows of the table thus show the p -values for the significance of the dierence
between each incentive treatment group and the base case group.
    We find that adding a time-bundled threshold does not aect the average level of exercise.
Figure 4 and Table 2, Panel B, rows 4 and 5 show that the 4- and 5-day threshold treatment
groups meet the daily step target roughly as frequently as the base case (linear) group does.
For both threshold groups, step-target compliance is within 2 pp of compliance in the base
case group, with the dierences not statistically significant.




      (a) Probability Exceeded Step Target                           (b) Average Daily Steps

Figure 4: Adding a Time-Bundled Threshold Does Not Significantly Aect Average Walking
Notes: The figure compares the time-bundled threshold treatments with the base case (linear) incentive
treatment. Panel A shows the average probability of exceeding the daily step target during the intervention
period; Panel B shows average daily steps walked during the intervention period. The confidence intervals
represent tests of equality between the base case incentive group and each other treatment group, with the
same controls as Table 2.



                                                    29
   However, consistent with the intuition laid out above, the threshold contracts generate
exercise more cost-eectively. Individuals in the threshold groups only receive payment for
exceeding the step target if they do so on at least four or five days in a given week; when they
comply on fewer days, they are not rewarded. We find that the 4-day and 5-day threshold
groups are paid on only 90% and 85% of the days they achieve the step target, respectively.
They are thus paid an average of 18 INR and 17 INR per day of compliance, less than the
20 INR paid (by definition) to the base case group. Importantly, these cost savings of 10%
and 15% are achieved while generating the same amount of walking among participants.
For comparison, the incentive paid per day walked is also lower in the small payment group
(10 INR per day walked), but this comes at the cost of reduced steps overall (Table 2).
Because threshold contracts do not reduce overall compliance but pay out for only a subset
of compliance, they are more cost-eective than the base case contract.
   We now examine whether thresholds increase the dispersion of walking at the week level
and find that they do. Figure 5 shows histograms of the number of days the step target was
met per week in the threshold and base case groups. The threshold contracts have a large
bimodal eect, causing significantly more individuals to achieve their step target zero days in
the week or seven days in the week. The increase in dispersion and in zeroes is consistent with
the intuition laid out earlier. The increase in density at seven days in particular (instead of at
the specific threshold level of four or five) is perhaps more surprising. Potential explanations
include that it is hard for participants to keep track of how many days they have walked or
it is easier to schedule walking every day in a given week than on a subset of days.
   Thresholds do not just increase dispersion across weeks but also across individuals. Figure
6 plots the density of each individual's probability of exceeding her step target, and mean
daily steps, over the intervention. The threshold treatments have thicker tails, with more
people walking at the high and low ends. A Brown Forsythe test for equal variance finds that
the pooled threshold treatments significantly increase the variance of average steps across
the population (p -value < 0.001). Thus, although thresholds do not work well for everyone,
they work very well for some people.
   The bimodal eects of thresholds highlight the importance of understanding for whom
they work best. We next test our theoretical prediction about one type of individual for
whom they will work well: those who are impatient over eort.




                                               30
                Figure 5: Threshold Contracts Increase Dispersion Across Weeks
Notes: This figure shows the distribution of the number of days walked each week during the intervention
period. Data are at the respondent-week level. Confidence intervals represent a test of equality between the
base case and 4- or 5-day treatment from a regression with the same controls as Table 2.




             Figure 6: Threshold Contracts Increase Dispersion Across Individuals
Notes: This figure shows the distribution of the fraction of days walked and average steps for each participant
over the intervention period in each threshold contract compared with the base case (linear) contract.




                                                      31
5.2.2   Heterogeneity in Time-Bundled Threshold Eects by Time Preferences
   We perform two exercises to assess the quantitative advantage of time-bundled contracts
for those with higher impatience over eort. First, we quantify the heterogeneity by baseline
impatience in compliance with the threshold contracts relative to the base case (linear) con-
tract. Since Prediction 1 is a prediction about heterogeneity in the threshold eect holding
all else constant, this heterogeneity analysis will only be a direct test of the theory if impa-
tience is not correlated with other variables that influence the eectiveness of the threshold.
To shed light on whether this assumption holds here, we control for many covariates in-
teracted with the threshold and show that the estimated relationship is robust. Moreover,
even if there were omitted variables aecting the estimates, the heterogeneity we estimate is
still relevant for policy: it is what policymakers would want to decide whether to customize
contract separability based on participant impatience.
   To more precisely tie our data to our theory, we also calibrate a model to determine
whether the gap in predicted compliance between the threshold and linear contracts varies
with the discount rate over eort. All analyses yield consistent results.

Heterogeneity by Baseline Impatience We use a regression of the following form to
test for heterogeneity in the eects of time-bundled thresholds by impatience:

  yit = +    1 impatiencei    threshi +   2 threshi   +   3 impatiencei   + X 0i  + X 0it  + "it , (11)

where yit is an indicator for whether individual i surpassed the 10,000-step target on day t.
Following our ex ante analysis plan, we pool the threshold treatments for power purposes, so
threshi is an indicator for being in either threshold group (see Table A.6 for disaggregated
results as well as impacts on daily steps). Measures of individual impatience are denoted by
impatiencei ; because some measures are estimated, we present bootstrap confidence intervals
in the table as well as Gaussian standard errors and p -values in table notes when available.
   We restrict the sample to only the base case incentive group and the 4- and 5-day thresh-
old groups, so the only dierence between groups is whether their contract has a time-bundled
threshold. The key coe cient of interest is   1,   which captures how the eect of the threshold
(relative to the base case) varies with impatience. Our prediction is that          1   > 0.
   Table 3 shows that, consistent with our prediction, thresholds work meaningfully better
for those with higher impatience over eort. Column 1 uses the impatience index (i.e., our
standardized index of questions on impatience and self-control from the psychology litera-


                                               32
       Table 3: Time-Bundled Thresholds Increase Walking More for the Impatient


Dependent variable:                                     Met step target (100)
                                                 Above median           Predicted        Above median
                               Impatience
Impatience measure:                               impatience           impatience          predicted
                                 index
                                                    index                 index              index
Sample:                            Late                 Late               Full                Full
                                    (1)                  (2)                (3)                (4)

Impatience  Threshold              3.7                 5.69              3.36                 6.65
                               [0.62, 6.79]        [-1.08,12.45]       [1.40, 5.13]        [0.68, 9.98]
Threshold                          -1.55               -3.9                -1.26             -3.74
                               [-4.79, 1.69]       [-9.20,1.39]        [-3.14, 0.53]      [-5.72, -0.91]
Impatience                        -3.61              -6.04               -2.22               -4.98
                               [-6.10, -1.12]     [-11.26,-0.82]      [-3.45, -0.83]      [-7.16, -0.22]

# Individuals                      1,075                1,075             1,969               1,969
# Observations                    86,215                86,215           157,946             157,946
Base case mean                     50.4                  50.4              50.2                50.2

Notes: This table shows heterogeneity by impatience in the eect of threshold contracts relative to linear
contracts. The impatience measure changes across columns; its units in columns 1 and 3 are standard
deviations. The sample includes the base case and time-bundled threshold incentive groups only. The
"Late" sample includes only participants who were enrolled after we started measuring the impatience
index; the Full sample includes everyone. Bootstrap draws were done at the person level, and bootstrapped
95% confidence intervals are in brackets. The Gaussian standard errors and p -values for the column 1
Impatience  T hreshold coe cient are 1.92 and 0.054, respectively; for column 2 the corresponding values
are 3.84 and 0.139. Controls are the same as Table 2. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%.


ture) as the measure of impatience. Having a one standard deviation higher value of the
impatience index increases the average performance of the threshold contracts relative to
linear contracts by 4 pp (statistically significant at the 5% level). To aid in interpretation,
column 2 uses a dummy for having an above-median value of the impatience measure. Rela-
tive to the base case, the threshold works 6 pp better for those with above-median impatience
than those below the median. Recall that we only have the impatience index for the sample
enrolled later in the intervention; to improve power and to use the full sample, columns 3 and
4 use the predicted impatience index, which is available for the full sample, as the impatience


                                                   33
measure. We find similar (and more precise) results. Relative to the base case, the threshold
works 7 pp better for those with above-median impatience than those with below-median, a
large increase relative to the sample-average eect of either contract (20 pp).
    Figure 7 presents a visualization of column 4, showing that adding the threshold to the
linear contract increases compliance among the more impatient while decreasing it among
the less. The dierence between the eects is the significant 7 pp eect from column 4.
Although we had no prediction for whether the threshold would have a positive or negative
eect in each group (just that the eect would be more positive among the more impatient),
it is important for policy that in our case, the eects are positive for one group and are
negative for the other. This means that eorts by policymakers to individualize who receives
a threshold contract based on agent impatience could substantially increase eectiveness.




        Figure 7: Time-Bundled Thresholds Increase Walking More for the Impatient
Notes: The chart plots the average compliance in the threshold contracts relative to the base case (linear)
contract, estimated separately for those with below-median predicted impatience (left bar) versus above-
median predicted impatience (right bar). The height of the vertical arrow shows the dierence between the
treatment eects, with the 95% confidence interval in brackets. All estimates come from Table 3 column 4.


    Table A.7 presents estimates of Equation 11, controlling for other baseline covariates and
their interactions with the threshold treatments. For example, we control for risk aversion,
scheduling uncertainty, and baseline walking (a proxy for the mean of the walking cost
distribution) among other covariates. The coe cient on the interaction of impatience and the
threshold remains stable, suggesting that it is likely impatience itself (and not its correlates)
driving the estimated relationship. Another potential confound that was hard to measure

                                                    34
at baseline (and hence which we do not control for) is the individual-level propensity for
habit formation. However, reassuringly, the propensity to form habits does not appear to be
correlated with impatience in our setting, as impatience does not predict the persistence of
incentive eects after payments stop (results available upon request).

Model Calibration We next calibrate a model using the empirical distribution of walking
costs to show that, in this setting, the performance of the threshold treatments should indeed
increase meaningfully with impatience over exercise. We first extend the simple framework
from Section 2 to contracts with seven-day payment periods and with 4- and 5-day thresholds.
We simplify the model slightly by assuming that individuals are fully patient over payments
(dm = 1) and exponentially discount exercise eort at rate ( ).
       To calibrate the average compliance in the threshold and base case (linear) contracts, we
need to estimate the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of walking costs. We do this
by fitting a uniform distribution to several moments of the CDF from the data, as described
in Appendix D. We then use the estimated distribution to predict how relative compliance
in the base case and threshold contracts would vary with the discount rate over eort.
       The results are displayed visually in Figure 8, with the exponential discount factor over
walking      on the x-axis and the gap between performance in the threshold and base case on
the y-axis (shown separately for the 4- and 5-day thresholds). The downward-sloping curves
in the figure confirm the theoretical intuition from our model: for people who are more
impatient over walking (smaller ), there are larger compliance gains from thresholds. This
is true for both naifs and sophisticates for moderate levels of impatience.20 In addition, the
increase in performance of the threshold contract as impatience increases is quantitatively
important, especially for the 5-day threshold contract, where the threshold has more bite.
For example, decreasing the eort discount rate from 1 to 0.9 increases relative compliance
in the 5-day threshold contract by roughly 3 pp among both sophisticates and naifs.21
  20
     As naifs become more impatient ( < 0.85), the linear contract starts to gain relative to the 4-day
threshold: as naifs become very impatient, they procrastinate in early periods under the threshold contract.
However, even very impatient naifs still do better with the threshold than completely patient people ( = 1),
which is our theoretical prediction when the threshold level is less than the number of periods (App. B.4).
  21
     The calibration overestimates the average eect of the threshold, which in practice we found to be zero.
This is likely because our model does not incorporate risk aversion over uncertain walking costs, which
would decrease the average performance of the threshold. However, our main interest is heterogeneity by
impatience, which we do not believe will change by incorporating uncertainty and risk aversion.




                                                    35
                                                                          




  Figure 8: Threshold Relatively More Eective for More Impatient in Calibrated Model
Notes: The figure shows the dierence between compliance in each Threshold contract relative to the Base
Case as predicted by a walking model with uniform walking costs calibrated to our data. We assume
exponential discounting over eort, with t the discount factor over eort t periods in advance.


5.2.3     Time-bundled Thresholds Result Summary
      Our analysis creates several new findings about time-bundled threshold contracts. Con-
sistent with our theoretical predictions, thresholds generate meaningfully more compliance
among the impatient than the patient. In the full sample, they have advantages and dis-
advantages, improving cost-eectiveness but increasing dispersion. The variance in their
performance across the full sample underscores the potential policy gains from targeting the
assignment of thresholds based on predictors of e cacy and highlights the importance of our
finding that impatience over eort is one such predictor.

5.3     Payment Frequency
      We conduct two primary analyses to better understand the roles of payment frequency
and the discount rate over financial payments in incentive design:
1. Between treatment: We compare average compliance in the daily, weekly (base case), and
   monthly groups. We assess how payment frequency aects compliance and use Prediction
   2 to shed light on the level and shape of discount rates over payment.
2. Within treatment: Within the base case and monthly groups, we examine how compli-
   ance changes as the payday approaches to shed light on the shape of discount rates over


                                                  36
   payment using Prediction 3. Kaur et al. (2015) uses similar variation to study discounting.
    The approaches are complementary. The between-treatment approach answers the policy
question of whether payment frequency matters, while the within-treatment approach has
more statistical power and rules out potential confounds to the between-treatment eects.
    We begin with the between-treatment comparisons. Figure 9 and Panel B of Table 2
both show that the three payment frequency treatments have similar eects of walking.
The impacts on both compliance and steps walked are statistically indistinguishable. The
point estimates also do not increase monotonically with frequency, as would be expected if
dierences reflected discounting instead of statistical noise. We thus do not find evidence
that increasing payment frequency in the range from daily to monthly aects compliance ­
a perhaps surprising finding given the conventional wisdom that it would.




      (a) Probability Exceeded Step Target                         (b) Average Daily Steps

            Figure 9: Payment Frequency Does Not Significantly Impact Walking
Notes: Panel A shows the average probability of exceeding the daily step target during the intervention for
the three dierent frequency treatments (the base case treatment pays weekly). Panel B shows average daily
steps during the intervention. Confidence interval bars represent tests for equality between each group and
the base case incentive group and are from regressions with the same controls as Table 2.


    The lack of between-treatment frequency eects implies that the discount rate over fi-
nancial payments is small and has a relatively flat shape over the range from one day to
one month. If we interpret these findings from the lens of a quasi-hyperbolic ("beta-delta")
model, the lack of dierence between weekly and monthly frequency implies that the long-
run discount factor, delta, may be relatively close to 1, while the lack of dierence between
the daily and weekly frequencies implies either that the present bias parameter beta is also

                                                    37
relatively close to 1 (i.e., that there is limited present bias), or that the "beta window" (i.e.,
the "present" that is not discounted) is shorter than a day. These findings add evidence
from a novel field-based test to extensive lab-based studies that trace out the payment dis-
count rate over time and find mixed evidence on its shape.22 Field evidence is particularly
important because, in the lab, narrow bracketing may cause discount rates measured using
payments to reflect discount rates over consumption instead (Andreoni et al., 2018).
       One important caveat to these results is that the between-treatment eects are somewhat
imprecise, and we have limited power to reject large discount rates.23 We address this issue
with the within-treatment analysis below.
       Using our between-treatment eects to make inferences about discount rates over pay-
ment requires that no other confounds drive the response to payment frequency. At the
design stage, we attempted to mitigate potential confounds as well as possible.24 Many of
the remaining confounds would improve the eectiveness of higher-frequency payments. For
example, if utility were concave in the payment amount, then the fact that higher-frequency
payments also break payments of a given size into smaller chunks would improve compliance.
Since these confounds would lead us to overestimate the discount rate over payments, they
cannot be driving our finding that payment discount rates are small. That said, there do
exist potential confounds whose eects run in the opposite direction.25 The within-treatment
analysis is less subject to these confounds, as variables like payment size are fixed within
treatment. That analysis, thus, allows us to more cleanly assess discount rates over payment.
       The within-treatment analysis confirms the suggestive evidence of flat and low discount
rates from the between-treatment analysis. Figure 10 shows how compliance within the
base case weekly (Panel A) and monthly (Panel B) treatments changes as the payment date
approaches. Prediction 3 shows that, if agents are impatient over payments, compliance
increases as the payday approaches. Yet we find that walking behavior is remarkably steady
across the payment cycle. Table A.8 estimates the change in compliance as the payment
  22
     While Andreoni and Sprenger (2012) find no evidence of present bias over payments and Balakrishnan
et al. (2017) find that individuals are only impatient over payments in the very immediate future, Janssens
et al. (2017) find present bias over payments even when the "present" period is actually "tomorrow."
  23
     We cannot rule out that daily payments have an eect 4 pp higher than the base case or that monthly
payments have an eect 8 pp lower.
  24
     For example, higher-frequency payments could improve compliance by providing more frequent feedback;
to address this, we hold text messages constant across all treatment groups.
  25
     For example, Casaburi and Macchiavello (2019) suggest that people might prefer lumpier payments since
they can serve as commitment devices for savings.



                                                    38
              (a) Weekly Payment Cycle                             (b) Monthly Payment Cycle

Figure 10: The Probability of Exceeding the Step Target Is Stable over the Payment Cycle
Notes: The figures show the probability of exceeding the daily 10,000-step target among individuals receiving
the base case (i.e., weekly) incentive (Panel A) and a monthly incentive (Panel B) relative to the monitoring
group, according to days remaining until payday. Eects control for payday day-of-week fixed eects, day-
of-week fixed eects, day-of-week relative to survey day-of-week fixed eects, and the controls in Table 2.
The shaded area represents a collection of confidence intervals from tests of equality within each daily period
between the incentive and monitoring groups from regressions with the same controls as Table 2.


date approaches within the base case and monthly groups, conditional on day-of-week fixed
eects.26 The estimates are not significantly dierent from zero and suggest that, if anything,
compliance decreases as the payment date approaches. For each day closer to the payday,
compliance is 0.1 pp lower in the weekly group and 0.07 pp lower in the monthly group.
       Our confidence intervals are also tighter here. If we assume linearity of compliance in lag
to payment, then the confidence interval around the slope in the weekly treatment rules out
the possibility that because of monetary discounting, daily payments would be more than a
mere 0.3 pp more eective than weekly. We also calculate an implied payment discount rate
following Kaur et al. (2015). We use our small payment and base case groups to estimate
the elasticity of walking to payment and combine that estimate with the slope of walking as
payday approaches from column 1 of Table A.8. The implied discount rate is negative and
  26
    Intervention launch visits were made seven days per week, allowing us to control for day-of-week and
payday day-of-week when estimating payment cycle eects. To address the concern that launch survey dates
were endogenous to participants' schedules, we randomly varied the delay between the survey date and the
contract launch (and hence the payday). We then control for fixed eects of day-of-week relative to the
launch survey date, thereby isolating variation in the payment cycle within a given number of days from the
survey day-of-week.



                                                      39
even the maximum estimate implied by the top of our confidence interval is only 0.59%.
       Although these results are consistent with recent lab-based work (e.g., Augenblick et al.
2015) in showing limited discounting over payments, the absence of payday spikes and low
implied daily discount rate over payments conflicts with Kaur et al. (2015), who back out
an implied daily discount rate of 4%. The reasons for the dierences are an open question
for future work (e.g., they may reflect dierent countries or payment amounts).
       Evidence from self-reported contract demand further substantiates our finding that there
is limited impatience over payments.27 When we asked participants upfront whether they
would prefer payments at a daily, weekly, or monthly frequency, the modal answer was
weekly, preferred by 58% of participants. Daily payments were the least common choice,
preferred by only 17% of participants.
5.3.1      Summary of Results
       Our analysis suggests two main findings. First, changing the payment frequency between
monthly and daily does not have meaningful eects on average compliance in our setting,
suggesting that increasing payment frequency is not always an eective policy to improve
compliance. Second, on average, the model of discounting over payments that best describes
our participants is one of patience over mobile recharges.

5.4      Eectiveness and Welfare
       Our focus in this paper is on maximizing contract "eectiveness" (the compliance achieved
for a given payout). Improving contract eectiveness is an appropriate objective in many
situations. In firm and worker applications, maximizing eectiveness is often analogous to
profit maximization. In public applications with a social cost of public funds, if the incen-
tivized behavior has a positive marginal social benefit ­ as is likely in our setting since the
estimated social benefits to walking are large relative to the private costs ­ then maximizing
eectiveness should increase social welfare.28 Policymakers themselves are often concerned
with maximizing eectiveness, perhaps because it is straightforward to explain and justify.
       One potential concern with our approach would be if the contract variations we examine
  27
      In addition, we do not find larger frequency treatment eects among those who appear more impatient
according to our (imperfect) proxies for impatience over mobile recharges. Although we did not power our
frequency groups to examine heterogeneity, for completeness, the Online Supplement shows these results.
   28
      Exercise generates health benefits and financial savings by reducing the incidence of expensive com-
plications (Reiner et al., 2013). Baseline exercise is likely ine ciently low due to both internalities and
externalities, with the externalities stemming from the fact that in many places, including India, health
insurance schemes mean that individuals do not bear the full cost of their own health care.


                                                    40
improve eectiveness and/or social welfare but do not cause a Pareto improvement, instead
decreasing the welfare of some individuals relative to a no-incentives benchmark. This con-
cern is potentially relevant for the threshold contract, and is particularly vivid in light of
evidence that pre-commitment contracts can decrease welfare among partially naive individ-
uals who pay upfront for commitment but fail to follow through (e.g., Bai et al., 2017).
       Are there similar concerns with oering threshold contracts, even though individuals
do not pay upfront for them? In fact, there is a potentially analogous issue: naifs may
comply in early periods of a threshold contract (a form of paying upfront) but fail to receive
compensation because they do not follow through in later periods. Our theory suggests
this concern is small for two reasons. First, later compliance costs must be much larger
than earlier costs for lack of follow through to be an issue: as the compliance approaches
the threshold, the incentives for marginal compliance become more and more high powered.
Second, even if naifs do comply upfront but fail to follow through, this could still increase
private welfare if they undercomply without incentives due to internalities like present bias.
       Two pieces of empirical evidence also suggest that the program did not reduce individual
participants' welfare. First, at endline, we asked participants whether they were interested in
continuing the program. The vast majority said that they were interested, with no significant
dierence between the threshold groups and other groups and, within the threshold group, no
significant dierence between the more and less impatient (Table A.9).29 Second, impatient
people are no more likely (and in fact are less likely) than patient people to comply and not
be paid for it under threshold contracts (results available upon request).


6        Empirical Results: Program Evaluation
       The impacts of an incentive program on health and healthy behaviors are of policy
interest, especially among a population like ours that has a high risk of complications from
noncommunicable disease. This section delves into the impact of incentives on exercise
patterns and health. We summarize the literature on exercise interventions for diabetics and
on pedometer-based incentive programs and interpret our estimates in light of the existing
evidence. We next examine how our exercise impacts changed over time, both during and
after the intervention. Finally, we show that the program improved cardiovascular health.
  29
    While we would ideally separate impatient naifs in particular, our survey questions are particularly well
positioned to detect naive impatience, so this result is still reassuring that the program did not harm naifs.



                                                     41
6.1     Exercise Eects
      Interventions previously shown to improve exercise among diabetics and prediabetics have
required highly trained sta to engage in frequent and personally-tailored interactions with
participants (Aziz et al., 2015; Qiu et al., 2014), and hence have had limited scalability. Since
evidence conclusively shows that exercise has important health benefits for diabetics (Qiu
et al., 2014), developing scalable approaches to generate exercise among diabetics is a crucial
policy priority. Although scalable, low-intensity programs ­ and pedometer-based incentives
in particular ­ have successfully generated exercise among non-diabetic populations, whether
such approaches can also be eective among diabetics is an open question.
      Encouragingly, our estimates suggest that low-intensity pedometer-based incentives can
be very successful among diabetics. Our treatment eect on daily steps (1,266 from Column
2 of Table 2) is at the high end of eect sizes found in other populations, which range from
only 1.5 steps in Bachireddy et al. (2019) to 1,050 steps in Finkelstein et al. (2016). Our
treatment eect represents the eect of incentives relative to the monitoring group. Because
monitoring itself may have an independent positive impact, our estimate is likely a lower
bound on the overall impact of incentives on exercise.30
6.1.1      Robustness of Exercise Impacts
      Our exercise treatment eects are robust to accounting for missing data from failure to
wear pedometers. Column 3 of Table 2 reports impacts on daily steps treating days with
no steps recorded as missing (which gives an unbiased estimate if participants randomly
choose not to wear pedometers), and Table A.5 reports Lee bounds which account for the
non-random patterns of missing data; both strategies find similar eects. The estimates are
also robust to excluding the control variables from the regression (Table A.12).

6.2     Persistence of Exercise Eects
      We now analyze how the exercise impacts evolve over time, both during and after the
intervention. We begin with their evolution during the intervention. Because insurers and
governments are increasingly rolling out longer-term (and even permanent) incentive pro-
grams, it is important to understand whether one can sustain incentive eects throughout
the intervention. Panels A and B of Figure 11 show that after an initial spike at week 1, the
eect of incentives on walking remains stable during the full intervention period, suggesting
that policymakers could extend this intervention further with similar eects.
 30
      A pre/post comparison shows no evidence that monitoring increases steps (see Online Supplement).


                                                    42
(a) Step-Target Compliance During Intervention              (b) Daily Steps Walked During Intervention




 (c) Step-Target Compliance Post Intervention                (d) Daily Steps Walked Post Intervention

Figure 11: Incentive Eects are Steady through the 12-Week Program and Persist Afterward
Notes: For the pooled incentive and monitoring groups in each weekly period, Panel A shows the average
probability of exceeding the step target and Panel B shows the average daily steps walked over the inter-
vention period. Week 0 is the phase-in period (before randomization). Panels C and D show the same
dependent variables as Panels A and B, respectively, over the 12 weeks subsequent to the intervention period
for the pooled incentive and pooled comparison (monitoring and control) groups. The shaded area represents
a collection of confidence intervals from tests of equality within each weekly period between the incentive
and comparison groups from regressions with the same controls as Table 2. Intervention period graphs are
unconditional on wearing whereas post-intervention period graphs are not, as described in footnote 32.


       Do the eects of incentives also persist after the payments stop? Studies of similar exer-
cise programs find mixed results regarding whether the eects persist both throughout the
intervention and after incentives end.31 Panels C and D of Figure 11 depict the dierence
  31
       For example, the treatment eects in Royer et al. (2015) and Bachireddy et al. (2019) fade out during the



                                                       43
between our incentive and the pooled comparison groups for the 12 weeks after the interven-
tion ended.32 The incentive group walks significantly more even after incentives end, with
impacts persisting until the last week of measurement. Table A.13 shows that the post-
intervention treatment eects on steps and compliance are statistically significant and large:
55.5% and 43.1% as large as the intervention period eects, respectively. Our short-run
incentive program may thus induce habit formation, enabling long-term impacts.

6.3     Health and Lifestyle Eects
      We now assess the impacts of our programs on health outcomes. Our experiment was
powered to detect the dierence between incentive groups (pooled) and the pure control
group. Table 4 reports results from regressions of the following form:

                    yi =  +      1    incentivesi +     2    monitoringi + X 0i + "i ,                    (12)

where yi is a health outcome at endline for individual i; incentivesi is an indicator for being
in the incentive group; monitoringi is an indicator for being in the monitoring group; and
X i is a vector of controls, shown in the table notes.
      We report intent-to-treat (ITT) eects on our primary outcome of health as well as on
two secondary outcomes, anaerobic fitness and mental health, and two potential confounders,
diet and addictive substance use. To maximize power and avoid multiple testing concerns, we
create a single index of all variables in each category by taking the average of each variable,
standardized by the mean and standard deviation in the control group.33 While we report
ITT estimates for each outcome individually, we focus on the indices to infer eectiveness.
      Table 4 suggests that the incentive program caused moderate improvements in health.34
Column 1 presents the treatment eect on the "Health Risk Index," which averages the five
intervention period whereas they persist in Patel et al. (2016) and Finkelstein et al. (2016). Similarly, while
Charness and Gneezy (2009) find that the eects of a roughly 4-week program incentivizing gym visits persist
7 weeks after incentives end, Royer et al. (2015) find the eect of a similar intervention is indistinguishable
from zero 8 weeks after incentives are removed.
   32
      We pool comparison groups for power. The results are similar when we compare incentives with control
alone (the post-intervention monitoring group is too small to analyze separately). While average pedometer-
wearing rates declined from 87% in the intervention period to 69% post-intervention, wearing rates in the
post-intervention period are balanced across arms (Table A.10) and our results are robust to a Lee bounds
exercise (Table A.11). We focus on results conditional on wearing the pedometer for greater comparability
with intervention period eects; unconditional results also show persistence (Table A.13).
   33
      For individuals who have nonmissing responses to at least one index component, we impute missing
components as the sample mean following Kling et al. (2007).
   34
      Each physical health outcome is trimmed using World Health Organization guidelines to trim biologically
implausible health outcome measurements (i.e., z-scores < 4 or > 4).


                                                      44
                              Table 4: Incentives Moderately Improve Health

A. Sample-Average Impacts              Health risk                     Random          Mean         Body mass       Waist cir-
                                                        HbA1c
                                         index                       blood sugar    arterial BP       index        cumference
                                           (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)

Incentives                               -0.045         -0.072          -5.67           0.081         -0.049          -0.18
                                         [0.025]        [0.070]         [3.42]          [0.42]        [0.042]         [0.27]
Monitoring                                0.014          -0.13           1.63            1.08          0.064         0.00080
                                         [0.044]         [0.12]         [6.07]          [0.75]        [0.074]         [0.48]
P-value: M = I                             0.13           0.57           0.18           0.14            0.09           0.67

B. Heterogeneity by Hba1c             Health risk                      Random           Mean        Body mass       Waist cir-
                                                        HbA1c
                                        index                        blood sugar     arterial BP      index        cumference
                                         (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)
                                                 
Incentives                              -0.074           -0.15          -12.1           -0.18          0.060          -0.18
Above Median Hba1c                       [0.036]         [0.10]          [4.79]         [0.61]        [0.061]         [0.39]
Incentives                               -0.024         -0.031          -2.81            0.31         -0.14           -0.18
Below Median Hba1c                       [0.035]        [0.097]         [4.56]          [0.59]        [0.058]         [0.37]
Control mean                              0.00           8.44           193.83         103.02          26.45           94.44
# Individuals                            3,063           3,061           3,062          3,051          3,053           3,054
P-value: I  Above Med. Hba1c             0.32            0.40            0.16           0.57            0.02            1.00
      = I  Below Med. Hba1c
Notes: The omitted category is the pure control group. Controls are the same as Table 2, along with second order polynomials
of the dependent variable at baseline. The Health Risk Index is the simple average of the variables in columns 2-6, standardized
with the control group mean and standard deviation. Hba1c is the average plasma glucose concentration (%), RBS is the blood
glucose level (mg/dL), and mean arterial BP is the mean arterial blood pressure (mm Hg). In Panel B we control for both the
main eects of above-median HbA1c and below-median HbA1c and their interactions with a monitoring group dummy. Thus,
the interaction terms represent the total eects of incentives for those with above- or below-median Hba1c. Robust standard
errors are in brackets. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%



health risk factors displayed in the table. Panel A shows that, across the full population,
incentives improve the index by 0.05 SDs, significant at the 10% level. Since we hypothesized
ex ante that health outcomes among those with more severe diabetes might be more respon-
sive to exercise, Panel B also examines the health impacts separately by baseline diabetes
severity. We find somewhat stronger eects on health risk among those with more severe
diabetes at baseline, although we cannot reject equality.
    Table A.14 examines whether the intervention had coincident impacts on mental health or
fitness. While RCTs strongly indicate that exercise improves depression among the diagnosed
(Kvam et al., 2016), there is scant evidence on its mental health eects among people without
a depression diagnosis. We measure mental health using seven questions from RAND's 36-
Item Short Form Survey. The incentive program significantly improves mental health. In


                                                                45
contrast, we find no eect on physical fitness, perhaps because our surveys could only measure
high-intensity fitness while our intervention motivated low-intensity exercise. Finally, we do
not find significant impacts on diet or addictive good consumption, as shown in the Online
Supplement.

7     Conclusion
    This paper investigates incentive design for impatient agents. Starting from a model
where agents discount consumption and financial payments dierently, we formulate incen-
tive contract variations that interact with impatience in each domain. First, relative to linear
contracts, we show that compliance with time-bundled contracts is increasing in agents' dis-
count rates over eort. One nice feature of this prediction is that it holds regardless of
whether agents are time-consistent or time-inconsistent, sophisticated or naive, thus broad-
ening the arsenal for motivating impatient or time-inconsistent agents. The intuition behind
the prediction is that the time-bundled contracts enable the principal to purchase future
eort from participants instead of current eort, which is advantageous when participants
discount their future eort and are hence willing to eectively sell it "at a discount." Our
second prediction is that higher-frequency payments induce more eort if agents discount
future financial payments. To assess the quantitative importance of these predictions, we
implement an RCT to incentivize walking among 3,200 diabetics and prediabetics in India.
    Our empirical findings regarding time-bundling are promising for policy and open up new
research directions. We find that time-bundled contracts are an eective way to motivate
the impatient, inducing more eort than linear contracts for those with above-median impa-
tience. However, they induce less eort than linear contracts for those with below-median
impatience. Their heterogeneous e cacy increases dispersion, highlighting the potential
promise of trying to target the contracts only to those who are more impatient. One ques-
tion for future research is whether such targeting could be done eectively at scale. Another
potential topic to study is how to optimize the specific features of time-bundled contracts
such as the payment period length T and threshold level C . Higher C and T should in-
crease the advantage of the contracts for the impatient by increasing the number of periods
of future costs that are "bundled" with present costs. However, higher C and higher T
may also decrease the overall performance of the contracts, especially if there is substantial
uncertainty about future costs. Future work can illuminate these trade-os.
    Our insight that impatience increases the value of time-bundling for the principal in

                                              46
principal-agent relationships could have broad applicability. Dynamic incentives are widespread,
and we find that high discount rates over eort may be a potential explanation. A common
dynamic incentive is a labor contract where an individual could be fired if she does not exert
enough eort today, so eort today increases her future payo to eort. While standard
models show one reason such contracts enhance eort is simply the high stakes of job loss,
our work suggests that these contracts have extra bite if the agent discounts her future eort.
   Our analysis of payment frequency also raises new questions for future work. We find that
increasing payment frequency is not eective in our setting because participants appear to
have limited impatience over payments. Our finding suggests that, contrary to conventional
wisdom, more frequent rewards are not always better, but also leaves open an important
question: under what circumstances are agents impatient over payment and under what
circumstances are they patient?
   Finally, we find that an incentive program for walking leads to a large and persistent
increase in walking among the study population, and improves health. Our study thus
provides some of the first evidence of a scalable, low-touch intervention with the potential
to decrease the large and growing burden of chronic disease worldwide.



References
Andreoni, J. et al. (2018). Arbitrage or narrow bracketing? On using money to measure intertem-
  poral preferences. NBER Working Paper Series, No. 25232.
Andreoni, J. and Sprenger, C. (2012). Estimating time preferences from convex budgets. American
  Economic Review, 102(7):3333­3356.
Ashraf, N., Karlan, D., and Yin, W. (2006). Tying Odysseus to the mast: Evidence from a
  commitment savings product in the Philippines. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2):635­
  672.
Augenblick, N., Niederle, M., and Sprenger, C. (2015). Working over time: Dynamic inconsitency
  in real eort tasks. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3):1067­1115.
Augenblick, N. and Rabin, M. (2019). An experiment on time preference and misprediction in
  unpleasant tasks. Review of Economic Studies, 86:941­975.
Aziz, Z. et al. (2015). A systematic review of real-world diabetes prevention programs: Learnings
  from the last 15 years. Implementation Science, 10(1).
Bachireddy, C. et al. (2019). Eect of dierent financial incentive structures on promoting physical
  activity among adults: A randomized controlled trial. JAMA Network Open, 2(8).
Bai, L., Handel, B. R., Miguel, E., and Rao, G. (2017). Self-control and demand for preventive
  health: Evidence from hypertension in India. Working Paper.

                                               47
Balakrishnan, U., Haushofer, J., and Jakiela, P. (2017). How soon is now? Evidence of present bias
  from convex time budget experiments. NBER Working Paper Series, pages 1­65.
Bassett, D. R. et al. (2010). Pedometer-measured physical activity and health behaviors in U.S.
  adults. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 42(10):1819­1825.
Burns, R. J. and Rothman, A. J. (2018). Comparing types of financial incentives to promote
  walking: An experimental test. Applied Psychology: Health and Well-Being, 10(2):193­214.
Carrera, M. et al. (2019). How are preferences for commitment revealed? NBER Working Paper.
Carvalho, L. S., Meier, S., and Wang, S. W. (2016). Poverty and economic decision-making:
  Evidence from changes in financial resources at payday. American Economic Review, 106(2):260­
  284.
Casaburi, L. and Macchiavello, R. (2019). Demand and supply of infrequent payments as a com-
  mitment device: Evidence from Kenya. American Economic Review, 109(2):523­555.
Charness, G. and Gneezy, U. (2009). Incentives to exercise. Econometrica, 77(3):909­931.
Chassang, S. (2013). Calibrated incentive contracts. Econometrica, 81(5):1935­1971.
Cubitt, R. P. and Read, D. (2007). Can intertemporal choice experiments elicit time preferences
  for consumption? Experimental Economics, 10:369­389.
Cutler, D. M. and Everett, W. (2010). Thinking outside the pillbox - Medication adherence as a
  priority for health care reform. The New England Journal of Medicine, 362(17):1553­1555.
Edmans, A., Gabaix, X., Sadzik, T., and Sannikov, Y. (2012). Dynamic CEO compensation.
  Journal of Finance, 67(5):1603­1647.
Finkelstein, E. A. et al. (2016). Eectiveness of activity trackers with and without incentives to
  increase physical activity (TRIPPA): a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet Diabetes and
  Endocrinology, 4(12):983­995.
Gardiner, C. K. and Bryan, A. D. (2017). Monetary incentive interventions can enhance psy-
  chological factors related to fruit and vegetable consumption. Annals of Behavioral Medicine,
  51:599­609.
Howells, L., Musaddaq, B., McKay, A. J., and Majeed, A. (2016). Clinical impact of lifestyle
  interventions for the prevention of diabetes: An overview of systematic reviews. BMJ Open,
  6(12):1­17.
International Diabetes Federation (2019). IDF diabetes atlas. International Diabetes Federation,
  Brussels, Belgium, 9 edition.
Jacob, B. A. and Levitt, S. D. (2003). Rotten apples: An investigation of the prevalence and
  predictors of teacher cheating. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3):843­877.
Jain, S. (2012). Self-control and incentives: An analysis of multiperiod quota plans. Marketing
  Science, 31(5):855­869.
Janssens, W., Kramer, B., and Swart, L. (2017). Be patient when measuring hyperbolic discounting:
  Stationarity, time consistency and time invariance in a field experiment. Journal of Development
  Economics, 126(December 2016):77­90.
Kaur, S., Kremer, M., and Mullainathan, S. (2015). Self-control at work. Journal of Political
  Economy, 123(6):1227­1277.


                                               48
Kim, K. R. and Seo, E. H. (2015). The relationship between procrastination and academic perfor-
  mance: A meta-analysis. Personality and Individual Dierences, 82:26­33.
Kling, J. R., Liebman, J. B., and Katz, L. F. (2007). Experimental analysis of neighborhood eects.
  Econometrica, 75(1):83­119.
Kremer, M., Rao, G., and Schilbach, F. (2019). Behavioral development economics. In Bernheim,
  B. D., Dellavigna, S., and Laibson, D., editors, Handbook of Behavioral Economics - Foundations
  and Applications 2, volume 2, chapter 5, pages 345­458. Elsevier B.V.
Kvam, S., Lykkedrang, C., Hilde, I., and Hovland, A. (2016). Exercise as a treatment for depression:
  A meta-analysis. Journal of Aective Disorders, 202:67­86.
Laibson, D. (2015). Why don't present-biased agents make commitments? American Economic
  Review, 105(5):267­272.
Larkin, I. and Leider, S. (2012). Incentive Schemes, Sorting, and Behavioral Biases of Employees:
  Experimental Evidence. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 4(2):184­214.
Lay, C. H. (1986). At last, my research article on procrastination. Journal of Research in Person-
  ality, 20:474­495.
Lazear, E. P. (1981). Agency, earnings profiles, productivity, and hours restrictions. American
  Economic Review, 71(4):606­620.
Lee, D. S. (2009). Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on treatment
  eects. Review of Economic Studies, 76(3):1071­1102.
Ministry of Labour and Unemployment (2016). Report on Fifth Annual Employment - Unemploy-
  ment Survey (2015-16). Technical report, Labour Bureau, Government of India, Chandigarh.
O'Donoghue, T. and Rabin, M. (1999a). Doing it now or later. American Economic Review,
  89(1):103­124.
O'Donoghue, T. and Rabin, M. (1999b). Incentives for procrastinators. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 114(3):769­816.
Oyer, P. (1998). Fiscal year ends and nonlinear incentive contracts: The eect on business season-
  ality. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1):149­185.
Patel, M. S. et al. (2016). Framing financial incentives to increase physical activity among over-
  weight and obese adults. Annals of Internal Medicine, 164(6):385.
Qiu, S. et al. (2014). Impact of walking on glycemic control and other cardiovascular risk factors
  in type 2 diabetes: A meta-analysis. PLoS ONE, 9(10).
Reiner, M., Niermann, C., Jekauc, D., and Woll, A. (2013). Long-term health benefits of physical
  activity - A systematic review of longitudinal studies. BMC Public Health, 13(1):1­9.
Royer, H., Stehr, M., and Sydnor, J. (2015). Incentives, commitments, and habit formation in
  exercise: Evidence from a field experiment with workers at a Fortune-500 company. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(3):51­84.
Tuckman, B. W. (1991). The development and concurrent validity of the procrastination scale.
  Educational and Psychological Measurement, 51:473­480.
Volpp, K. G. et al. (2008). Financial incentive based approaches for weight loss: A randomized
  trial. JAMA: the Journal of the American Medical Association, 300(22):2631­2637.


                                                49
Appendices (for online publication)
This section contains all appendix tables, appendix figures, and Appendices B - E.
The Online Supplement is a separate document available at:
faculty.chicagobooth.edu/rebecca.dizon-ross/research/papers/IncentiveDesignSupp.pdf


             Appendix Figure A.1: Experimental Timeline for Sample Participant

                       Day 1 Screening

                       Day 4 Interest Assessment Phone Survey

                       Day 8 Baseline Health Survey

                        Days Phase-in Period with Pedometers
                       8--14
                      Day 14 Pedometer Sync, Time Preference Survey
                                                                        Randomization
                      Day 30 Pedometer Sync, Health Check

                      Day 51 Pedometer Sync, Health Check               Intervention Period

                      Day 72 Pedometer Sync, Health Check

                     Day 100 Endline Survey

Notes: This figure shows an experimental timeline for a participant. Visits were scheduled according to
the participants' availability. We introduced variation into the timing of incentive delivery by delaying the
start of the intervention period by one day for randomly selected participants. The intervention period was
exactly 12 weeks for all participants.


                             Appendix Table A.1: Enrollment statistics

                                              Total screened: 57,599
                                               Total eligible: 7,781

                                                                             % of total
                    Stage:                              # Individuals
                                                                              eligible

                                                                 (1)             (2)

                    Successfully contacted                      6,965           90%
                    Interested in enrolling                     5,552           71%
                    Completed baseline survey                   3,438           44%
                    Successfully enrolled                       3,192           41%



                                                        1
    Appendix Table A.2: Impatience measures correlate in the expected direction with baseline measures of behavior and health

      Covariate type:                                                          Exercise                          Baseline Indices

                                                                                       Daily        Negative        Negative
                                                                      Daily                                                          Healthy     # Individ-
      Dependent variable:                                                             exercise     health risk       vices
                                                                      steps                                                         diet index      uals
                                                                                       (min)         index           index

      A. Impatience Index Measures
      Impatience index                                               -0.080          -0.070          -0.017           -0.052        -0.185         1,760
      1. I'm always saying: I'll do it tomorrow                       -0.059         -0.100          -0.012           -0.031        -0.150         1,760
      2. I usually accomplish all the things I plan to do in a day    -0.054              -0.053     -0.012          -0.043         -0.151         1,760
      3. I postpone starting on things I dislike to do               -0.041               0.006      0.004            -0.053          0.047        1,760
      4. I'm on time for appointments                                 -0.053              0.002      -0.021           0.010         -0.097         1,760
      5. I often start things at the last minute                     -0.041          -0.066          -0.009          -0.043         -0.209         1,760
      and find it di cult to complete them on time
2




      B. Predicted index measures
      Predicted index                                                 0.001               -0.037   -0.062             0.021           0.005        3,232
      1. In the past week, how many times have you found              0.016               -0.009   -0.060             0.010           0.027        3,232
      yourself exercising less than you had planned?
      2. In the past 24 hours, how many times have you                -0.001          0.053        -0.059             0.015          0.033         3,232
      found yourself eating foods you had planned to avoid?
      3. Do you worry that if you kept a higher balance               -0.027         -0.063          -0.018           0.025           -0.038       3,232
      on your phone, you would spend more on talk time?

     Notes: This table displays the correlations between our impatience measures and a number of baseline health and behavior measures. We
     normalize impatience variables so that a higher value corresponds to greater impatience, and we normalize health and behavior measures so that
     higher values correspond to healthier behavior; hence we expect all correlations to be negative. Panel A displays the impatience index along
     with the five questions from which it is generated. Panel B shows the predicted index along with the three questions from which it is generated.
     The health index includes an individual's measures of Hba1c, random blood sugar, blood pressure, body mass index, and waist measurement.
     The vices index includes an individual's daily cigarette, alcohol, and areca nut usage. The healthy diet index includes an individual's daily
     number of wheat meals, vegetable meals, rice meals, spoonfuls of sugar, and fruit, junk food, and sweets intake, as well as whether a respondent
     goes out of his or her way to avoid unhealthy foods. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%.
                           Appendix Table A.3: Baseline impatience summary statistics in full sample and by treatment group.

                                                                    Full sample   Control   Monitoring   Incentives   Daily    Base     Monthly   4 - Day TH   5 - Day TH    Small
                                                                                                          pooled               case                                         payment


                                                                        (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)      (6)       (7)        (8)          (9)        (10)

    A. Impatience index
     1. I am continually saying: I'll do it tomorrow                   2.22        2.07        2.14        2.26        2.13     2.28      2.40       2.27         2.10        2.51
                                                                      (1.46)      (1.40)      (1.30)      (1.48)      (1.50)   (1.47)    (1.38)     (1.51)       (1.42)      (1.68)
     2. I usually accomplish all the things I plan to do in a day      0.64        0.57        0.67        0.66        0.59     0.66      0.60       0.70         0.59        0.68
                                                                      (0.97)      (0.89)      (0.98)      (0.98)      (0.97)   (0.99)    (0.87)     (1.01)       (0.95)      (1.03)
     3. I postpone starting on things I dislike to do                  3.97        3.76        4.17        4.00        4.07     4.04      3.99       4.01         3.91        3.68
                                                                      (1.31)      (1.37)      (1.11)      (1.30)      (1.27)   (1.27)    (1.28)     (1.30)       (1.33)      (1.56)
     4. I'm on time for appointments                                   0.47        0.49        0.37        0.47        0.48     0.50      0.52       0.47         0.37        0.51
                                                                      (0.86)      (0.88)      (0.73)      (0.86)      (0.82)   (0.93)    (0.90)     (0.84)       (0.73)      (0.84)
3




     5. I often start things at the last minute                        2.51        2.53        2.30        2.52        2.29     2.51      2.72       2.49         2.49        3.19
     and find it di cult to complete them on time                     (1.54)      (1.53)      (1.47)      (1.55)      (1.48)   (1.54)    (1.58)     (1.55)       (1.55)      (1.58)

     # Individuals                                                     1,740       316         111         1,313       86       487       93         438          172         37

    B. Predicted index
     1. In the past week, how many times have you found                0.53        0.56        0.45        0.52        0.51     0.58      0.55       0.49         0.46        0.47
     yourself exercising less than you had planned?                   (1.01)      (1.02)      (0.93)      (1.02)      (1.04)   (1.05)    (1.08)     (0.98)       (0.97)      (1.01)
     2. In the past 24 hours, how many times have you                  0.21        0.17        0.25        0.21        0.21     0.23      0.25       0.19         0.22        0.15
     found yourself eating foods you had planned to avoid?            (0.54)      (0.49)      (0.56)      (0.55)      (0.61)   (0.58)    (0.70)     (0.46)       (0.56)      (0.44)
     3. Do you worry that if you kept a higher balance                 0.13        0.15        0.10        0.13        0.11     0.12      0.13       0.13         0.14        0.12
     on your phone, you would spend more on talk time? (=1)           (0.34)      (0.35)      (0.31)      (0.34)      (0.32)   (0.33)    (0.34)     (0.34)       (0.35)      (0.33)

     # Individuals                                                     3,192       585         203         2,404       166      902       164        794          312         66

       Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses. Components of the impatience index range from 1 to 5, 1 being very false and 5 being very true. Responses to question 2 from the
       predicted index range from 0 to 3.
                  Appendix Table A.4: Missing pedometer data during the intervention period

 Dep. Variable:      No Steps data       Reason no steps data                                        Reason no data from fitbit
                                                                                                                        Mid-
                                     Did not wear      No data from              Lost data           Immediate                         Other
                                                                                                                    intervention
                                         fitbit            fitbit               entire period        withdrawal                       reasons
                                                                                                                     withdrawal
                            (1)           (2)                  (3)                   (4)                 (5)            (6)                 (7)
 Incentives               -0.0151      -0.0309             0.0151                 -0.00176             0.00541        0.0163          -0.00484
                          [0.0176]      [0.0144]          [0.0124]                [0.00506]           [0.00723]      [0.00695]        [0.00593]
 Controls                    X               X                 X                     X                   X               X                  X
 # Individuals             2,607         2,559             2,607                   2,607               2,607           2,607           2,607
 # Observations           218,988       205,732           218,988                 218,988             218,988         218,988         218,988
 Monitoring mean            0.19         0.15              0.05                    0.00                 0.01           0.01             0.02

  Notes: This table reports balance of missing data by treatment status. Each observation is an individualday. There
  are two reasons why data can be missing: people did not wear their pedometers (column 2) or we do not have data
  from the person's pedometer (column 3). Columns 2 + 3 = Column 1 except that column 2 conditions on there not
  being missing data for consistency with our main step analyses whereas columns 1 and 3 do not (column 2 results
  similar without this restriction). Columns 4-7 summarize reasons for why steps data might have been missing, and
  sum up to column 3. Some people have no data during the entire intervention period (columns 4 and 5) because their
  pedometers broke and all intervention data was lost (4), or because they withdrew immediately after being assigned a
  treatment group (5). Others only have missing data for part of the intervention period, either because they withdrew
  midway through the period (6) or had a broken fitbit or a failed sync (7). "Did not wear fitbit" takes value 1 when
  steps = 0 for that day. Controls are the same as Table 2. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%.




Appendix Table A.5: Lee bounds on the impacts of incentives on exercise during the intervention period

                                                                                      Lost data        Withdrew
                                     No steps       No data           Did not                                       Mid-period      Other
 Definition of missing:                                                                entire          immedi-
                                      data         from fitbit       wear fitbit                                    withdrawal     reasons
                                                                                       period            ately

 A. Daily steps
 Regression estimate                  1269            1338              1269               1338           1338         1338         1338
 (conditional on nonmissing data)     [245]           [261]             [245]              [261]          [261]        [261]        [261]
 Lee lower bound                      1053            1230              882                 1315          1297         1226         1303
                                      [62]            [44]              [53]                [43]          [43]         [43]         [43]
 Lee upper bound                      1426            1572              1571                1351          1430         1581         1358
                                      [55]            [48]              [51]                [42]          [44]         [44]         [42]
 B. Met 10k step target
 Regression estimate                  0.223           0.205             0.223               0.205         0.205        0.205        0.205
 (conditional on nonmissing data)    [0.024]         [0.022]           [0.024]             [0.022]       [0.022]      [0.022]      [0.022]
 Lee lower bound                      0.215           0.200             0.208               0.204         0.203        0.200        0.204
                                     [0.005]         [0.004]           [0.005]             [0.004]       [0.004]      [0.004]      [0.004]
 Lee upper bound                      0.232           0.216             0.242               0.206         0.209        0.217        0.206
                                     [0.005]         [0.004]           [0.005]             [0.004]       [0.004]      [0.004]      [0.004]
 # Individuals                        2,557          2,559             2,557               2,559          2,559       2,559         2,559
 # Observations                      180,018        205,732           180,018            205,732         205,732     205,732       205,732
  Notes: This table reports regression estimates and Lee bounds accounting for dierent types of missing pedometer
  data. The regression estimates and Lee bounds condition on data not being missing, using dierent definitions of
  missing data in each column. All estimates are of the eect of incentives pooled relative to the monitoring group.
  Note that regression estimates are not comparable to those reported in Table 2 because each column conditions on
  the "type of missing" indicator in the first row being equal to 0 and does not include controls.




                                                                        4
                    Appendix Table A.6: Dierential Incentive Eects according to Impatience

Impatience Measure:                           Impatience index                            Predicted impatience index

Dependent variable:           Met step target  100           Daily steps        Met step target  100           Daily steps
                                       (1)                           (2)                 (3)                       (4)

Incentives                           21.76                    1399.18                  20.84                    1396.56
                                  [17.46, 26.05]           [909.82, 1888.53]        [18.15, 23.21]          [1083.83, 1673.23]
Small payment                       -14.32                     -868.08                -8.01                      -626.27
                                 [-22.28, -6.36]          [-1976.40, 240.24]       [-12.65, -3.13]          [-1076.32, -174.58]
Daily                                  0.78                    -192.66                  -0.70                    -284.23
                                  [-7.57, 9.13]           [-1015.80, 630.48]        [-4.20, 2.87]            [-659.06, 70.74]
Monthly                               -4.78                     -198.72                 -2.70                     -114.18
                                  [-12.38, 2.83]           [-956.97, 559.54]        [-5.60, 0.65]            [-409.66, 227.00]
4-day TH                              -1.84                     -163.64                 -1.83                   -197.44
                                  [-6.30, 2.62]            [-590.60, 263.31]        [-3.88, 0.11]            [-394.36, -0.71]
5-day TH                              -0.73                     -80.27                   0.02                     -104.53
                                  [-5.67, 4.22]            [-449.62, 289.09]        [-2.67, 2.77]            [-360.02, 169.83]
Impatience                             3.59                     192.12                  -0.54                     -69.07
                                  [-1.58, 8.75]            [-457.82, 842.06]        [-2.75, 1.87]            [-357.74, 242.28]
Incentives  Impatience               -7.10                     -389.03                  -1.70                     -155.58
                                 [-12.90, -1.30]          [-1108.85, 330.78]        [-4.42, 1.09]            [-480.22, 187.77]
Small payment  Impatience              4.16                     -39.82                  5.71                    642.95
                                  [-3.57, 11.90]          [-1132.42, 1052.78]       [1.11, 11.55]           [151.80, 1083.88]
Daily  Impatience                      4.89                     400.78                  -0.02                     -149.76
                                  [-0.91, 10.68]           [-195.15, 996.71]        [-3.89, 3.92]            [-529.69, 205.84]
Monthly  Impatience                    2.77                     335.84                  3.04                     381.04
                                  [-4.69, 10.23]          [-581.43, 1253.11]        [-0.43, 6.12]             [15.01, 723.80]
4-day TH  Impatience                  3.82                      287.48                 3.96                     345.96
                                   [0.37, 7.27]            [-66.34, 641.30]          [1.94, 5.89]            [150.16, 531.34]
5-day TH  Impatience                   3.42                     290.26                   1.80                     -62.81
                                  [-2.81, 9.65]           [-447.56, 1028.07]        [-1.12, 4.26]            [-348.35, 192.10]
Controls                                X                            X                    X                         X

Base case mean                         50                         8,098                  50                       8,131

#   Monitoring                         109                        109                    200                       200
#   Small payment                       36                         36                     64                        64
#   Daily NTH                          84                          84                    163                       163
#   Base case                          481                        481                    890                       890
#   Monthly NTH                        93                         93                     163                       163
#   4-day NTH                          428                        428                    775                       775
#   5-day NTH                          166                        166                    304                       304
# Individuals                         1,397                       1,397                 2,559                     2,559
# Observations                      112,215                      112,215              205,732                    205,732

Notes: This table shows the eects of each Incentive treatment interacted with measures of impatience over recharges. The
dummy for the base case incentive sub treatment is omitted; the "Incentives" coe cient along with other incentive sub
treatment dummies are interpreted relative to the base case contract. Bootstrap draws were done at the person level, and
bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals are in brackets. Controls are the same as Table 2. Columns 1 and 2 use the impatience
index and columns 3 and 4 use the predicted index as measures for impatience. Units are standard deviations on the index.
Larger values of each impatience measure indicates more impatience. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%.



                                                                 5
                                                    Appendix Table A.7: Time preference heterogeneity robust to including other controls

    Dependent variable:                                                                                                   Met step target (100)
                                        (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)                   (6)                (7)               (8)               (9)               (10)             (11)
    A. Predicted impatience index
    Predicted index  Threshold        3.36               3.49             3.36             3.52              3.36                 3.33               3.45              3.36               3.22             3.21              3.12
                                    [1.40,5.13]        [1.53,5.28]      [1.41,5.14]      [1.61,5.29]       [1.40,5.17]          [1.38,5.07]        [1.50,5.22]       [1.42,5.11]        [1.31,5.00]      [1.35,4.93]       [1.28,4.83]
    Predicted index                    -2.22             -2.26             -2.21            -2.23            -2.2                  -2.12             -2.22              -2.16             -2.15             -2.26            -2.37
                                    [-3.45,-0.83]     [-3.50,-0.86]     [-3.46,-0.82]    [-3.48,-0.85]    [-3.45,-0.81]         [-3.37,-0.72]     [-3.46,-0.83]      [-3.44,-0.76]     [-3.41,-0.75]     [-3.48,-0.93]    [-3.52,-1.03]
    Threshold                            -1.26           -13.2               -.811            -1.27            -1.7                  -1.36           -4.31                 1.5            .000892             -1.3           -1.27
                                     [-3.14,0.53]     [-22.95,-2.47]     [-3.13,1.47]     [-3.15,0.49]     [-3.93,0.29]          [-3.22,0.40]     [-7.69,-1.17]       [-6.17,9.16]      [-2.12,2.03]      [-4.61,1.10]    [-7.01,0.55]
    Threshold  Covariate                                 0.241              -1.102           -1.824           0.015                 0.022             1.115              -0.768           -0.003             0.024           0.000
                                                      [0.032,0.437]    [-4.695,2.400]   [-5.022,1.504]   [-0.020,0.049]        [-0.056,0.100]      [0.093,2.169]    [-2.690,1.215]    [-0.005,-0.001]   [-0.198,0.408]   [-0.002,0.009]
    Covariate                                            1.479              0.206            -1.411           0.004              -0.261                -0.370          1.764              -0.001           2.730            -0.115
                                                      [0.369,2.552]    [-2.792,3.835]   [-4.026,1.066]   [-0.021,0.030]       [-0.377,-0.138]     [-1.145,0.384]    [0.258,3.128]     [-0.003,0.001]    [2.162,3.460]    [-0.155,-0.098]
    Threshold  Covariate2                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.014
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [-0.002,0.009]
    Covariate2                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.122
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [-0.155,-0.098]
    # Individuals                      1,969             1,969            1,969            1,969             1,969                1,969              1,969              1,969             1,969             1,969             1,969
.   # Observations                    168,672           168,672          168,672          168,672           168,672              168,672            168,672            168,672           168,672           168,672           168,672
    B. Impatience index
    Impatience index  Threshold       3.70               3.80             3.70             3.74              3.79                 3.63               3.74              3.85               3.43             3.89              3.62
                                    [0.62,6.79]        [0.86,6.75]      [0.62,6.78]      [0.65,6.83]       [0.75,6.84]          [0.78,6.49]        [0.97,6.50]       [0.77,6.94]        [0.69,6.17]      [0.75,7.03]       [0.39,6.84]
    Impatience index                   -3.61             -3.65            -3.61            -3.63             -3.65                -3.34              -3.60             -3.74              -3.31             -3.23            -2.84
                                    [-6.10,-1.12]     [-6.09,-1.20]    [-6.06,-1.16]    [-6.14,-1.12]     [-6.11,-1.20]        [-5.85,-0.83]      [-5.91,-1.30]     [-6.21,-1.26]      [-5.76,-0.86]     [-5.66,-0.81]    [-5.21,-0.48]
    Threshold                           -1.55             -10.6             -1.19            -1.55            -2.85                 -2.36              -1.72             -0.41             6.76             -3.13            -2.16
                                    [-4.79,1.69]       [-32.9,11.8]     [-5.59,3.21]     [-4.75,1.64]     [-6.73,1.04]          [-5.67,0.95]       [-7.98,4.54]      [-4.21,3.39]      [-7.89,21.4]      [-10.7,4.41]     [-11.5,7.20]
    Threshold  Covariate                                   0.18             -0.84             1.01             0.045                0.20              0.022             -0.0029            -2.27             0.27             0.16
                                                       [-0.26,0.62]     [-8.39,6.71]     [-4.28,6.30]     [-0.037,0.13]        [-0.0015,0.40]      [-2.16,2.21]    [-0.0082,0.0024]    [-6.29,1.75]      [-0.64,1.19]     [-1.98,2.29]
    Covariate                                              1.50             -2.42            -3.59            -0.015              -0.61                0.18            -0.00091             1.98           2.30              6.16
                                                       [-0.47,3.47]     [-7.59,2.74]     [-8.46,1.27]    [-0.069,0.039]        [-0.91,-0.31]       [-1.37,1.72]    [-0.0054,0.0036]    [-1.31,5.27]      [1.20,3.40]       [4.83,7.49]
    Threshold  Covariate2                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0.0021
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [-0.13,0.12]
    Covariate2                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         [-0.19,-0.041]
                                                                                         Health risk     Mobile balance      Yesterday's talk                        Scheduling       Daily personal    Baseline steps   Baseline steps
    Covariate used                        -               Age             Female                                                                  Risk aversion
                                                                                           index            (INR)              time (INR)                             certainty          income          (over 1000)      (over 1000)
    # Individuals                     1,075              1,075            1,075            1,075             1,075                1,075              1,075              1,075             1,075             1,075            1,075
    # Observations                    92,148             92,148           92,148           92,148           92,148               92,148              92,148            92,148             92,148           92,148            92,148

    Notes: The sample is restricted to the base case (linear) group and the 2 threshold groups, 4-day threshold and 5-day threshold, pooled together here as "Threshold." All
    columns control for the baseline value of the dependent variable and the same controls as Table 2. Panel A uses the predicted index as the measure for impatience while Panel
    B uses the impatience index; the units for both impatience measures are standard deviations. The unit of observation is a respondent  day. Bootstrap draws were done at the
    person level, and bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals are in brackets. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%.
             Appendix Table A.8: Walking Does Not Vary Significantly across the Pay Cycle
                                                 .
Dependent variable:                             Met step target (100)
Payment frequency:             Weekly                                    Monthly
                                 (1)                   (2)                       (3)                (4)                (5)
Days before payday               0.10                                            0.07
                                [0.09]                                          [0.05]
Payday                                                -0.63                                         0.12
                                                      [0.55]                                       [1.02]
Payweek                                                                                                                -0.12
                                                                                                                       [1.02]
# Individuals                   890                   890                        163                163                163
# Observations                 71,672                71,672                     13,333             13,333             13,333
Sample mean                     50.2                  50.2                       49.3               49.3               49.3
Notes: The columns show the eect of days until payday on the probability of meeting the step target in the weekly and monthly
frequency groups. The sample in columns 1 and 2 is restricted to the base case (weekly) treatment group, and the sample in
columns 3 and 4 is restricted to the monthly treatment group. Regressions control for payday day-of-week fixed eects, day-of-
week fixed eects, day-of-week relative to launch survey day-of-week fixed eects, a day-of-contract-period time trend, and the
controls in Table 2. Standard errors, in brackets, are clustered at the individual level. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%.




         Appendix Table A.9: Threshold contracts do not significantly decrease satisfaction at endline

                             Dependent variable:                 Interest in continuing program

                                                                       (1)                 (2)
                             Threshold                               -0.0219             -0.00735
                                                                     [0.0151]            [0.0214]
                             Impatience  Threshold                                       -0.0297
                                                                                         [0.0301]
                             Base case (omitted) mean                 0.880                0.880
                             # Individuals                            2590                 2590
         Notes: This table shows predictors of satisfaction with the walking program. We ask respondents at endline if
         they are interested in continuing the program for an extra 3 months. The impatience measure is a dummy for
         being above-median on the predicted impatience index. Controls are the same as Table 2, as well as the main
         eect for impatience and treatment indicators (both main eects and interactions with impatience) for being
         in the daily, monthly, small payment, or monitoring treatments. The omitted group is the base case (weekly)
         group. Standard errors are in brackets. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%.




                                                                 7
                   Appendix Table A.10: Missing pedometer data during the post-intervention period

  Dep. Variable:        No Steps data           Reason no steps data                                         Reason no data from fitbit
                                                                                                                               Mid-
                                            Did not wear      No data from          Lost data                Immediate                         Other
                                                                                                                           intervention
                                                fitbit            fitbit           entire period             withdrawal                       reasons
                                                                                                                            withdrawal
                              (1)                (2)                (3)                    (4)                   (5)            (6)                 (7)
  Incentives                -0.00583          0.000968           -0.0108              0.00191                 0.00216        -0.00874         -0.00610
                            [0.0233]          [0.0211]           [0.0203]            [0.00384]                [0.0191]       [0.00496]        [0.00597]
  Controls                        X               X                 X                      X                     X               X                  X
  # Individuals              1,254              1,122             1,254                   1,254                1,254           1,254              1,254
  # Observations            105,336            91,756            105,336                105,336               105,336         105,336         105,336
  Monitoring mean             0.40              0.31               0.13                   0.00                  0.10            0.01            0.02
Notes: This table reports the reasons that we do not have step data by treatment status in the post-interevntion period. Each observation is an individual
 day. Controls are the same as Table 2. Column 1 reports fitbit data missing for any reason, which can include mid-intervention withdrawal, fitbit sync
issues, and not wearing the fitbit, amongst others. Columns 2 + 3 = Column 1, except that column 2 conditions on there being no missing data for
consistency with our main step analyses whereas columns 1 and 3 do not. Columns 4-7 summarize reasons for why steps data might have been missing,
and the variables in columns 4-7 sum up to the variable in column 3. Some people have no data during the entire measurement period, as summarized in
columns 4 and 5. The omitted category is the pooled control and monitoring groups. "Did not wear fitbit" takes value 1 when fitbit data is non-missing
and fitbit steps = 0. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%.




      Appendix Table A.11: Lee bounds on the impacts of incentives on exercise: Post-intervention period

                                                                                                 Lost data      Withdrew
                                               No steps       No data        Did not                                        Mid-period     Other
         Definition of missing:                                                                   entire        immedi-
                                                data         from fitbit    wear fitbit                                     withdrawal    reasons
                                                                                                  period          ately

         A. Daily steps
         Regression estimate                      765            471             765                471            471         471         471
         (conditional on nonmissing data)        [238]          [246]           [238]              [246]          [246]       [246]       [246]
         Lee lower bound                          731            366             689                459            448         304         459
                                                  [58]           [61]            [55]               [38]           [40]        [40]        [38]
         Lee upper bound                          840            503             934                515            554         522         515
                                                  [99]           [41]            [86]               [39]           [57]        [39]        [39]
         B. Met 10k step target
         Regression estimate                     0.102          0.068            0.102             0.068           0.068       0.068       0.068
         (conditional on nonmissing data)       [0.020]        [0.016]          [0.020]           [0.016]         [0.016]     [0.016]     [0.016]
         Lee lower bound                         0.101          0.063            0.099             0.067           0.067       0.060       0.067
                                                [0.004]        [0.004]          [0.004]           [0.003]         [0.003]     [0.003]     [0.003]
         Lee upper bound                         0.105          0.069            0.110             0.070           0.072       0.070       0.070
                                                [0.006]        [0.003]          [0.006]           [0.003]         [0.004]     [0.003]     [0.003]
         # Individuals                           1,122          1,122            1,122             1,122           1,122       1,122       1,122
         # Observations                         62,858         91,756           62,858            91,756          91,756      91,756      91,756
Notes: Table reports regression estimates and Lee bounds accounting for dierent types of missing pedometer data in the post-intervention period. The
regression estimates condition on data not being missing, using dierent definitions of missing data in each column, and then the Lee bounds are estimated
again allowing the definition of missing data to vary by column. Panel A reports results using average daily steps as the dependent variable, and Panel
B reports results using proportion of days met 10k step target as the dependent variable. The omitted category is the monitoring group. The number of
observations is reported for the Lee bounds regressions. Note that regression estimates reported in columns 1 - 3 are not comparable to those reported
in Table 2 because each column conditions on the "type of missing" indicator in the first row being equal to 0 and does not include controls. 132 people
have no data during the period. The most common reason for this was immediate withdrawal.




                                                                            8
Appendix Table A.12: Impacts of Incentives on Walking, Without Baseline Controls.


           Dependent variable:      Compliance         Daily steps        Daily steps
                                                                           (if > 0)
                                         (1)                (2)               (3)

           A. Pooled incentives
           Incentives           0.21                    1337.6             1271.4
                                [0.022]                  [261.1]            [246.1]
           B. Unpooled incentives
           Weekly                      0.21             1356.6             1208.8
                                       [0.024]           [277.0]            [258.6]
           Daily                       0.21             1202.7             1363.9
                                       [0.034]           [389.5]            [346.0]
           Monthly                     0.20             1568.6             1482.3
                                       [0.035]           [393.8]            [365.4]
           5-Day threshold             0.22             1380.8             1301.4
                                       [0.030]           [336.8]            [309.4]
           4-Day threshold             0.20             1321.2             1320.6
                                       [0.025]           [287.7]            [268.1]
           Small payment               0.15               820.5              658.5
                                       [0.049]           [524.0]            [477.9]

           # Individuals               2559.00           2559.00            2557.00
           Observations                205,732           205,732            180,018
Notes: This table replicates the Table 2 estimates without including the baseline controls. Signif-
icance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%.




                                                 9
      Appendix Table A.13: The Eects of Incentives Persist After the Intervention Ends

                                   Conditional on wearing fitbit                          Unconditional on wearing fitbit
     Dependent variable:           Compliance                 Daily Steps                   Compliance                    Daily Steps

                                            (1)                        (2)                          (3)                     (4)
     Incentives                       0.093                         647.5                       0.070                      532.9
                                         [0.02]                     [195.63]                       [0.01]                  [220.60]
     No incentives mean                     0.3                      7347.4                         0.2                     5687.4
     % Persistence                         43.3                       55.8                         35.5                      42.7

     # Individuals                       1,122                        1,122                        1,122                     1,122

Note: Table shows the average treatment eect of incentives during the post-intervention period. The omitted
group is the monitoring and control groups (pooled). We considered a participant to have worn the pedometer if
their step count > 0. Each observation is a person-day; columns 1 and 2 only include days where the participant
wore the pedometer and columns 3 and 4 include all days. The % Persistence row shows the treatment eect
from the post-intervention period divided by the corresponding treatment eect from the intervention period,
where the intervention period treatment eect comes from a specification using the same dependent variable
and pedometer-wearing condition. Controls are the same as Table 2. Standard errors, in brackets, are clustered
at the individual level. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%.




             Appendix Table A.14: Impact of incentives on fitness and mental health

            A. Mental Health     Mental                                                                                        Less
                                                   Felt      Less                                                Less
                                 health                                 Peaceful         Energy     Less blue                harm to
                                                  happy     nervous                                              worn
                                 index                                                                                      social life
                                   (1)              (2)       (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)        (7)          (8)

            Incentives           0.097            0.090      0.027          0.058         0.065        0.016    0.089        0.054
                                 [0.042]          [0.045]   [0.044]        [0.047]       [0.047]      [0.044]   [0.039]      [0.030]
            Monitoring            0.16             0.075      0.12          0.095         0.037         0.12     0.17         0.051
                                 [0.074]          [0.079]   [0.077]        [0.083]       [0.084]      [0.077]   [0.069]      [0.053]
            Control mean           0.00        3.06          3.48          3.35      3.30             3.86       4.40         4.71
            P-value: M = I         0.35        0.84          0.16          0.61      0.71             0.12       0.20         0.95
            # Individuals         3,063       3,063          3,063        3,063     3,063             3,063     3,063        3,063
                               Fitness time trial index               Seconds to walk 4m                 Seconds for 5 sit-stands
            B. Fitness
                                           (1)                                     (2)                             (3)

            Incentives                    0.013                                0.033                               -0.10
                                         [0.043]                              [0.041]                             [0.12]
            Monitoring                    0.056                                0.071                              -0.082
                                         [0.076]                              [0.072]                             [0.20]

            Control mean                   0.00                                3.88                               13.18
            P-value: M = I                 0.53                                0.55                                0.91
            # Individuals                2,887                                 2,822                              2,791

Notes: The Mental health index averages the values of seven questions adapted from RAND's 36-Item Short
Form Survey (SF-36). A large value of the Fitness time trial index indicates low fitness. The omitted category is
the pure control group. Controls are the same as Table 2, along with second order polynomials of the dependent
variabe at baseline. Robust standard errors are in brackets. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%.




                                                                      10
B      Theoretical Predictions Appendix
B.1    Proof of Prediction 1
Prediction 1. Among both sophisticates and naifs, holding all else equal, average compliance in
the time-bundled threshold contract relative to the separable contract is weakly decreasing in the
discount factor over eort, (k ).

Proof. We first use Equation 5 to rewrite compliance under a separable linear contract for the case
where T = 2:
                            2
                            X
                                  wt |Separable = {e1 < dm (1)m} + {e2 < m}.                     (13)
                            t=1

     We now solve for compliance under the time-bundled threshold. On day 1, the agent considers
if it is worth the eort to comply on both days in order to be paid. She compares the present
discounted cost of both days' eort, e1 + (1)e2 , with the value of the payment, dm (1)2m. She
wants to comply on both days if the costs are low enough:

                                          e1 + (1)e2 < dm (1)2m.                                 (14)

     Equation 14 is more likely to hold if agents discount eort more. The cost of both days' eort
from the day 1 perspective is decreasing in (1) since day 2 eort is discounted. The role of (1) for
desired compliance in the threshold contract contrasts with the separable contract, where (1) does
not aect compliance: agents only compare present eort costs with future payment (Equation 13).
     Equation 14 tells us whether the individual's day 1 self wants to comply in both days, but if
individuals are time-inconsistent, then it is not su cient to determine compliance. We consider
sophisticates' compliance first. Sophisticates know that their day 2 selves may not share their day
1 selves' preferences, and may not comply on day 2 even if Equation 14 holds. Sophisticates will
comply only if Equation 14 holds and they know they will follow through on day 2, which happens
if e2 < 2m. The compliance of a sophisticate under the threshold is thus
         2
         X
               wt |Threshold, Sophisticate = {e1 + (1)e2 < dm (1)2m}  {e2 < 2m}  2.              (15)
         t=1

Inspection of Equations 13 and 15 shows that Prediction 1 holds for sophisticates since compliance
in Equation 15 is decreasing in (1), whereas compliance in Equation 13 is invariant to (1).
     We next consider naifs. Unlike sophisticates, naifs assume their day 2 selves will follow through
as their day 1 selves desire. They thus comply on day 1 if Equation 14 holds and comply on day 2
if they complied on day 1 and e2 < 2m:
            2
            X
                     wt |Threshold, Naif = {e1 + (1)e2 < dm (1)2m}  (1 + {e2 < 2m}).             (16)
               t=1



                                                    11
Inspection of Equations 13 and 16 proves Prediction 1 for naifs: naif compliance under the time-
bundled threshold, but not the separable contract, is decreasing in (1).
    The relative eectiveness of the threshold contract is therefore increasing in (1) for naifs and
sophisticates. Agents who discount future eort more have a lower total discounted cost of reaching
the threshold and thus have higher compliance for a given payment level.

B.2     Other Types of Time-Bundled Contracts
   This section examines the full space of two-day time-bundled contracts. We first define notation
to describe the key contract parameters and formally characterize the concepts of option and
commitment described in Section 2.3.1. We then present proofs describing the types of two-day
time-bundled contracts for which Prediction 1 holds, separately for sophisticates and for naifs.
   The two main contract parameters that interact with time preferences are:
   1. m2L : the payment for day 2 compliance if the agent did not comply on day 1.
   2. m2H : the payment for day 2 compliance if the agent did comply on day 1.
Since we examine time-bundled contracts in this section, we assume m2H > m2L (the dynamic
complementarity). To simplify notation, we set dm (1) = 1 for the remainder of the subsection. All
results in this section (as throughout the paper) assume that agents only comply if the payment is
strictly larger than the cost; they do not comply when the cost and payment are equal.
B.2.1    Characterizing Option and Commitment
    Prediction 1 holds among agents who think that their day 2 compliance is pivotal to their day
1 compliance (we show this more rigorously in Section B.2.2). Below, we describe the contracts
that meet this condition for naive and sophisticated agents with a given (1).
    For an impatient naif who has discount factor over eort (1) < 1, the condition holds when
day 1 compliance creates option value, wherein day 1 compliance is pivotal to whether the day 1
naif wants to comply on day 2. Option contracts satisfy:

                                  Option: m2L  (1)e2 < m2H                                    (17)

For sophisticates with the same discount factor (1), the condition holds when day 1 compliance
creates commitment, wherein day 1 compliance is pivotal to whether the agent will actually follow
through on day 2. Commitment contracts satisfy:

                                 Commitment: m2L  e2 < m2H                                    (18)

   Some contracts satisfy both equations 17 and 18 and are thus eective for both types (i.e.,
generate more eort from both types than from a patient person with (1) = 1):

                       Option + commitment: m2L  (1)e2 and e2 < m2H                           (19)

In contrast, contracts with commitment but not option work for sophisticates but not naifs:

                          Commitment only: (1)e2 < m2L  e2 < m2H                              (20)

                                                12
                       Appendix Table B.1: Two-day time-bundled contracts

                                   Contract definitions                   Comparative statics

                                                                                Sign of slopea of
                               Payment for day 2 compliance:
                                                                         compliance w.r.t. (1)
                                If did not         If complied
                                                                         Naif              Sophisticate
                            comply on day 1         on day 1
                                ( m 2L )             ( m 2H )
    Contract                        (1)                 (2)               (3)                   (4)

    Option + commitment            < e2                 > e2             0                      0
    Commitment-only                 e2                  > e2              0                     0
    Option-only                    < e2                  e2               0                     0
    Inframarginal                  > e2                 > e2              0                     0

a
     Compliance takes on the values 0 and 1. We denote the slope as  0 when compliance as a function of
    (1) is a step function with a derivative that is always either 0 or 1.


And contracts with option but not commitment work for naifs but not sophisticates:

                                Option only: m2L  (1)e2 < m2H  e2                                     (21)

B.2.2       Predictions and Proofs for General (1)
    Since the properties of a contract depend on the specific cost realization (and, in particular,
the value of e2 ), for any given e2 , we define four contract types, also summarized in the first two
columns of Table B.1
      1. Option + commitment: m2L < e2 < m2H
      2. Commitment-only: m2L = e2 < m2H
      3. Option-only: m2L < m2H  e2
      4. Inframarginal: e2 < m2L < m2H
Note that contract types 1, 2, and 3 satisfy equations 19, 20, and 21, respectively, for some (1) < 1,
with contract type 2 in fact satisfying equation 20 for all (1) < 1.
    We define some additional notation for the proofs. Let m1 be the payment for day 1 compliance,
and the realized day 2 payment be m2 = (1 w1 )m2L + w1 m2H . Finally, let an individual's day-1
willingness to pay (WTP) in day 2 dollars to have the principal increase her day 2 payment for
compliance from payment level m to m0 be W T Pm     m0 .

    We now demonstrate the following predictions, summarized in Table B.1 columns (3)-(4).

Prediction 4. For naifs, for a given cost realization, compliance is weakly decreasing in (1) for


                                                   13
Option-only and Option + commitment contracts, but invariant to (1) under Commitment-only
and Inframarginal contracts.

Proof. Time-bundled contracts with a two-day payment period reward walking on day 1 with m1
and an increase in the day-2 payment from m2L to m2H . Individuals thus comply on day 1 if

                                                         m 2H
                                          e1 < m1 + W T Pm 2L
                                                              .                                       (22)

As a result, day 1 (and hence total)35 compliance is decreasing in (1) if and only if W T Pm  m 2H
                                                                                               2L
decreases in (1).
                                      m2H only decreases in (1) for Option-only and Option + commitment
    We now show that, for naifs, W T Pm 2L
contracts. Because naifs think their day 2 selves will comply when m > (1)e2 , their WTP to in-
crease the day 2 payment from 0 to m > 0 is

                                       m Naif
                                  W T P0 |    = max(m          (1)e2 , 0).                            (23)

           m 2H = W T P m 2H
Since W T Pm                           m 2L
                                  W T P0    , then for any m2H > m2L :
             2L        0
                                          8
                                          >                 if (1)e2  m2L < m2H
                                          <m2H
                                          >        m2 L
                          m2H Naif
                     W T Pm    |      =     m2H     (1)e2   if m2L < (1)e2 < m2H                      (24)
                            2L
                                          >
                                          >
                                          :0                if m2L < m2H  (1)e2

    Equation 24 shows that W T Pm    m2H |Naif is weakly decreasing in (1) for all parameter values.
                                      2L
It is strictly increasing in (1) when m2L < (1)e2 < m2H , which is the option case: from the
day 1 perspective, walking on day 2 is not worth a payment of m2L but is worth a payment of
m2H . As a result, increasing the payment from m2L to m2H creates a lucrative option that the
naif believes she will exploit on day 2. The more she discounts eort, the more valuable the option
is. Since there exists a range of (1)  1 for which m2L < (1)e2 < m2H for all Option-only and
Option + commitment contracts, Equation 24 implies that, for those contracts, there exists a range
of e1 , m1 , and (1)  1 for which W T Pm  m2H (and hence compliance) is strictly decreasing in (1).
                                           2L
    To see that compliance is not decreasing in (1) under Commitment-only or Inframarginal
contracts, note that Equation 24 shows that for those contracts W T Pm  m 2H = m       m2L , which is
                                                                          2L      2H
not decreasing in (1). The intuition is that, in these contracts, the naif believes on day 1 that she
will comply on day 2 regardless of her day 1 action. She thus values the increase in m2 from m2L
to m2H at exactly its cash value, which is invariant to (1).

    Note that, under Commitment-only contracts, the naif is mistaken about her day 2 compliance:
she thinks she will comply on day 2 regardless of her day 1 action, but in reality will only comply
on day 2 if she complies on day 1. If naifs were not mistaken, then Prediction 1 would also hold
for Commitment-only contracts for naifs.
  35
    Total compliance follows from day 1 compliance since day 2 compliance is increasing in day 1 compliance
(because m2H > m2L ) and is not otherwise aected by (1).


                                                    14
     How are Option + commitment contracts able to induce more eort from impatient naifs than
from patient people (i.e., have Prediction 1 hold) while Commitment-only contracts are not? Rel-
ative to Commitment-only contracts, Option + commitment contracts "increase the stakes" by de-
creasing m2L , which helps the naif realize that she would only comply on day 2 if she complies
on day 1. By worsening the consequences of noncompliance on day 1, the Option + commitment
contracts help guide naifs to take the action in their own best interest (complying on day 1 when
it is truly in their best day 1 interest to do so) by preventing them from overestimating their day
2 compliance were they not to comply in day 1.
     Another interesting pattern for naifs is that, although Option-only contracts induce more com-
pliance from impatient naifs on day 1 than from patient people, they do not induce extra compliance
on day 2: no agent (regardless of (1)) will comply on day 2 of an Option-only contract. In con-
trast, if an Option + commitment contract induces additional compliance from an impatient naif
on day 1, it will also induce extra compliance on day 2 because agents who comply on day 1 of
Option + commitment contracts always follow-through on day 2.
Prediction 5. For sophisticates, for a given cost realization, compliance is weakly decreasing in (1)
for Commitment-only and Option + commitment contracts, but invariant to (1) under Option-only
and Inframarginal contracts.
Proof. Sophisticates know they will not comply on day 2 for a payment less than e2 , yielding the
following WTP for a day 2 payment m > 0:

                                      m Soph
                                 W T P0 |    = (m            (1)e2 )  1{e2 < m}.                (25)

WTP to increase m2 from m2L to m2H            is thus
                 8
                 >
                 <m2H m2L
                 >               if           e2 < m2L < m2H (Inframarginal)
      m2H Soph
 W T Pm    |    = m2H      (1)e2 if           m2L  e2 < m2H (Option + Comm. or Comm. only) (26)
        2L
                 >
                 >
                 :0              if           m2L < m2H  e2 (Option-only)

     The critical cuto for day 2 payment over which it is dierentially valuable for more impatient
sophisticates is thus e2 , not (1)e2 as it was for naifs. Even though the day 2 contract appears to
be a lucrative option as soon as m2 surpasses (1)e2 , sophisticates know their day 2 selves will not
follow through on the option if m2 < e2 . Thus Option-only contracts are not more eective for
low- (1) sophisticates. In contrast, in contracts with commitment, sophisticates know that day 1
compliance is pivotal to day 2 compliance, and the more they discount future eort, the higher the
net benefits of compliance.
     To complete the proof, note that compliance with Inframarginal contracts is invariant to (1)
for the same reason as for naifs.

    Interestingly, under Commitment-only and Option + Commitment contracts, sophisticates are
willing to pay more than dollar for dollar to increase the day 2 payment from m2L to m2H .36 In
  36                             m2H m2H >e2 ,m2L =e2
       That is, if (1) < 1, W T Pm 2L
                                      |               = m2 H     (1)e2 > m2H   m2L .


                                                        15
this way, these time-bundled contracts operate like standard commitment contracts.

B.3    Predictions with Uncertainty
    We now show that, under reasonable distributional assumptions, Prediction 1 holds in the case
where future eort costs are unknown (i.e., the agent knows the distribution of her future eort
costs but not the realizations). For simplicity, we examine the same two-day model as Section 2
and consider the case where eort costs are weakly positive and dm = 1. Assume the agent's day
2 costs are distributed according to the distribution function F (·). We examine sophisticates first.
Sophisticates We solve backwards. Day 2 compliance can be expressed as

                                    w2 = {w1 = 1 & e2 < 2m},                                       (27)

and conditional on day 1 compliance, day 2 compliance occurs with probability F (2m).
   The sophisticate anticipates her day 2 behavior, and thus complies on day 1 if the expected
payments are greater than the discounted sum of expected costs:

                             e1 + (1)F (2m)E [e2 |e2 < 2m] < F (2m)2m                              (28)

The lower is (1), the more likely is this equation to hold.
   Equations 27 and 28 show that Prediction 1 holds for sophisticates with cost uncertainty.
Overall compliance is decreasing in (1) since day 1 compliance decreases with (1) (equation 28)
and day 2 compliance increases with day 1 compliance (equation 27).
Naifs The solution for naifs is more complicated because naifs' beliefs about their own future
compliance depend on (1). As such, we need to put some structure on the distribution of e2 . We
show the result here assuming that e2 is distributed uniformly from 0 to k .37
   We solve forwards. On day 1, the naif thinks she will comply on day 2 if:

                                  w2 = {w1 = 1 & (1)e2 < 2m}.                                      (29)

She then complies on day 1 if the expected payments are greater than the discounted sum of
expected costs:                                                      
                                 2m                             2m
                    e1 + (1)F          E [e2 | (1)e2 < 2m] < F        2m              (30)
                                  (1)                            (1)
With uniform costs, this expression simplifies to the following condition for day 1 compliance:
                                         (
                                             2m       (1) k
                                                          2   if (1) <   2m
                                                                          k
                                  e1 <       (2m)2                       2m
                                                                                                   (31)
                                              (1)2k           if (1)      k

The lower is (1), the more likely equation 31 is to hold, as both of the "cutos" for compliance
                 (2m)2
(2m    (1) k                                                                   2m
           2 and (1)2k ) are decreasing in (1) (the cutos are equal when (1) = k ). Thus day 1

  37
    The result goes through with many other distribution functions. The key condition is that the PDF of
e2 cannot be too much greater between 2m and 2(me) than it is right below 2m.


                                                       16
compliance is decreasing in (1) for naifs. Like sophisticates, naifs then comply on day 2 if equation
27 holds.
   Hence, overall compliance for naifs is decreasing in (1). Day 1 compliance is decreasing in (1)
(equation 31), and day 2 compliance is increasing in day 1 compliance (equation 27).

B.4     Predictions with Thresholds Less than 100%
    In the main text, we examine dynamic thresholds where the threshold level of compliance is set
at 100% (i.e., where someone must comply on 100% of days to receive payment, so the threshold
level C is equal to the payment period length T ). We now show that Prediction 1 still holds under
certain cost assumptions when the threshold is less than 100%.
    We consider a three-period model where all payments are made in period 3. People discount
eort t periods in the future with an exponential discount factor of t ,  1. Given the short time
frame, we assume the discount factor over payments is one. In the threshold contract, people are
paid m per period complied if they comply in at least two periods. In the nonthreshold contract,
people are paid m per period complied regardless of how many periods they comply with.
    We define some useful notation:
    · Xt is the "walking stock" coming into period t (i.e., sum from period 1 to period t            1 of
                                        P 1
      whether the person complied Xt = t  i=1 wi ).
    · wt (Xt ) is a dummy for whether the person complies in period t as a function of the walking
      stock coming into period t.
B.4.1    Constant Costs
    We first build intuition by examining the simplified case where the per-period cost of walking
is constant across periods: et = e for all t.

Prediction 6. For both sophisticates and naifs, when the cost of walking is constant across periods,
compliance in the threshold contract relative to the nonthreshold contract is weakly decreasing in
the discount factor .

Proof. Compliance in the nonthreshold contract does not depend on . Thus the prediction holds
if we can show that compliance in the threshold contract is weakly decreasing in . We examine
the problem separately for three dierent cost cases: e 2m, m  e < 2m, and e < m. The first
and third cases are not interesting. For the case e 2m, it will never be worth it to walk in any
                 P
period, and so 3   t=1 wt = 0 for all . On the other hand, if e < m, since the cost of walking is low
relative to the incentive level, then it is worth it for the participant to walk in all periods regardless
              P
of , and so 3   t=1 wt = 3 for all .
    We now show the proof for the interesting case where m  e < 2m. In this case, walking in the
nonthreshold contract would be zero when = 1, so we are exploring whether there are any for
which the threshold contract could generate walking when the nonthreshold contract could not.
    We begin by solving for sophisticates, and then for naifs. For sophisticates, we solve backwards.




                                                   17
Sophisticates in Period 3: m  e < 2m. Behavior will depend on the walking stock X3 .
There are three cases:
   1. "In the money" (X3 = 2). The person walks if e < m. Thus they never walk:

                                                  w3 (2) = 0.                                       (32)

   2. "On the cusp" (X3 = 1). The person walks if e < 2m. Thus they always walk:

                                                  w3 (1) = 1.                                       (33)

   3. "Out of the money" (X3 = 0). The person walks if e < 0. Thus they never walk:

                                                  w3 (0) = 0                                        (34)

Sophisticates in Period 2: m  e < 2m.
   1. On the cusp (X2 = 1). The person walks if

                                e + 2m + w3 (2)(m       e)      w3 (1)(   e + 2 m)
                                                     ) e        e.

      If = 1, then this means they walk in period 2 and do not walk in period 3; if           < 1, then
      they do not walk in period 2 but do walk in period 3.
   2. On track (X2 = 0). The person walks if e + e < 2m. Note that this is the same "cost-
      bundling" equation that causes 100% threshold contracts to work better for those with lower
       . The equation means that they walk in both periods 2 and 3 if < 2e m
                                                                                 1.
Sophisticates in Period 1: m  e < 2m. The sophisticate knows that she will never walk
in all three periods since w3 (2) = 0. She also knows that she will always achieve the threshold if
she walks in period 1 or 2, since w3 (1) = 1. If < 1, then to achieve two periods of walking, she
would rather walk in periods 2 and 3 than walk in periods 1 and 3 or periods 1 and 2, from today's
perspective. So when < 2e   m
                                 1, she will wait until period 2 and then walk. Thus, we just have to
check if there are any scenarios where it is worth it for her to walk in period 1 and period 3 when
she would not walk in periods 2 and 3. From period
                                                q      1's perspective, it is worth it to walk in periods
                  2e                              2m
1 and 3 if   e+         2m, which means      <     e    1. Since this is higher than the threshold for
                                                                                    q
                           2m
walking in period 2 ( <     e    1), she will thus walk in period 1 if 2e
                                                                        m
                                                                            1 < < 2e    m
                                                                                             1.
Sophisticates Summary: m  e < 2m. We summarize walking as a function of              in Table
B.2, which shows that total walking weakly decreases in as a result of the same cost-bundling
logic that drives the e cacy of the 100% threshold contract for the impatient.
Naifs We now examine the case where m  e < 2m for naifs. By definition, naifs always think
they will follow through on the plan that is best from today's perspective; as a result, we can "solve


                                                   18
 Appendix Table B.2: Walking by Sophisticate in 3-Day Contract with 2-Day Threshold, by

                                                     Walks on day:
               Discount factor over walking ( )      1 2       3     Total days walked
               q
                  2m
                   e    1< 1                         N   N     N              0
                             q
               2m              2m
                e     1 <       e    1               Y   N     Y              2
                     2m
                 < e      1                          N   Y     Y              2

Notes: Per-period cost e is assumed to be weakly positive.


forward," examining what is best for the naif to do in any period assuming she will follow-through
on it.
    When m  e < 2m, it is never optimal for the naif to walk in all three periods (since the
payment for walking in period 3 conditional on walking in periods 1 and 2 is just m  e). Thus,
the naif walks in a maximum of two periods. If = 1, then the naif does not care which periods
she walks in but will never walk since the condition for walking twice would be that e + e < 2m,
which can never hold given the costs.
    If < 1, then the naif will always want to postpone walking to periods 2 and 3. In period 2,
she will walk if e + e < 2m, which will hold for any < 2e  m
                                                                 1.
    Thus, as shown in Table B.3, our prediction holds due to the same cost-bundling intuition we
saw before.                                        q
    One interesting point is that for 2e
                                       m
                                          1 <  2e     m
                                                           1, the naif does not walk even though it
would have been in her best interest in period 1 to do so. This is because she thinks she will walk
in period 2 instead. However, our main prediction of interest still holds for naifs: the threshold still
works better for the naif the lower is.

     Appendix Table B.3: Walking by Naif in 3-Day Contract with 2-Day Threshold, by

                                                     Walks on day:
            Discount factor over walking ( )         1 2      3       Total days walked
            2m
             e
                 1< 1                                N N      N               0
                2m
              < e    1                               N Y      Y               2

Notes: Per-period cost e is assumed to be weakly positive.


B.4.2     Non-Constant Costs
    We now allow for costs to vary across periods. We assume for simplicity that costs are all
weakly positive (the results are the same when we allow costs to be negative, but it complicates
the notation). We show the prediction under a reasonable case where eort costs are binary.



                                                   19
Prediction 7. For sophisticates and naifs, assume the cost of eort in each period is binary, taking
on either a "high value" (eH ) or a "low value" (eL ), with eH     eL . Compliance in the threshold
contract relative to the nonthreshold is weakly higher for someone with a discount factor < 1 than
for someone with discount factor = 1.

Proof. Since compliance in the nonthreshold contract is invariant to , the prediction holds if we
can show that compliance in the threshold contract is weakly higher for < 1 than for = 1. We
                                                                   P
first consider dierent values of eH and eM . First, if eH < m, then 3 t=1 wt = 3 for all and so the
                                                             P
prediction trivially goes through. Second, if eL m, then 3        w
                                                               t=1 t =  0 for = 1. However, some
people with < 1 may walk in at least one period due to the standard cost-bundling eect (e.g.,
if they have costs of eL every period and if eL + eL < 2m, then they would walk twice). Thus
the prediction goes through in that case as well. We thus have proved the prediction in the cases
where eH < m and eL m and so we next consider the cases where eH m and eL < m.
     To prove the prediction, we examine all 8 potential sequences of costs and prove it separately
for each case. Note that we only consider the cases where eH m and eL < m.
   1. Cases 1 and 2: eL , eL , eL and eH , eH , eH
      Since in these cases, costs are constant across periods, the prediction goes through by the
      proofs for the constant cost prediction (Prediction 6).
   2. Case 3: eH , eH , eL : Again neither sophisticates nor naifs walk in period 1 but both walk
      in period 2 and period 3 if eH + eL < 2m (note that by the assumptions above, since
      eL < m, they will always follow-through so there is no follow-through constraint). Thus total
      compliance is decreasing in .
   3. Case 4: eH , eL , eH . Again nobody walks in period 1. Sophisticates walk in periods 2 and 3
      if eL + eH < 2m and eH < 2m. Naifs walk in period 2 if eL + eH < 2m and in period 3 if
      they've walked in period 2 and eH < 2m. Again total compliance is decreasing in .
   4. Case 5: eL , eH , eH . Sophisticates walk in period 1 if eL + 2 eH < 2m and they know they will
      follow through (eH < 2m). Naifs walk in period 1 if eL + 2 eH < 2m. Neither type walks in
      period 2 since eH m. Both types walk in period 3 if they walked in period 1 and eH < 2m.
      Again total compliance is thus decreasing in .
   5. Cases 6, 7, and 8: eL , eH , eL ; eL , eL , eH ; and eH , eL , eL . All people, regardless of , walk in
      the two periods where the cost is eL , since eL + eL < 2m. Nobody walks in the period where
      the cost is eH since they know they will walk in the other periods and eH                 m. Thus the
      prediction (trivially)holds.


    For sophisticates, we can also show a stronger result. In simulations with most realistic cost
distributions, this stronger result goes through for naifs as well.

Prediction 7A. For sophisticates, regardless of the cost distribution, compliance in the threshold
contract relative to the nonthreshold contract is weakly decreasing in the discount factor .


                                                    20
Proof. We work backward. In period 3, behavior will depend on the walking stock X3 :

                                           w3 (2) = 1{e3 < m}
                                           w3 (1) = 1{e3 < 2m}
                                           w3 (0) = 1{e3 < 0}.

We show that the prediction holds by showing that it holds under all potential cases for e3 .
Case 1: m  e3 < 2m In this case, walking in period 3 is

                                                  w3 (2) = 0
                                                  w3 (1) = 1
                                                  w3 (0) = 0.

   Note that this implies the person will never walk three times. Walking in period 2 is

                                        w2 (1) = 1{e2  e3 }
                                        w2 (0) = 1{e2 + e3 < 2m}.

   In period 1, consider two cases:
   1. e2 + e3 < 2m: she knows she will walk at least twice, and the only question is whether to
      walk now or later. If e1 < min{ e2 , 2 e3 }, then she will walk in period 1; if not, then she will
      wait and walk in periods 2 and 3. Either way, she walks twice.
                 2m: she knows she will not walk later, so she will walk if e1 + min{ e2 ,   2e
   2. e2 + e3                                                                                     3}   < 2m.
   Thus we can see that when m  e3 < 2m, overall compliance is as follows:
                                (
                                    2   if e2 + e3  2m OR e1 + min{e2 , e3 }  2m
                Days walked =
                                    0   otherwise.

   Thus, compliance is obviously decreasing in .
Case 2: e3      2m In this case, the person will never walk in period 3 regardless of the walking
stock. Thus, overall compliance is as follows:

                                          (
                                              2   if e1 + e2 < 2m AND e2 < 2m
                        Days walked =
                                              0   otherwise.

This is again decreasing in .




                                                      21
Case 3: e3 < m In this case, walking in period 3 is

                                                       w3 (2) = 1
                                                       w3 (1) = 1
                                                       w3 (0) = 0.

There are two cases to consider for e2 :
    1. e2 < m: in this case (for  1), discount rates do not matter since the person will walk
       regardless in periods 2 and 3. Then they walk in period 1 if e1 < m.
    2. e2  m: in this case, the person will not walk in period 2 with walking stock 1. Thus, the
       maximum the person will ever walk is two periods (the first or the second and then the third).
                           (
                               2   if (e1 +   2e       < 2m & e3 < 2m) or (e2 + e3 < 2m & e3 < 2m)
                                                   3
           Days walked =
                               0   otherwise.

       Thus days walked is again weakly decreasing in .
    Thus, the proposition (that compliance is weakly decreasing in ) is proved since we have shown
it holds for all potential values of e3 .


C      Misreporting Steps, Confusion, and Suspensions
Procedures to Curb Misreporting Because incentive payments for walking were deter-
mined by self-reported data and not pedometer data, we implemented a number of checks during
the intervention to ensure integrity of step reporting. Within each 28 day sync period, respondents
who were found to have incorrectly over-reported meeting a 10k step target on over 40% of days
were flagged for cheating and contacted by a member of our field team. Those who were flagged
were suspended from receiving recharges for 7 days. Those who were flagged for cheating more
than one time were terminated from the program. As shown in Table C.1, fewer than 5% of the
incentive group was suspended for cheating and only 1 participant was terminated.
    During the intervention period, we also attempted to flag participants who appeared to be
confused about how to read their pedometers or report properly. Our pedometers record daily
steps until midnight, and because respondents typically reported their daily steps via our IT system
before midnight, we expected that even if people report correctly, reported steps may be slightly
under pedometer steps. We tagged those whose reported steps were either more than 10% higher
than their pedometer steps or more than 15% lower than their pedometer steps as "confused."
Those who were flagged as simply "confused" received tutorials from the surveyors on how to use
the step-reporting system.
Rates of Misreporting and Confusion Although our analysis only uses pedometer data
(not reported data), so misreporting would not bias our conclusions, it is still interesting to examine
whether misreporting was prevalent in practice. We find that the prevalence of "misreporting"

                                                           22
behavior, defined as reporting walking at least 10,000 steps when the pedometer itself records
fewer than 10,000 steps, is less than 5% and, interestingly, relatively balanced across incentive and
monitoring groups. See column 1 of Table C.2. The balance with the monitoring group, who had
no incentives to over-report, suggests that much of what looks like intentional misreporting was
simply participant mistakes or confusion. We also find that the incentive group appeared to put
more eort into making sure their step reports were correct, with less examples of divergences in
either the positive or negative directions (columns 2-4 of Table C.2).

               Appendix Table C.1: Summary statistics on audits and suspensions
                                                Count                            Share
                                      Incentives    Monitoring          Incentives    Monitoring
                                          (1)               (2)             (3)                 (4)

      Shared fitbit ever*                 3                 0              0.004            0.000
      Suspended for cheating             100               N/A             0.042            N/A
      Terminated for cheating             1                N/A             0.000            N/A

      Total:                            2,404               203             0.92             0.08

*Notes: We randomly audited around 1,000 individuals from both the incentive and monitoring groups to
look for evidence of pedometer sharing. The first row in columns (3) and (4) is conditional on being audited.

        Appendix Table C.2: Misreporting, confusion and cheating by contract group
           Variable type:            Reporting                       Confusion
                                     Incorrectly        Over-           Over-          Under-
                                      reported       reported or     reported by     reported by
           Dependent variable:
                                      over 10k         under-          at least        at least
                                        steps         reported           10%             15%
                                         (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)
           Incentives                  0.0079         -0.081           -0.059          -0.022
                                       [0.01]           [0.02]           [0.02]         [0.01]

           Monitoring mean              0.049             0.272         0.167            0.104

           # Individuals               2,542            2,542           2,542            2,542
           #Observations              173,131          173,131         173,131          173,131

Notes: Each observation is a respondent  day. Column 2 shows whether a respondent over-reported by
at least 10% or under-reported by at least 15%. The omitted group is the monitoring group. Analysis is
restricted to dates falling within an individual's contract period. Controls include baseline steps as well as
all other variables included in Table 2 to maintain consistency with other step analyses. Standard errors, in
brackets, are clustered at the individual level. Significance levels: * 10%, ** 5%, *** 1%.




                                                     23
           Appendix Table C.3: Summaries from the minute-level pedometer data

                                                                                           P-value:
                                       Incentives          Monitoring      I-M
                                                                                            I=M
                                           (1)                (2)            (3)             (4)

  A. Activity (by minute)
  Average daily activity                   213                197            16             0.001
  Average steps per minute                 41                 38             3              0.001
  B. Time of Day
  Average start time                      7:11               7:16             4             0.445
  Average end time                        20:49              20:50            1             0.743
  C. High step counts per minute (share)
  Steps > 242                      0                           0              0               -
  Steps > 150                          1.3210     6            0         1.3210    6          -
  # Individuals:                          2,368               201

Notes: This table presents various statistics at the respondent  minute level. High step count thresholds
(242 and 150) were determined based on the average number of steps an individual takes when running at 5
mph and 8 mph, respectively. Only one individual's minute-by-minute data coincides with jogging at a pace
greater than 5 miles per hour, and only for a total of 15 minutes over one day in the intervention period.




D      Calibrating the CDF of Walking Costs
    Here, we describe how we estimate the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of walking costs
using the step data for our calibration exercise in Section 5.2.2.
    To estimate values of the CDF, we take advantage of the fact that payments are not discounted
on payday, and so the probability of walking on paydays is equal to the probability that walking
costs are less than the payment amount ­ or the CDF of the payment amount. Therefore, average
payday walking in the small payment treatment uncovers F (10), and average payday walking in the
base case and daily groups uncover F (20). Average walking in the monitoring treatment uncovers
F (0). We also use two additional moments: the probability of walking for the 4-day (5-day)
threshold group when one had already walked three days (four days), and it is the last day of the
contract period uncovers F (80) (F (100)). With these five data points in hand, we fit a linear (i.e.,
uniform) walking cost CDF using a linear regression of F (x) on (x).
    Because the final two CDF values are estimated on a selected sample, they are only valid for
estimating the population-level cost distribution if costs are i.i.d. across people. Therefore, while
the calibration exercise is useful for exposition, our model may not perfectly fit observed behavior.




                                                      24
E        CTB Time Preference Measurement
    We adapted the convex time budget (CTB) methodology of Andreoni and Sprenger (2012)
to try to measure time preferences in two domains, walking and mobile recharges (the Online
Supplement details our adaptation). Here we discuss why we believe our measurement was not a
reliable measure of time preferences in this setting.
    First, the methodology is complicated. It was di cult to explain to our sample, who had limited
familiarity with screens, sliders, or complicated exercises. Due to survey length constraints, we also
included fewer questions (and gave less practice) than previous laboratory studies.
    A number of patterns suggest that participant understanding was limited. First, law of demand
violations are far more common than in previous studies.38 As shown in Table E.1, 57% of the
sample violated the law of demand at least once. For reference, participants in the Augenblick et al.
(2015) had 16 opportunities to violate monotonicity, while ours had just 2. If understanding were
similar in both contexts one would expect a higher share of the Augenblick et al. (2015) sample to
ever violate the law of demand, but the share in their sample was only 16%.

                Appendix Table E.1: Law of demand violations in eort allocations

                                                 # of violators          % of sample

                                                       (1)                    (2)

                    Violates 0/7                      1,337                  41.4
                    Violates 7/14                     1,515                  46.9
                    Violates at least once            1,830                  56.7
                    Violates both                     1,022                  31.6

                    Total:                            3,232                  100

       Notes: Violators allocate more steps to the future date when we increase the interest rate from
       1 to 1.25. We varied the exchange rate for two questions: today versus 7 days from now, and 7
       versus 14 days; rows 1 and 2 show violations for these two questions separately and row 3 and 4
       show percentages of people who violated at least once or both.

     Second, in the eort task, there was low follow-through on the incentivized activity: fewer than
50% of participants selected to complete the step task did so despite large rewards (500 INR) for
completion. While this partly reflects a logistical glitch (we failed to give respondents intended
reminder calls the day before their activity), the lack of follow-through may also indicate a lack of
respondent understanding. Regardless, the poor follow-through is problematic methodologically:
identification requires that, when participants make their allocation decisions, they think they will
follow-through with certainty, which seems unrealistic given how few followed through in practice.
  38
    We can only examine law of demand violations in the eort domain because we did not include exchange
rate variation in the recharge domain, so cannot estimate the demand curve.



                                                     25
    Third, respondents on average allocated more steps to today than the future even when the
interest rate was 1:1. Although they could be future-biased, the following other potential explana-
tions are concerning for interpretation: respondents were confused; they saw steps as consumption
instead of a cost (violating the first order conditions underlying estimation); or uncertainty over
future walking costs and schedules led participants to want to finish steps sooner, which would
confound discount rate estimates with risk aversion and uncertainty.
    Fourth, day-specific-shocks appear to be important in practice. 19% of respondents' allocations
of steps to the sooner date are neither monotonically weakly increasing nor monotonically weakly
decreasing across questions which feature the same sooner date (today) but a monotonically de-
creasing later date (questions 2-6). These allocations cannot be rationalized with a discount rate
that is either weakly decreasing or increasing with lag length without day-specific utility shocks.
The same holds for 24% of respondents in the recharge domain. These types of shocks would also
confound estimation.
    Fifth, the CTB parameter estimates themselves are not robust and are inconsistent with typical
priors. First, we do not have estimates for a large, endogenous share of the sample. The estimates
do not converge (i.e., we are unable to estimate discount rate parameters) for 38 to 44% of the
sample in the recharge domain, and 23 to 44% of the sample in the steps domain. Moreover, many
of the participants with estimates that converge in the eort domain have an estimated  < 1,
which violates the first order conditions for estimation and is often associated with non-sensible
and estimates. When we exclude these estimates, we are left with estimates for only 34 to 38% of
the sample in the eort domain. Second, we have a high rate of negative estimated discount rates:
26% for steps and 30% for recharges. This is more that the usual rate of negative individual-level
estimates.
    Finally, the CTB estimates do not correlate with any of the behaviors one would expect them
to. The CTB estimates in the steps/eort domain do not correlate with exercise and health, and
the estimates in the recharge domain do not correlate consistently with our proxies for impatience
over recharges (e.g., balances). See the Online Supplement for estimation results.
    For all of these reasons, we do not think our CTB estimates are a reliable measure of discount
rates in this setting and do not use them for analysis.




                                                26
