                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DOES ECONOMICS MAKE YOU SEXIST?

                                     Valentina A. Paredes
                                     M. Daniele Paserman
                                        Francisco Pino

                                     Working Paper 27070
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27070


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We thank Leah Boustan, Damian Clarke, Stefano DellaVigna, Shoshana Grossbard, Pablo
Guzmán-Pinto, Daniel Hamermesh, Shulamit Kahn, Shelly Lundberg, Patricia Funk, and
participants at the American Economic Association Annual Meetings, the WERISE Women in
Economics Conference and seminar participants at Boston University, Universidad de Chile,
PUC-Chile, Universitat de Barcelona, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, CU Denver and Duke
University for helpful comments. Gerard Domènech, Juan Luis Fuentes, Danilo Kuzmanic and
Daniela Paz provided excellent research assistance. The authors gratefully acknowledge funding
from Fondecyt Inicio, Project 11170968, the Centre for Social Conflict and Cohesion Studies
(CONICYT/FONDAP/15130009) and the Millennium Nucleus of Social Development, supported
by the Millennium Scientific Initiative of the Ministry of Economy, Development and Tourism
(Chile). This research was approved by the University of Chile Institutional Review Board. The
usual disclaimers apply. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Valentina A. Paredes, M. Daniele Paserman, and Francisco Pino. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Economics Make You Sexist?
Valentina A. Paredes, M. Daniele Paserman, and Francisco Pino
NBER Working Paper No. 27070
May 2020
JEL No. A13,A14,A22,J16,J71

                                           ABSTRACT

Recent research has highlighted unequal treatment for women in academic economics along
several different dimensions, including promotion, hiring, credit for co-authorship, and standards
for publication in professional journals. Can the source of these differences lie in biases against
women that are pervasive in the discipline, even among students in the earliest stages of their
training? In this paper, we provide evidence on the importance of explicit and implicit biases
against women among students in economics relative to other fields. We conducted a large scale
survey among undergraduate students in Chilean universities, among both entering first-year
students and students in years 2 and above. On a wide battery of measures, economics students
are more biased than students in other fields. Economics students are somewhat more biased
already upon entry, before exposure to any economics classes. The gap is more pronounced
among students in years 2 and above, in particular for male students. We also find an increase in
bias in a sample of students that we follow longitudinally. Differences in political ideology
explain essentially all the gap at entry, but none of the increase in the gap with exposure.
Exposure to female students and faculty attenuates some of the bias.

Valentina A. Paredes                              Francisco Pino
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Chile                               University of Chile
Diagonal Paraguay 257                             Diagonal Paraguay 257
Of. 1305A Santiago                                Of. 1505B
Chile                                             Santiago
vparedes@fen.uchile.cl                            Chile
                                                  fjpino@fen.uchile.cl
M. Daniele Paserman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
paserman@bu.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5715
             If women have a comparative advantage over men in the household sector
          when they make the same investments in human capital, an efficient household
          with both sexes would allocate the time of women mainly to the household sector
          and the time of men mainly to the market sector.

                                 -- Gary Becker, A Treatise on the Family (1991 [1981])


1         Introduction
Economics is a difficult field for women. Despite substantial progress in women's educational
attainment over the past 30 years, the fraction of women in economics, at all stages of the
educational and professional ladder, has remained stubbornly low (Bayer and Rouse, 2016;
Lundberg, 2018; Lundberg and Stearns, 2019). The underrepresentation of women may
hurt the discipline, by constraining the types of questions that are asked, and by providing
analyses that fail to take into account the full range of perspectives on specific issues.
Moreover, economists have an outsize influence of on the public conversation (Wolfers,
2015). Therefore, female underrepresentation may also affect the types of policies that are
publicly debated, and the implementation of policies that are ultimately enacted.
        Recent research has highlighted unequal treatment of women in academic economics,
along several different dimensions. Women in economics are less likely to be promoted,
even conditional on productivity (Ginther and Kahn, 2004, 2014); male economists are
less likely, relative to other fields, to exhibit a women preference in a hypothetical hiring
scenario (Williams and Ceci, 2015); women receive less credit for co-authorship (Sarsons,
2017); female-authored papers in top economics journals are held to higher standards and
go through a longer process of peer review (Hengel, 2017; Card, DellaVigna, Funk, and
Iriberri, 2020); female instructors in economics receive lower teacher evaluations (Boring,
2017; Mengel, Sauermann, and Zölitz, 2019); women are underrepresented in principles of
economics textbooks (Stevenson and Zlotnik, 2018); and women face explicit hostility in an
anonymous online forum with academic and professional purposes (Wu, 2018).1
        Does the unequal treatment of women in economics arise because of a pervasive bias
against women that is present in the discipline, even among students in the earliest stages
    1
    Although several studies have documented the unequal treatment of women in academic economics,
there are other studies that find no evidence of unequal treatment. See for example Hamermesh and
Schmidt (2003) and Donald and Hamermesh (2006).



                                                1
of their training? And, if economics is sexist, is it because it attracts individuals who are
ex ante more sexist, or does economic training contribute to gender bias?
       There can be a number of explanations for why gender bias is prevalent in economics.
First, if economics is perceived as a relatively high paying field (Zafar, 2013), it may attract
individuals with more traditional gender norms, especially among males. But it is also
possible that exposure to economics itself leads to more gender bias. Economics students
may encounter a small number of female faculty members relative to other fields. Exposure
to female role models has been shown to lower the gender gap in major choice (Porter
and Serra, forthcoming), and may also affect the degree of gender bias. Alternatively, it
may be that the relatively low share of women among economics students facilitates the
development of gender bias.
       It may also be that economics training leads students to develop more market-oriented
views about economic policy and, consequently, to identify more with the right on the
political spectrum. This could lead to more gender bias among economics students if right-
wing ideology on economic issues is also associated with a more conservative position on
social and gender-related issues (Hammock, Routon, and Walker, 2016).
       Finally, it is possible that the discipline of economics itself is responsible for the gap. As a
social science, economics can potentially affect people's view of society, including the role of
women. Some common economic theories, taken in their most simplistic version, could lead
to more gender-biased views. For example, if markets are competitive and workers are paid
their marginal product, the gender wage gap must reflect only differences in productivity
between male and female workers. And, at least according to some theories, taste-based
labor market discrimination cannot exist in the long run because it will be weeded out by
competitive forces (Becker, 1971).2 An additional example is the theory of comparative
advantage: applied to the household sphere, it can be used to justify traditional gender
roles, as the opening quote illustrates.3
   2
       Becker himself did not subscribe to such a simplistic view. In a 1968 article, he wrote:
             "A few of the more extreme nineteenth-century advocates of a competitive market econ-
         omy believed that eventually its extension and development would eliminate most economic
         discrimination... . Unfortunately, this has not yet taken place; discrimination exists, and at
         times even flourishes, in competitive economies. The position of Negroes in the United States
         being a clear example." (Becker, 1968).

   3
    Throughout the paper, we will use the terms "sexism," "gender bias" and "traditional gender attitudes"
interchangeably. This is done mostly for convenience. However, this use does not imply a normative



                                                        2
   In this paper, we provide direct evidence on the importance of explicit and implicit
biases against women among students in economics relative to other fields. We conducted
a large scale survey among undergraduate students in Chilean universities. As in many
other countries, students in Chile choose jointly a college-major pair, and are enrolled in
a specific major from the very first day they enter college. This allows us to separate self-
selection from training, because we can identify economics students even before they have
been exposed to any economics classes.
   We collected data on 3,344 students concentrated in 7 universities in Chile: close to
1,800 first-year students, surveyed in January-March 2017 and March 2018; and about
1,500 upperclassmen, surveyed in August 2017.4 In addition, we were able to follow up
a sample of the first year students between October 2018 and May 2019, when they were
enrolled in their second year in college. We end up with a longitudinal sample of 379
students, and a total of 3,723 completed surveys.
   We measured implicit bias using the gender-career and gender-science versions of the
Implicit Association Test (IAT, Greenwald, McGhee, and Schwartz, 1998). We then ad-
ministered a shortened version of the Ambivalent Sexism Inventory (ASI, Glick and Fiske,
1996) to measure both hostile and benevolent sexism. We also asked students a battery
of questions on gender attitudes (similar to those asked in the World Values Survey), and
beliefs about gender differences in mathematical ability. Finally, we asked students to assess
the importance of various factors (including discrimination and differences in preferences
and skills) for explaining the gender pay gap.
   From these questions, we constructed nine different measures of gender bias: four of the
measures were constructed following the guidelines in the literature (the two IAT scores
and the benevolent and hostile sexism scores based on the ASI); the remaining ones were
obtained by grouping survey questions into five clusters based on cluster latent variable
analysis (Vigneau and Qannari, 2003). Finally, we used factor analysis to extract the
first principal component of these nine measures and construct an aggregate measure of
gender bias. As a validity test, we show that on almost all measures women appear to be
substantially less gender-biased than men.
judgment. In fact, reasonable people can disagree as to whether the opening quote reflects gender bias or
is a simple mathematical statement in which the conclusion follows logically from the assumptions.
    4
      Throughout the paper we use the terms "upperclassmen" or "upperclass students" to refer to students
in year 2 and above.




                                                   3
   We document that, on the vast majority of these measures, as well as on the aggregate
gender-bias score, economics students are more biased than students in other fields. The
gap between economics and non-economics students is about one third as large as the gap
between men and women. There is some evidence that economics first-years are more
biased already upon entry, before exposure to any economic classes. The gap becomes
substantially more pronounced among upperclass students, in particular for male students.
In our preferred specification, the difference-in-differences estimate of the effect of economics
training on gender bias is about 0.09 standard deviations for the sample as a whole, and
0.18 standard deviations for male students.
   Although we find evidence of differences in some observable predetermined character-
istics between first-year and upperclass students, these differences are remarkably similar
across fields, making it unlikely that the results are driven by differential selection of stu-
dents into economics across different cohorts. Moreover, in the sample of students that
we can follow longitudinally, we find evidence of an increase in bias of similar magnitude
to the one found in the between-cohort analysis, in contrast to the notion that the results
are driven by differential selection on unobservable characteristics. The combined evidence
strongly suggests that exposure to economics causally leads to more gender-biased views.
We also implement an IV analysis to address the concern that the results may be driven
by economics students being more prone to become more gender-biased as they progress
through their studies, but do not find much evidence in support of this view.
   We next move to the analysis of possible mediating mechanisms. Students who are
more religious and self-identify with the political right are more likely to choose economics
relative to other fields (Hammock, Routon, and Walker, 2016). Consequently, political
ideology and religiosity explain essentially all the gap in bias between economics and non-
economics students at the point of entry in college. However, the differences-in-differences
estimates are essentially unaffected by controlling for political ideology or religiosity. Hence,
these variables cannot explain away the increase in the gap between the freshman and later
years. We find some evidence for a mediating role of exposure to female peers and professors:
the increase in bias is smaller for economics students who had a large share of female peers
and took classes with many female professors.
   This paper is related to various strands of the literature. First, it connects to the grow-
ing literature showing unequal treatment of women in economics, even relative to other



                                               4
academic disciplines. Ginther and Kahn (2014) show that the gender gap in the probability
of achieving tenure is 20% for economists, while the gender gap in other social sciences
is 12%. The same can be observed when studying the gender gap in the probability of
promotion: while it is 50% for economists, it is only 25% for other social sciences. Ceci,
Ginther, Kahn, and Williams (2015) study the gender gaps for women in different academic
fields. Their results show that, once that they control for productivity, the gender gap in
the probability of tenure disappears for all disciplines except for economics. Williams and
Ceci (2015) conducted an experiment on more than 800 tenure-track faculty in biology, en-
gineering, economics and psychology. In the experiment, faculty had to evaluate summaries
describing hypothetical applicants to an assistant professor opening, where the gender of
the applicant was manipulated. Their results show that both male and female faculty had
a 2:1 preference for female applicants in all fields, with the only exception of male faculty in
economics, who showed no gender preference. Sarsons (2017) finds that women in economics
become less likely to receive tenure the more they coauthor, but there is no difference for
men when they coauthor or solo-author. She attributes her results to the fact that, because
coauthored papers do not provide information about the specific contribution of each indi-
vidual, this leads to differential attribution of credit based on gender. Hengel (2017) finds
that women's writing is held to higher standards in academic peer review, and as a result,
female-authored papers in two top general-interest journals in economics spend longer in
peer review. Card, DellaVigna, Funk, and Iriberri (2020) use data on referee recommen-
dations and editorial decisions from four leading journals and find that referees of both
genders appear to set a higher bar for female-authored papers. Grossbard, Yilmazer, and
Zhang (2018) also find that female-authored papers in demographic economics receive more
citations. Two recent papers analyze gender differences in acceptance rates to economics
conferences. While Chari and Goldsmith-Pinkham (2017) find no significant differences for
NBER Summer Institute conferences, Hospido and Sanz (2019) find a significant gap for
conferences in Europe. Boring (2017) and Mengel, Sauermann, and Zölitz (2019) both find
evidence of female instructors receiving lower teaching evaluations (in a French and Dutch
university, respectively), despite the fact that student performance on final tests is not af-
fected by instructor gender. Finally, Dupas, Modestino, Niederle, and Wolfers (2020) find
that female economists face more (and more hostile) questions in professional seminars.5
  5
      A recent survey of the literature can be found in Lundberg (2020).




                                                     5
   A number of previous papers have documented a gender gap in the propensity to study
economics already at the undergraduate level. Dynan and Rouse (1997) and Emerson,
McGoldrick, and Mumford (2012) find that women are less likely to major in economics,
even after controlling for math aptitude, and other factors. Goldin (2015) documents that
women are dissuaded from majoring in economics by poor performance in introductory
courses, while males major in economics almost without regard to their grades.
   Some studies have looked at the the difference between economics students and students
in other fields. Frank, Gilovich, and Regan (1993) study the difference in levels of coop-
eration between economists and individuals in other fields, under the hypothesis that the
models taught in economics promote lower levels of cooperation. A more recent example
is Rubinstein (2006), where students have to decide whether to maximize profits by laying
off half of a company's workforce, or have lower profits by firing less than that number.
He finds that economics students had a much stronger tendency to maximize profits com-
pared to students in law, mathematics, philosophy and business administration. Exposure
to economics education also has real consequences: Ash, Chen, and Naidu (2019) find that
federal judges who participated in an economics training program were more likely to render
conservative verdicts in economics cases, rule against regulatory or taxation agencies, and
impose longer criminal sentences.
   Our research is also related to the literature that analyzes the effects of selection com-
pared to the effects of group socialization and/or training. The selection effect is driven
by self-selection (individuals select environments that fit their values and ideologies) and
institutional selection (institutions recruit people that match their values and ideologies),
as described in Haley and Sidanius (2005). On the other hand, group socialization leads
individuals to share and internalize specific values, norms and social knowledge. For ex-
ample, Gatto, Dambrun, Kerbrat, and De Oliveira (2010) found that both selection and
group socialization could explain police officers' prejudice towards disadvantaged groups.
Frank, Gilovich, and Regan (1993) show evidence that the lower cooperation rates found for
economic majors are due in part to economic training, since they find that the difference in
cooperation rates between economic and non-economic majors increases between freshman
and senior years. However, Carter and Irons (1991) found evidence that lower levels of
cooperation among economists are associated with self-selection into the economics major.
Their results are mixed as to whether the difference between economists and non-economic



                                             6
students persists between freshmen and senior years, but they find no evidence that the
initial difference widens with economic training.
   Finally, we believe that our paper can also inform the debate about the emergence of
populist parties and movements around the world. Several of these parties have drawn
disproportionate support from men (Norris, 2005 and Inglehart and Norris, 2016), in part
by appealing to male economic insecurities generated by the forces of globalization and
deindustrialization. Inglehart and Norris (2016) hypothesize that the displacement of tra-
ditional patriarchal values about fixed sex roles may have generated resentment, anger and
a sense of loss among older and less educated individuals. This in turn may have led to an
increase in support for populist right wing parties (which tend to share a combination of pa-
triarchal family values and antifeminism, Mudde, 2007) in particular among older and less
educated male voters. This paper, even though it is focused on the economics profession,
can shed some light on the factors that contribute to the emergence of these sentiments in
the broader population.
   Most closely related to our work is the paper by Hammock, Routon, and Walker (2016)
which uses longitudinal data on undergraduates in U.S. colleges and universities and ex-
amines how majoring in economics affects student opinions on a variety of social, political
and economic issues. Studying economics appeared to increase beliefs in favor of personal
freedom and decrease support for government intervention in markets. One question asked
students to evaluate the statement that married women's activities "are best confined to
the home and family." The paper finds no difference in responses to this question between
economics and non-economics majors, either at matriculation or at graduation. Our paper
extends this analysis by asking a much wider battery of questions on gender bias, which
allows us to investigate whether economics training affects gender attitudes along a variety
of different dimensions.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives the background, describing
recent trends in gender inequality in Chile, the Chilean university system, Economics in
Chile and women and higher education. Section 3 describes the survey, while section 4
reports our main results. In section 5 we explore possible mechanisms. Finally, section 6
concludes.




                                             7
2         Background
2.1        Gender inequality in Chile
Chile is the second richest economy in Latin America, with a GDP per capita of $15,346
(current US dollars). It is a member of the OECD since 2010. Since 1990, the GDP per
capita has increased at an average rate of about 7% per year. This economic success has
been accompanied by a reduction in the poverty rate from 39% in 1990 to 12% in 2015, and
an increase in life expectancy from 74 to 79 in those same years.6,7 However, despite these
improvements in economic and social outcomes, the country still exhibits significant gender
inequality. Female labor force participation, despite increasing from 32% in 1990 to 51% in
2017, is still below the average for South America (55%).8 The raw gender gap in monthly
wages is 31.7%. Even among full-time employees, the gender gap in hourly wages is 19.4%.
The United Nations Gender Inequality Index ranks Chile 65th out of 188 countries (the
U.S. is ranked 43), while the World Economics Forum Gender Gap Index ranks Chile 63rd
of 144, and only 117th in the Economic Participation and Opportunity subcategory.
        To further compare the gender attitudes of the Chilean population to gender attitudes
in other countries, we use the 2016 World Values Survey and construct two variables that
take the value of 1 if the respondent agrees or strongly agrees with the following statements:
"When mother works for pay, the children suffer", and "When jobs are scarce, men should
have more right to a job than women".9 Figure 1 shows the percentage of the population
under 25 years old that agrees or strongly agrees with the statements by countries.10 About
27% of respondents agree with the first statement in Chile, somewhat below the OECD
average, but slightly higher than in the U.S. The fraction agreeing with the second statement
is about 10% in Chile, again somewhere in between the U.S. and the OECD average. On
the whole, Chilean young adults appear to have somewhat more traditional views about
gender roles than their U.S. counterparts, but the differences are not very large.
    6
     Source: World Bank data: https://data.worldbank.org/country/chile.
    7
     Starting in October 2019, Chile has been rocked by a series of violent protests. The protests began
as a response to an increase in subway fares in Santiago, and soon extended to all other major cities, and
took on the character of a general protest against social and economic inequality. These protests took place
after completion of our data collection.
   8
     Source: World Bank data: https://data.worldbank.org/country/chile.
   9
     These two statements are also included in our survey.
  10
     We use all the OECD countries available in the survey.




                                                     8
2.2       Chilean University System
In Chile, students apply to colleges and majors simultaneously. This is relevant to our
analysis, as it will allow us to isolate the effect of self-selection into economics from exposure
to an economics major. In what follows we discuss the admission system in detail.
       The Chilean admission system is a centralized system where 36 universities, including
the most prestigious ones, participate. This system is administered by the "Department of
Evaluation, Measurement and Educational Registration" (DEMRE), which is part of the
University of Chile.
       Before graduating from high school, students must register for a national college ad-
mission test (the Prueba de Selección Universitaria, PSU), which is comparable to the
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) in the United States. The PSU includes two mandatory
tests in mathematics and language and two optional tests, in history and science. Students
take the PSU test in December and receive their score in early January. Based on their
score, students apply to majors through the centralized system. Students can rank up to
10 choices of "careers" ("carreras") in order of preference. A career is a combination of a
university and a field of study. That is, in each of their 10 choices, students must specify
both the degree program and the university that they would like to attend.
       After students submit their applications, DEMRE allocates students to slots. Students
are ranked based on a deterministic function of high school GPA and national standardized
test scores (this deterministic function varies by degree program and university). Students
are admitted to their most preferred major for which the student's score is greater than the
cutoff score, where the cutoff score is the score of the last student admitted to the program.
This corresponds to a university-preferred Gale-Shapley algorithm.
       Because the cutoff score depends on the students that apply to each program, at the
time of application students do not know with certainty if they will be accepted to their
preferred program and university.11 However, the algorithm is strategy-proof for students,
so that they have incentives to reveal their true preferences.
  11
    Even though they do not have certainty about being accepted, students know the cutoff applied by
every career in the previous year, so they can estimate the probability of being accepted.




                                                 9
2.3       Economics in Chile
Undergraduate economics is taught as a hybrid major between Economics and Business,
called "Ingeniería comercial" (Commercial engineering). The commercial engineering major
was first offered by the Université Libre de Bruxelles in Belgium in 1903. It was first
taught in Chile by the University of Chile in 1935. The Pontificia Universidad Católica
(PUC) followed closely starting its program in 1942. The program was then offered by
the Universidad Adolfo Ibañez in 1957, Universidad de Concepción in 1957, Universidad de
Valparaíso in 1958, and Universidad de Santiago in 1980 (Lopez Bohle and Paredes Rojas,
2007). In 1981 a new law allowed the creation of new private universities, increasing the
number of universities from 8 before 1980 to 60 in 1990 (Larroulet Vignau and Domper,
2006). Many of these new universities started teaching Business and Economics.12
       Business and Economics is typically taught in 10 semesters. According to University of
Chile's website, it is a "degree aimed at young people interested in humanistic and scientific
knowledge and with a deep capacity for reflection and analysis, and motivated by micro
and macro economic phenomena and in the problems associated with the allocation of
resources in the economy and society, or by phenomena associated with the management
and direction of companies and organizations, in their different areas, including finance,
                                                          13
marketing and human resources management."                     Lopez Bohle and Paredes Rojas (2007)
                                                          14
compare coursework in B&E for 10 universities.                 On average, B&E students take 12% of
courses in Economics (roughly 7 full-credit courses), followed by General Interest (11%),
Electives (10%), Finance (7%) English (6%) and Strategy (6%). Most economic courses
follow standard textbooks.15
       In 2017, 52 out of 59 Universities offered Business and Economics. Figure 2 shows that
the percentage of students in B&E in Chile has increased steadily since 2005, going from
5% to 6.7%.
  12
     In 1983, from the 17 Universities that we have information, 60% taught Business and Economics.
  13
     http://www.uchile.cl/carreras/4966/ingenieria-comercial
  14
     They focus on the specialization in Business within B&E. Students following the specialization in
Economics are exposed to more economics courses.
  15
     For example, textbooks used in the course "Introduction to Economics" (first semester) at the University
of Chile are Samuelson and Nordhaus (2009) and Mankiw (2011).




                                                     10
2.4       Women and Higher Education
Chile has one of the the highest first-time tertiary entry rates among OECD countries: fully
89% of young adults enter tertiary education (OECD, 2018). When considering only first
time tertiary entry rates below the age of 25, the percentages are 76% for women and 66%
for men, while the OECD average is 61% for women and 49% for men. In 2017, women
constituted 54% of total enrollment in Universities.
       Although women have surpassed men in higher education enrollment since 2009, there
are still important differences in the type of majors women follow. In particular, women
constitute only 24% of total enrollment in technology majors, while they reach 72% of total
enrollment in health and 70% in education. Business and Economics is a more balanced
field, with 43% women, as shown in Figure 3. This figure is comparable to the share of
women undergraduates in economics in the U.S., which fluctuates around 31% (Siegfried,
2014). The share of women in economics has remained essentially constant over the sample
period.


3        The Survey
We conducted a pilot survey in January, 2017 for B&E and accounting students in one
university ("University 1"). On the day of registration, first year students were invited to
complete the survey after they finished activating their computer account. We estimate the
response rate at 25% for B&E and 28% for accounting.16 Between March and June, 2017,
we conducted the first wave of the survey. First year students from 7 universities, including
the university from the pilot study, were invited to complete the survey by email.17 Based
on enrollment data for these universities-majors, we estimate the average response rate at
9.8%.18 We conducted the second wave between August and October, 2017. Upperclass
  16
     Students were not required to register on registration day, but about two-thirds typically do. Therefore
to compute the response rate we include all students enrolled in B&E and accounting in University 1, and
counted as respondents those who participated in the pilot.
  17
     Even though students from only some universities were invited to participate in the study, because
the invitation was distributed by email, it could reach students in other universities. Students from B&E
and Accounting in University 1 were asked not to answer the survey in wave 1 if they had already done so
during registration day.
  18
     Some universities only agreed to distribute the survey to their student email list without sharing the
actual list with us. Therefore we do not know the exact number of emails that were sent out, and we
cannot calculate the exact survey response rate. For B&E and Accounting in University 1, we counted as
respondents students who participated in the pilot and in wave 1.



                                                     11
students from the same 7 universities were invited to complete the survey by email, and
offered to enter a lottery for one pair of movie tickets for participating in the study. The
average response rate for this wave was 5.7%.19 In March 2018 we conducted a third wave
where we invited first year students from the same universities to complete our survey, and
again offered to enter a lottery for one pair of movie tickets for participating in the study.
The average response rate for this group was 10.9%. In October 2018 we conducted a
limited follow-up study (wave 4) with the students from University 1 that were interviewed
in the pilot study. We contacted the 157 students from the pilot and invited them to answer
a follow-up survey. The follow-up survey included the same questions form the pilot survey
plus some additional questions to help us disentangle some mechanisms. Students were
contacted by email to their institutional accounts and were offered to enter a lottery for
one pair of movie tickets for participating in the study. Our response rate for the follow-up
survey was 22%. Finally, in May 2019 we conducted a second follow-up study (wave 5) with
the students from the 7 universities that were interviewed in March 2018. We contacted
666 students that were interviewed in March 2018 and had given contact information to
answer the follow-up survey. Students were offered to enter a lottery for two iPads. Our
response rate for this second follow-up was 44%.20 Figure 4 shows the timeline of the survey,
including waves 0 to 5.
       Table 1 shows the number of students by university and year of study, and the proportion
of those studying B&E. On average 26 percent of our sample studies B&E. Even though
we see important differences in the sample of students in each university, all universities
have some representation of Business and Economics students. Most of our sample is
concentrated in 7 universities. There are 85 students who report studying in universities
that we did not directly invite to participate.21 In total, we have data on students from 16
different universities. Table 2 shows the distribution of students across fields and waves. The
fields with a highest proportion of students are engineering (26%), business and economics
(26%), accounting (12%) and law (11%).
       Our final sample consists of 3,723 students: 1,816 first-year students from the pilot
  19
     The response rate is computed considering students enrolled in years 2 to 6 in each program.
  20
     If we calculate the response rate using all the students in wave 3 (instead of the students that provided
contact information) the response rate is 34%. The higher response rate in the last wave is probably due to
the fact that students were contacted through a popular messaging app (Whatsapp), as well as by email.
  21
     Notice that 13 of these students are in wave 5 (the follow-up to wave 3), so they might have changed
university over the course of a year.




                                                     12
(157), first wave (808) and third wave (851); and 1,907 upperclass students from the second
wave (1,528), fourth wave (34) and fifth wave (345).22

3.1       Measuring gender bias
Students in our sample answered questions on both explicit and implicit biases and be-
liefs, and some questions on their sociodemographic characteristics. We measured implicit
bias using the gender-career and gender-science versions of the Implicit Association Test
(IAT, Greenwald, McGhee, and Schwartz, 1998).23 To measure explicit bias, we adminis-
tered a shortened version of the Ambivalent Sexism Inventory (ASI, Glick and Fiske, 1996),
which distinguishes between hostile and benevolent sexism. Hostile sexism captures nega-
tive feelings towards women (e.g., "Women try to gain power by controlling men."); while
benevolent sexism represents an ideology that offers protection to women who conform to
traditional gender norms (e.g., "men should be willing to sacrifice their own well-being in
order to provide economic stability to women.")
       We also asked students a battery of questions on gender attitudes (similar to those
asked in the World Values Survey), and beliefs about gender differences in mathematical
ability. Finally, we asked students to assess the importance of various factors (including
discrimination and differences in preferences and skills) for explaining the gender pay gap.
The rationale for these questions is that individuals with more traditional gender attitudes
are less likely to attribute gender differences in labor market outcomes to discrimination,
and more likely to rationalize these gaps with differences in skills and preferences (human
capital, risk aversion, competitiveness, preference for work-life balance).
       Based on the answers to these questions, we constructed five additional measures of
  22
      We collected data from 4,007 students. We excluded 31 students for whom we do not have information
on their university or major. From wave 2 we excluded 83 students who declared to be first year students,
and 170 students who declared to be in 7th to 9th year (students took 12.6 semesters on average to graduate
in 2017 from undergraduate university degrees in Chile).
   23
      There is an intense debate over whether implicit biases are predictive of discriminatory behavior (see
McConnell and Leibold, 2001; Blanton, Jaccard, Klick, Mellers, Mitchell, and Tetlock, 2009; McConnell and
Leibold, 2009; Forscher, Lai, Axt, Ebersole, Herman, Devine, and Nosek, 2019, among others). Even though
most of this research has addressed race stereotypes, the criticism should also apply to gender stereotypes.
In the economics literature, there have been a number of studies that have found a link between implicit
biases and behavor: Rooth (2010) finds that Arab-Muslim job applicants in Sweden are less likely to be
called back by employers with a stronger implicit bias against them; Glover, Pallais, and Pariente (2017)
find that minority grocery cashiers in France perform less well on the job on days in which they are paired
with managers with stronger implicit bias; finally, Carlana (2019) shows that teachers' IAT scores correlate
with students' gender gap in math performance, supporting a link between attitudes and behavior.



                                                    13
gender bias. Based on the pilot, we used a cluster latent variable analysis (Vigneau and
Qannari, 2003) to group the remaining variables into the following categories: i) traditional
gender roles, measuring the extent to which respondents agree with statements that women
working outside of the home have a negative effect on family life; ii) proactive (or normative)
gender roles, measuring the extent to which respondents agree that society should change
to promote gender equality; iii) beliefs about gender differences in mathematical ability;
iv) beliefs that the gender pay gap is due to discrimination; and v) beliefs that the gender
pay gap is due to differences in skills and preferences. The full set of survey questions, and
their grouping into our different measures of gender bias, is reported in the Appendix.
   Finally, we took the principal component of nine measures to calculate an aggregate
gender bias score.24 Table 3 shows the correlation matrix for all measures. The correlation
between the different measures is positive and significant in almost all cases. The only
pair of variables that have a negative correlation is the belief that the gender gap is due
to discrimination and the belief that the gender gap is due to skills and preferences. The
correlation between the Gender and Science IAT and the other measures is always positive
but small and not significant for benevolent sexism, traditional gender roles, the belief that
the gender gap is due to discrimination and the belief that the gender gap is due to skills
and preferences. However, we do find a significant correlation between the Gender and
Science IAT and beliefs about gender differences in mathematical ability, which is expected
since both variables are measuring similar aspects of gender biases.
   Table A-2 in the appendix shows the summary statistics of our nine measures of gen-
der bias, and the aggregate bias score.25 In most of the measures sexism decreases when
comparing first year and upperclass students. Sexism also decreased between first year
students in 2017 and 2018.26 However, both first year cohorts are in general more sexist
than upperclass students.
   As a first validity check, we look at whether there are gender differences in our measures.
If the measures do indeed capture gender bias, we expect women to exhibit lower scores
than men.27 Table 4 shows that on six of the nine core measures this is indeed the case.
  24
     We calculated the weights of the principal component using the answers of students the pilot survey,
and waves 1 to 3.
  25
     All the measures are standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation 1 in the entire sample.
  26
     The third wave took place after the onset of the #MeeToo movement, in October 2017, as shown in
Figure 4.
  27
     All the measures have been standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation 1 in the whole
population, and are rotated so that higher scores indicate higher gender bias.



                                                   14
The gap ranges between 0 and about 0.6 , depending on the measure. The gender gap
in the summary gender-bias measure is about two thirds of a standard deviation. We find
larger differences in the hostile sexism measure than in the benevolent sexism measure, as
found in Glick and Fiske (1996). Men have significantly more traditional attitudes about
gender roles, and are more likely to believe that women have lower mathematical ability.
Men are also significantly less likely to believe that labor market discrimination plays an
important role in explaining the gender pay gap. The only two measures where we do
not observe a significant gender gap are the IAT scores and the "skill and preferences"
measure.28 Regarding the former, it is perhaps not surprising that implicit biases are more
difficult to detect. The gender gap in the IAT scores is also smaller than that observed for
the other measures. The latter result is somewhat more surprising, especially in light of
the fact that the skill and preferences measure is positively correlated with all the other
measures, except for the discrimination measure (Table 3).
       Finally, we collected personal information including gender, age, high school type, and
socioeconomic background. Table A-3 shows descriptive statistics for these control variables.
On average, students from all waves are comparable in most characteristics. Upperclass
students tend to come more from single-sex schools rather than coeducational schools, than
first year students. Also, upperclass students have higher GPA and PSU scores, possibly
reflecting that these characteristics predict higher retention rate.
       Because we have a wide range of outcomes, we must address the concern of false positives
due to multiple hypothesis testing. We adopt three measures in this regard. First, we
have kept the same questions throughout the study. Second, we have created an index
constructed as the principal component of the nine measures, to reduce the number of
hypotheses tested. Finally, in the appendix we reproduce the main tables with p-values
corrected for multiple hypotheses testing, following Romano and Wolf (2005a,b).29

3.2       The #MeToo Movement and Social Desirability Bias
We begain collecting our data in January 2017 (see Figure 4). Since then, a number of
events occurred, both in Chile and worldwide, which could have influenced the way in
which students answered our survey questions.
  28
     When we do not include controls, there is a significant difference in the IAT-science score. Even with
controls, the difference is large (0.2 ), although not significant.
  29
     We use the implementation in Stata of Clarke, Romano, and Wolf (2019).



                                                    15
   In October 2017, following the revelations of extensive sexual abuse by Hollywood pro-
ducer Harvey Weinstein, the #MeToo hashtag spread virally on social media, leading to a
wave of allegations of widespread and pervasive sexual abuse and harassment in all sectors
of society. The movement spread globally, and quickly reached Chile as well. Indeed, in
April 2018, the faculty of Philosophy and Humanities of the Universidad Austral was oc-
cupied, in reaction to a case against a professor found guilty of sexual harassment. Several
university faculties and high schools were also occupied or went on strike during the first
semester (March-August), raising awareness of the prevalence of sexism in academia. Also,
as a response to the feminist movement, Chilean president Sebastián Piñera announced
a series of measures to reach equality between men and women, known as the "Women's
Agenda."
   The issue of sexism within the economics profession came forcefully to the fore at roughly
the same time. In August 2017, Alice Wu's article on widespread mysoginy in an anonymous
online forum frequented by many economists was quoted in a New York Times article, and
exposed the toxic environment faced by many women within the profession.
   These developments may have led respondents to be more cautious in expressing openly
sexist views on a survey. The global resonance of the #MeToo movement may have also led
some individuals to genuinely adopt less gender-biased views. It is intructive to examine
whether there are any notable trends in our measures of gender bias over time.
   As shown in Figure 4, students interviewed in the pilot and in Waves 1-2 completed the
survey almost entirely before the emergence of the #MeToo movement. By contrast, Wave
3 took place after #MeToo had already become a global phenomenon, and Waves 4 and 5
were conducted after the feminist occupations and strikes in Chilean Universities.
   Figure 5 shows the evolution of the aggregate score over time, after netting out university
and field of study fixed effects. Two main patterns emerge from the figure: first, gender
bias is substantially lower for upperclass relative to first-year students; second, there is a
clear downward trend in the aggregate score. The average score decreased by 0.20 from
March 2017 to March 2018 for first-year students, and by 0.26 between August 2017 and
May 2019 for upperclass students.
   The decrease in measured gender bias could be due to either a genuine change in at-
titudes following the revelation of the #MeToo movement, or to social desirability bias,
whereby students refrain from expressing openly sexist opinions in surveys. To shed light



                                             16
on this matter, Figures 6 and 7 look separately at the evolution of the hostile sexism measure
and the gender and science IAT score. Hostile sexism exhibits a particularly pronounced
downward trend, with a decrease of 0.21  and 0.37 for first year and upperclass students,
respectively. On the other hand, there is basically no downward trend in the IAT score,
which, by definition, is more difficult to consciously manipulate.30 This suggests that the
decrease in gender bias over time has more to do with social desirability bias than to a
genuine change attitudes. It is important to keep this in mind as we analyze the data.


4        Results
4.1       Are economists more sexist?
We start by documenting whether economics students are more gender biased relative to
students in other fields, regardless of year of study. Table 5 compares students in Business
and Economics to students in other disciplines.31 The first two columns report the mean
value of each one of our measures of bias (rows 1-9) and of the aggregate gender bias score
(row 10) for B&E and non-B&E students. Column 3 reports the raw difference in means and
its standard error, adjusted for clustering at the university/major level. Column 4 reports
the regression-adjusted difference in means, after controlling for student gender, mother's
education, a dummy for whether the mother worked when the student was growing up,
high school sector (public, private or voucher), high school type (mixed, single-sex school
and single-sex classroom), and university dummies.
       For eight of the nine individual measures, we find that B&E students are non-negligibly
more gender biased than non-B&E students. Five of the differences are statistically signifi-
cant at the 5% level (in the specification with controls). The bias of B&E students appears
to be particularly pronounced in the IAT-career score, hostile and benevolent sexism, the
skills and preferences measure and the gender roles-normative measure.32 The raw gap in
the aggregate gender-bias score is 0.2 standard deviations, and it falls to 0.14 standard
  30
     There is also no difference in the IAT score between first year and upperclass students, again suggesting
that some of the differences observed for the other measures may be due to the fact that older students
are more cautious about openly expressing sexist views. This evidence is consistent with Cao and Banaji
(2016), who suggest that implicit gender biases are relatively immune to counterstereotypic facts.
  31
     Table A-6 in the appendix reports p-values adjusted for multiple hypotheses testing.
  32
     Broadly speaking, this measure captures the extent to which respondents agree with statements that
society should change or intervene to promote more gender equality (e.g., "Men should assume a greater
degree of responsibility in domestic work than they currently do.")



                                                     17
deviations after inclusion of controls. In other words, the gap between B&E and non-B&E
students is about one quarter as large as the gap between men and women. This is a
sizeable difference.
   Columns 5 and 6 replicate the specification of Column 4 separately for men and women.
Across most measures, the B&E-non B&E gap is quite similar for men and women, with
a couple of exceptions (female B&E students exhibit more bias on the IAT-Science score,
male B&E students exhibit more bias on the IAT career score and the belief in differences
in mathematical ability.)

4.2    Selection or training? Identification
The difference in biases between students in B&E and students in other fields may reflect
either pre-existing differences between individuals who choose to major in economics and
those who choose to major in other fields; or, it may be a result of training in economics (or
a combination of the two). To test if the difference between economists and non-economic
students is due to selection or training, we use a difference-in-difference approach. We run
the following equation,

                       yimc =  + B &Eimc + U pperclassmenimc +
                         B &E × U pperclassmenimc +  Ximc + imc                             (1)

where Upperclassmen is a dummy variable that indicates students in their second to sixth
year. If economic training causes biases, then biases should increase with exposure to
training in economics. Specifically, the bias of upperclassmen B&E students should be
larger than the bias of B&E students in their first year; therefore, we should expect a
positive and significant  . If the difference is due to selection, we expect a large difference
in the first year that does not increase for upperclass students. If this is the case, we should
expect a positive and significant  and  = 0. Finally,  captures the change in gender bias
between the first and subsequent year for non-B&E students. As before, Ximc are controls
for student gender, mother's education, high school sector (public, private or voucher), high
school type (mixed, single-sex school and single-sex classroom), and university dummies.
   The interpretation of  as the causal effect of economics training hinges on two key
identifying assumptions. First, there can be no differential selection of students into B&E
across cohorts. This assumption would be violated if the set of students who chose to study


                                              18
economics became less (or more) gender-biased over time. Alternatively, the assumption
could be violated in our sample because of differential non-response across majors and
cohorts. For example, if upperclassmen biased B&E students were more likely to respond
to the survey than less biased ones, we would obtain a spurious difference-in-difference
estimate.
       While it is difficult to completely rule out these possibilities, we provide some evidence
against differential selection. In Table 6 we assess whether there are any differences between
B&E and non-B&E students in background characteristics, and whether they differ across
cohorts. In practice, we estimate a series of difference-in-difference regressions analogous
to equation (1), but where we use each of the background characteristics as the dependent
variable. We find essentially no differences between B&E and non-B&E students in both
cohorts (the only exceptions are for public and private schools), and all the differences-
in-differences coefficients are very close to zero. In sum, at least in terms of observable
characteristics, there is very little evidence of differential selection.33
       The second key assumption is the traditional parallel trends assumption of any difference-
in-differences analysis. In our context, this means that students who choose to major in
economics must not be differentially more likely to become more gender-biased over time,
regardless of which training they actually acquire. One possible way to address this con-
cern is to exploit the institutional features of the Chilean university admission system and
implement an instrumental variable strategy, where actual enrollment in a B&E degree is
instrumented by predicted enrollment based on PSU score and high school GPA and each
student's stated ranking of "careers." The results of this analysis are discussed in Section
4.5.

4.3       Selection or training? Results
Table 7a shows the main results of our differences-in-differences model.34 The first three
columns show, respectively, the gap between B&E and non-B&E freshmen, between B&E
and non-B&E upperclassmen, and the raw difference-in-differences coefficient for all stu-
  33
     In Table A-3 we find some significant differences between freshmen and upperclassmen in background
characteristics. Upperclassmen are more likely to come from a single-sex school (single-sex schools outper-
form coeducational schools in our sample by 0.33 ) and to have higher PSU scores and high school GPAs,
probably reflecting differential attrition of lower ability students. However, the results in Table 6 suggest
that this differential attrition is similar across fields.
  34
     Table A-7 in the appendix reports p-values adjusted for multiple hypotheses testing.



                                                     19
dents in our sample. These regressions include controls for all of the background character-
istics, and, in column 3, the interaction of background characteristics with the upperclass
dummy.35
       Among freshmen students, B&E students have significantly higher scores in five of the
individual measures (Hostile, Benevolent, Gender roles-normative, Math, and Skills and
preferences), as well as in the aggregate score. Therefore, there appears to be some evidence
in support of the selection hypothesis. On the other hand, the gaps between B&E and non-
B&E upperclass students are much more pronounced. In addition to the five measures
above-mentioned, the IAT gender-career also displays large differences between B&E and
non-B&E upperclass students.36 The difference-in-differences estimator is positive for all
measures (with the exception of the skills and preferences measure), but never statistically
significant at conventional levels. For the sample as a whole, the evidence in support of the
training hypothesis is somewhat mixed.
       These results, however, mask important differences by gender. Columns 4-6 and 7-9 of
Table 7b show the results of estimating equation (1) separately for men and women. For
women, there is some evidence of selection: economics students are more gender-biased upon
entry, and the gap increases at most moderately in subsequent years. For male students,
on the other hand, we observe a moderate-sized but insignificant gap in the aggregate score
at entry, a large and statistically significant gap among upperclassmen, and a large and
statistically significant difference-in-differences estimate. This result seems to be driven by
the effect of studying economics on benevolent sexism and the belief that the gender pay gap
is due to discrimination, although only the benevolent sexism measure remains statistically
significant after adjusting for multiple hypotheses testing (A-7). The combined evidence
from this section suggests that B&E students are more gender-biased in part because of
differences that were already present upon entry; but, especially for men, exposure to
economics increases the degree of bias.
       Our results could be due not to any particular feature of B&E training, but rather
to some other major that causes students to become less gender biased. Therefore, we re-
estimate equation 1 excluding one major at a time from the list shown in Table 2. Figure A-1
  35
      To maximize sample size, we retain all observations with valid data, including students in the follow-up
survey in Waves 4 and 5, but treat these as if they were independent observations. Results are essentially
unchanged if we discard these observations.
   36
      The difference in the math measure is larger than for first year students but it is no longer statistically
significant.



                                                       20
shows the results of studying B&E on the aggregate score for first year students, upperclass
students, and the difference-in-difference estimate. Results for male and female students
are shown in Figures A-2 and A-3 respectively. The results for male students show that
the treatment effect of studying B&E is not driven by a particular major: the difference-in-
difference coefficient is always positive and statistically significant, ranging from 0.126 to
0.253 standard deviations. For female students, the effect is never statistically significant.

4.4       Robustness check: Within Subject analysis
The interpretation of the difference in difference coefficient as a causal effect in the between-
subject analysis rests in the assumption that there are no differences in selection into B&E
across cohorts. While the results in Table 6 show that we can rule out differential selection
in terms of observable characteristics, it is still possible that there are differences in selection
into B&E in non-observable characteristics.
       To address these concerns, we conducted a follow-up study for a subset of our sample.
We use this longitudinal data to perform a within-subject analysis. As explained before, in
October 2018 and May 2019 we contacted 823 students who were interviewed in the pilot
survey and in March 2018 respectively, and invited them to answer a follow-up survey. Our
response rate for the follow-up survey was 39%. This results in a panel data set for 321
students.37 Of these 321 students, 23% study economics, 26% study engineering, 16% study
accounting and 14% study law.
       We thus modify model (1) to include a student fixed effect i ,

                       yimc =  + B &Eimc + U pperclassmenimc +
                              B &E × U pperclassmenimc + i + imc                                (2)

where B&E and Upperclassmen are defined as before. This model is estimated in first
differences.
       The response rate was lower for economic students (30%) compared to non-economics
students (43%). The response rates was also lower for men compared to women: 35% versus
44%. Given the high attrition rate across waves, it is important to check that attrition is not
related to underlying gender attitudes, and that it does not differ between B&E and non-
  37
   The total number of students who answered our follow-up survey was 376. There were 55 individuals
who either answered only the follow-up survey or who we were unable to match.



                                                21
B&E students. Using the full sample of students for which we have the average score in the
pilot study and the third wave, we estimate a linear probability model for the probability
of follow-up, regressed on the aggregate gender-bias score in the first wave, a dummy for
B&E, and the interaction between the two.
    The results are presented in Table A-4. B&E students are less likely to answer the follow-
up, and there is a mild and significant negative association between the gender-bias score
and the probability of follow-up. However, and more importantly, there is no significant
effect of the interaction between the gender-bias score and the difference between economics
and non-economics students.
    Even though we do not observe selective attrition in our sample, there could still be
unobservable characteristics affecting the response rate of students in our sample differen-
tially, depending on whether they study B&E. To alleviate this concern, we use a Heckman
selection model (Heckman, 1979) to correct for attrition bias in the model with student
fixed effects. The selection equation includes a dummy for whether the student is enrolled
in Business & Economics (B&E), the score in either wave 0 or 3, and a dummy for whether
the student gave his/her contact phone number.38
    We proceed to estimate the effect of Business and Economics for students in our panel.
Results are shown in Table 8a.39 As before, the first three columns show, respectively, the
gap between B&E and non B&E freshmen, between B&E and non B&E upperclassmen,
and the difference-in-difference coefficient without including student fixed effects. The first
two columns include controls for all the background characteristics, and in column 3, the
interaction of the background characteristics with the upperclass dummy. This column is
equivalent to column 3 of Table 7a, for the limited sample of students that we can follow
longitudinally. Column 4 shows the difference-in-difference coefficient of the model with
student fixed effects (and no controls). Finally, Column 5 shows the difference-in-difference
coefficient of the model with student fixed effects and a Heckman correction for attrition.
    The gap between B&E and non-B&E freshmen, and between B&E and non B&E upper-
classmen is smaller in the longitudinal sample than in the whole sample. In Table 7a both
first year and upperclassmen B&E students had a statistically significant coefficient on the
aggregate score, of 0.11 and 0.20 s.d. respectively. In the longitudinal sample, the difference
  38
     Students were asked to give their contact email to participate in the follow-up. In addition, in wave 3
we asked them to give their phone number, which 75% of them did.
  39
     Table A-8 in the appendix reports p-values adjusted for multiple hypotheses testing.




                                                    22
between B&E and non B&E freshmen, and between B&E and non B&E upperclassmen is
no longer significant. However, the difference-in-difference coefficient in the model with stu-
dent fixed effects is similar: 0.092 versus 0.112 . When controlling for selection (column
5), the results show a positive and statistically significant difference-in-difference effect on
the aggregate gender-bias score, which is driven mostly by the math, discrimination and
skills and preferences measures.40 Compared to the previous results, the effect is similar in
magnitude to the difference between B&E and non B&E students ­regardless of their year
of study­, reported in Table 5 (0.1792 versus 0.1442 ).
       To explore whether there are differences by gender, columns 6-7 and 8-9 of Table 8b show
the results of estimating our models separately for men ad women. Overall, our results are
broadly consistent in sign and magnitude with the between-subject analysis, but less precise.
For male students, while in the between-subject analysis we found a difference-in-difference
coefficient of 0.183 s.d., the coefficient for male students in the within-subject analysis,
after controlling for selection, is 0.197 s.d. For female students, although the difference-in-
difference coefficient for the principal component is not significant in any specification, the
coefficient in the longitudinal sample is similar in magnitude to the effect found for men.41
       It is interesting to note that two of the measures where we find the largest effect in this
sample are the ones in which respondents are asked to evaluate the relative importance
of various explanations for the gender wage gap ("discrimination" and "skills and prefer-
ences"). These measures are perhaps the ones for which the definition of "gender-bias" is
most controversial. One possible interpretation of this result is that economics students
internalize the view that a gender gap in wages is not necessarily only due to labor market
discrimination. We caution against pushing too hard on this interpretation: First, we ob-
tain this result only in the longitudinal sample, but not in the larger full sample. Second,
not all the results remain statistically significant after adjusting for multiple hypothesis
testing (Table A-8 in the appendix).

4.5       More robustness checks: IV analysis
As discussed before, a key assumption for any difference-in-difference analysis is the parallel
  40
      We also calculated Lee bounds (Lee, 2009). Our bounds contain zero so the positive treatment effect
is not robust to this procedure, which is expected given the high levels of attrition.
   41
      In columns 5, 7 and 9 we have restricted the sample to include students who gave contact information
(email or phone number). Results are similar in magnitude and significance if we also include students who
were not contacted for the follow-up.



                                                   23
trends assumption. In our setting, it is possible that students who chose to study economics
had a higher propensity to be "indoctrinated" and become more gender-biased over time, re-
gardless of which training they actually acquire. The within-subject analysis is not sufficient
to reject this possibility. Instead, we address this concern using an instrumental variable
strategy that exploits the features of the centralized admission system in Chile to generate
quasi-experimental variation in enrollment into economics (Pop-Eleches and Urquiola, 2013;
Lucas and Mbiti, 2014; Kirkeboen, Leuven, and Mogstad, 2016; Zimmerman, 2019).
       Specifically, we use information on the PSU score, the high school GPA and the student's
ranking of major-college combinations to construct an instrument for B&E enrollment.
First, we restrict the sample to include only students who listed at least one B&E major
in their ranking of careers. For each of these students, we construct the variable "Above
cutoff score" as a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the student's admission score
is greater than the cutoff score of the lowest ranked B&E department within her choice
set. We then use this variable as an instrument for actual B&E enrollment in a 2SLS
regression, separately for first-year and upperclass students.42 It is easy to see that this
instrument satisfies the relevance condition: to be enrolled in a B&E program, one needs
(in general) to have a score higher than the cutoff. However, the instrument does not
predict B&E enrollment perfectly: it is possible for a student to have a score below the
cutoff and still be admitted to a B&E program (this is a relatively small group that may
include student-athletes or students who are given preferential treatment by universities
because they come from disadvantaged schools or backgrounds); or, more commonly, a
student may have ranked a different major above B&E and had a sufficiently high score to
be admitted to both. The key identifying assumption is that, conditional on applying to an
economics program, whether one's score is above or below the cutoff of the lowest ranked
program she applied to is uncorrelated with any unobserved propensity to become more
gender-biased. For this reason, all regressions also include the cutoff score of the lowest
ranked B&E program one applied to as a control variable.
       The results of the IV regression are presented in Table 9. We focus first on the results for
the whole sample (Panel A). Despite a relatively strong first stage, the 2SLS estimates are
  42
    The logic of this instrument is similar to that of a Regression Discontinuity (RD) design that compares
students just above and just below the admission threshold. Given the size of our sample, we do not have
enough power to implement a traditional RD design. The 2SLS strategy can be thought of as a special
case of the RD design where we fit a polynomial of degree zero to the running variable on both sides of the
threshold, and we allow an infinite bandwidth.



                                                    24
highly imprecise. The point estimates, taken at face value, indicate a large negative rela-
tionship between B&E and gender bias among first year students, which becomes substan-
tially weaker among upperclass students. The point estimate for the difference-in-difference
coefficients is about two thirds of a standard deviation, substantially larger than the corre-
sponding estimate in Table 7a. The patterns in the male and female samples (Panels B and
C of the table) are broadly similar, pointing to a fairly large difference-in-difference point
estimate, with a large associated standard error. On the whole, the IV results are mostly
inconclusive, but they do not provide much support to the notion that students who choose
B&E are unobservably more likely to become more gender biased (if anything, the contrary
might be true). However, we should exercise caution in drawing these conclusions given the
imprecision of the estimates.


5     Possible Mechanisms
In this section, we analyze possible mediating mechanisms that can give rise to the gap
between B&E and non-B&E students. We examine in turn the role of political ideology
and religiosity, the exposure to female peers and the exposure to female faculty.

5.1    Political ideology and religiosity
As discussed above, previous research has shown that studying economics lowers support for
government intervention in markets, i.e., it moves individuals to the right on the political
spectrum (Hammock, Routon, and Walker, 2016). If support for the right on economic
issues is also accompanied by a more conservative stance on social and gender issues, one
would observe a positive difference-in-differences estimate, which is not directly attributable
to the content matter of economics.
    We measured political ideology in the survey by asking students to indicate where they
would locate themselves in the political spectrum on a 0 to 10 scale, where 0 corresponds
to the left, and 10 corresponds to the right. B&E students, with and average score of 5.2,
are indeed more right-wing than students from other disciplines (average score 4.1).
    Columns 1-3 in Table 10 reproduce the main results from Tables 7a and 7b when using
the aggregate score as the dependent variable. The table reports the coefficient on the B&E
dummy, representing the difference in score among first year students, the coefficient on
the upperclass dummy, and the difference-in-differences coefficient. Columns 4-6 show the


                                              25
effect of studying B&E controlling for political ideology. As expected, right wing ideology
is positively correlated with higher levels of gender bias. A one standard deviation move
to the right on the political ideology scale (i.e., a move of 2.2 points in the left-right scale)
is associated with a 0.4 increase in the gender bias score, about two - thirds the size
of the difference between men and women. Controlling for political ideology substantially
reduces the coefficient on the aggregate gender bias score for both entering students and
upperclassmen. In fact, after controlling for political ideology, B&E students are less gender-
biased at entry, and are only slightly more gender-biased in later years, although these
differences are not statistically significant. However, the difference-in-differences estimate is
essentially unaffected for the whole sample. For male students, the difference-in-differences
estimate is still positive and significant, although slightly smaller (political ideology can
explain 30% of the effect for men). We therefore conclude that, while political ideology can
explain almost the entirety of the gender bias gap between B&E and non-B&E students in
levels, it does not explain the increase in gender bias of B&E students after exposure to
economics.
   Hammock, Routon, and Walker (2016) also shows that students who are more religious
are more likely to choose economics as a field. We therefore ask whether religiosity affects
the gender bias gap between B&E and non B&E students. We measure religiosity in the
survey by asking students to indicate how religious they are on a scale from 1 to 4, where 1
indicates not religious and 4 indicates strongly religious. B&E students in our sample are
more religious than other students, with an average score of 1.8 versus 1.6.
   Columns 7-9 in Table 10 show the effect of studying B&E controlling for religiosity. As
with political ideology, religiosity also correlates with higher levels of gender biases. A one
standard deviation increase in religiosity (i.e., a move of 0.87 points in the scale) is associated
with a 0.22 increase in the gender bias score, about one - third the size of the difference
between men and women. After controlling for religiosity, the gap in bias between B&E
and non-B&E students at the point of entry is no longer significant. However, the extent of
attenuation is not as large as the one induced by the inclusion of political ideology. There
is still a positive and significant gap in later years for male students, even after controlling
for religiosity. Regarding the difference-in-difference estimate, it is unaffected for both male
and female students. Therefore, as was the case for political ideology, religiosity can not
explain away the effect of exposure to economics on gender bias.



                                                26
5.2       Exposure to female peers
Peers can have a significant impact in students' decisions and beliefs (Dasgupta, Scircle,
and Hunsinger, 2015; Finseraas, Johnsen, Kotsadam, and Torsvik, 2016; Dennehy and Das-
gupta, 2017; Crumb, Moore, and Buontempo, 2017; Booth, Cardona-Sosa, and Nolen, 2018;
Bostwick and Weinberg, 2018). We analyze whether exposure to a higher share of female
peers reduces the effect of studying economics on gender biases. To this end, we collected
information on the number of female students for all university/major/cohort cells in our
sample, and interact the share of female students with the B&E dummy, Upperclass, and
the Difference-in-Differences dummy.43
       The results of this exercise are presented in Table 11. Column 1 shows the results for all
students, while columns 2 and 3 shows results for male and female students, respectively.
When including the interaction with the share of female students, we find that having a
larger share of female peers decreases gender bias: moving from the average share of female
students in economics (42%) to gender parity reduces the effect of exposure to economics by
0.12 s.d. The effect is particularly strong among female students, while for male students
the interaction with the share of female students is negative but smaller in magnitude and
not statistically significant.

5.3       Exposure to female faculty
As in the United States and elsewhere, economics is a field with a relatively low representa-
tion of female faculty (Boring and Zignago, 2018). This is also true in our sample. B&E is
the discipline with the lowest percentage of female faculty (14.4%), followed by engineering
(15.1%). All other disciplines have at least 20% of female faculty. Psychology is an outlier
with 51.7% female faculty. Therefore, the lack of female representation, and not economic
training itself, could increase students' gender biases relative to other fields with a higher
percentage of female faculty.
       In the follow up survey, we directly asked students about their exposure to female
instructors. We gave students 4 categories to choose from: fewer than 10% of female
instructors, between 10 and 30%, between 30 and 50%, and more than 50%. We then
collapsed the last two categories into one (more than 30% of female instructors). Table
  43
    The average cohort size for students in first year in our sample is 332.7 students, with a standard
deviation of 225.3, a minimum of 49 students and a maximum of 1,152 students.



                                                  27
12 shows the results of estimating our model where the difference-in-difference coefficient
is interacted with the three categories of exposure to female professors. Our results show
that, for the whole sample, and particularly for women, the effect of exposure to economics
is larger for students who had not been exposed to female instructors.44
       There are at least three possible explanations that could give rise to this result. First,
if female professors are less sexist, results could be driven by students being exposed to
less gender-biased instructors. Even though there is no evidence for the Chilean context,
Carlana (2019) finds, using the same IAT gender-science that we use, that male math
teachers in middle schools in Italy are more gender biased than female teachers.45 Second,
previous research has found that female professors can have a significant effect as role
models (Bettinger and Long, 2005; Dee, 2007; Carrell, Page, and West, 2010; Paredes, 2014).
Finally, we cannot rule out that female professors teach economics differently (Allgood and
Walstad, 2013).


6        Conclusions
In this paper, we have provided direct evidence on the importance of explicit and implicit
biases against women among students in economics relative to other fields. We find that, on
a variety of dimensions, Business and Economics students are substantially more gender-
biased than students in other fields. B&E are somewhat more biased already upon entry,
before exposure to any economics training. The gap becomes substantially more pronounced
among upperclassmen, in particular for male students. We also find that, for a sample of
students that we can follow longitudinally, the bias increases over time. Therefore, our
results suggest that economic training may increase students' biases.
       We motivated this paper by the observation of unequal treatment in academic economics
along seveal different dimensions. Our results are at least suggestive that part of this
unequal treatment may be the result of deep biases that run through the discipline, even
among students at the earliest stages of their training.
       Teaching is maybe the area in which academic economists can have the largest policy
  44
     It is possible that there is also a reverse causality, where students that are more gender biased choose to
have fewer classes with female instructors. However, due to availability of instructors or capacity constrains,
students do not always have the possibility to choose instructors.
  45
     Comparing blind and non-blind scores of students, Lavy (2008) does not find differences between male
and female teachers in secondary schools in Israel.




                                                      28
impact, as they can shape the way of thinking of future leaders in the business and policy
world. Our results suggest that economics instructors should be particularly careful of hid-
den (and not so hidden) biases embedded in the material when teaching.46 Most researchers
are well aware that the "real world" is often a lot more nuanced than what is presented in
the simple models discussed in undergraduate classes, and principles classes in particular.
It is important to share this nuance with the students.
       The results also reveal that part of the difference in gender bias between B&E and
non-B&E students is present already upon entry, before exposure to any economics classes.
Rather than absolving the discipline, this result suggests that economics could do more to
appeal to a broader and more inclusive set of prospective students. Outreach initiatives
that illustrate "what economists really do" may be a step in the right direction.
       Finally, we find evidence that part of the gap between B&E and non-B&E students may
be explained by differential exposure to female peers and professors. Previous literature
has found that economic departments with a greater share of women faculty also have more
female students (Boustan and Langan, 2019). Moreover, Langan (2019) finds that female
department chairs in economic departments reduce gender gaps in tenure and publications
of assistant professors, as well as reducing the gender pay gap. Our results may provide
additional justification for striving to increase the number of women in the discipline.




  46
   Stevenson and Zlotnik (2018) find that women are underrepresented in principles of economics text-
books, either as business leaders, policymakers or economists, and even in fictionalized accounts.



                                                 29
References
Allgood, S., and W. B. Walstad (2013): "How Economists Allocate Time to Teaching
 and Research," The American Economic Review, 103(3), 654­58.
Ash, E., D. L. Chen, and S. Naidu (2019): "Ideas Have Consequences: The Impact of
 Law and Economics on American Justice," Discussion paper, ETH Zurich.
Bayer, A., and C. E. Rouse (2016): "Diversity in the economics profession: A new
 attack on an old problem," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(4), 221­42.
Becker, G. S. (1968): "Discrimination, Economic," in International Encyclopaedia of the
 Social Sciences, ed. by D. L. Sills, vol. 4, pp. 208­210. McMillan and Free Press, New
 York.
         (1971): The Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
         (1991 [1981]): A Treatise on the Family. Harvard University Press.
Bettinger, E. P., and B. T. Long (2005): "Do Faculty Serve as Role Models? The
 Impact of Instructor Gender on Female Students," The American Economic Review,
 95(2), 152­157.
Blanton, H., J. Jaccard, J. Klick, B. Mellers, G. Mitchell, and P. E. Tet-
 lock (2009): "Strong claims and weak evidence: Reassessing the predictive validity of
 the IAT.," Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(3), 567­582.
Booth, A. L., L. Cardona-Sosa, and P. Nolen (2018): "Do single-sex classes affect
 academic achievement? An experiment in a coeducational university," Journal of Public
 Economics, 168, 109­126.
Boring, A. (2017): "Gender biases in student evaluations of teachers," Journal of Public
 Economics, 145, 27­41.
Boring, A., and S. Zignago (2018): "Economics: where are the women?," https://
 blocnotesdeleco.banque-france.fr/en/blog-entry/economics-where-are-women.
Bostwick, V. K., and B. A. Weinberg (2018): "Nevertheless She Persisted? Gender
 Peer Effects in Doctoral STEM Programs," NBER Working Paper 25028.
Boustan, L. P., and A. Langan (2019): "Variation in Women's Success across PhD
 Programs in Economics," The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(1), 23­42.
Cao, J., and M. R. Banaji (2016): "The base rate principle and the fairness principle in
 social judgment," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(27), 7475­7480.
Card, D., S. DellaVigna, P. Funk, and N. Iriberri (2020): "Are Referees and
 Editors in Economics Gender Neutral?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(1),
 269­327.




                                           30
Carlana, M. (2019): "Implicit Stereotypes: Evidence from Teachers' Gender Bias," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(3), 1163­1224.
Carrell, S., M. E. Page, and J. E. West (2010): "Sex and Science: How Professor
 Gender Perpetuates the Gender Gap," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3),
 1101­1144.
Carter, J. R., and M. D. Irons (1991): "Are economists different, and if so, why?,"
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5(2), 171­177.
Ceci, S., D. Ginther, S. Kahn, and W. Williams (2015): "Women in science: The
 path to progress," Scientific American Mind, 26(1), 62­69.
Chari, A., and P. Goldsmith-Pinkham (2017): "Gender Representation in Economics
 Across Topics and Time: Evidence from the NBER Summer Institute," NBER Working
 Paper 23953.
Clarke, D., J. P. Romano, and M. Wolf (2019): "The Romano-Wolf Multiple Hy-
 pothesis Correction in Stata ," IZA Discussion Paper 12845.
Crumb, C. R., C. Moore, and J. Buontempo (2017): "Shifting STEM Stereotypes?
 Considering the Role of Peer and Teacher Gender," Journal of Research on Adolescence,
 27(3), 492­505.
Dasgupta, N., M. M. Scircle, and M. Hunsinger (2015): "Female peers in small
 work groups enhance women's motivation, verbal participation, and career aspirations in
 engineering," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(16), 4988­4993.
Dee, T. S. (2007): "Teachers and the Gender Gaps in Student Achievement," Journal of
 Human Resources, XLII(3), 528­554.
Dennehy, T. C., and N. Dasgupta (2017): "Female peer mentors early in college in-
 crease women's positive academic experiences and retention in engineering," Proceedings
 of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(23), 5964­5969.
Dupas, P., A. Modestino, M. Niederle, and J. Wolfers (2020): "Gender and the
 Dynamics of Economics Seminars," Discussion paper, Stanford University.
Dynan, K. E., and C. E. Rouse (1997): "The Underrepresentation of Women in Eco-
 nomics: A Study of Undergraduate Economics Students," The Journal of Economic
 Education, 28(4), 350­368.
Emerson, T. L. N., K. McGoldrick, and K. J. Mumford (2012): "Women and the
 Choice to Study Economics," The Journal of Economic Education, 43(4), 349­362.
Finseraas, H., A. A. Johnsen, A. Kotsadam, and G. Torsvik (2016): "Exposure
  to female colleagues breaks the glass ceiling--Evidence from a combined vignette and
  field experiment," European Economic Review, 90, 363­374.




                                          31
Forscher, P. S., C. K. Lai, J. R. Axt, C. R. Ebersole, M. Herman, P. G.
 Devine, and B. A. Nosek (2019): "A meta-analysis of procedures to change implicit
 measures," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 117(3), 522­559.
Frank, R. H., T. Gilovich, and D. T. Regan (1993): "Does studying economics
 inhibit cooperation?," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7(2), 159­171.
Gatto, J., M. Dambrun, C. Kerbrat, and P. De Oliveira (2010): "Prejudice in
 the police: On the processes underlying the effects of selection and group socialisation,"
 European Journal of Social Psychology, 40(2), 252­269.
Ginther, D. K., and S. Kahn (2004): "Women in economics: Moving up or falling off
 the academic career ladder?," Journal of Economic perspectives, 18(3), 193­214.
         (2014): "Academic women's careers in the social sciences," in The economics
  of economists: Institutional setting, individual incentives, and future prospects, ed. by
  A. Lanteri, and J. Vromen, pp. 285­315. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Glick, P., and S. T. Fiske (1996): "The ambivalent sexism inventory: Differentiating
 hostile and benevolent sexism.," Journal of personality and social psychology, 70(3), 491­
 512.
Glover, D., A. Pallais, and W. Pariente (2017): "Discrimination as a Self-Fulfilling
 Prophecy: Evidence from French Grocery Stores," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 132(3), 1219­1260.
Goldin, C. (2015): "Gender and the Undergraduate Economics Major: Notes on the
 Undergraduate Economics Major at a Highly Selective Liberal Arts College," Discussion
 paper, Harvard University.
Greenwald, A. G., D. E. McGhee, and J. L. Schwartz (1998): "Measuring individ-
 ual differences in implicit cognition: the implicit association test.," Journal of personality
 and social psychology, 74(6), 1464­80.
Grossbard, S., T. Yilmazer, and L. Zhang (2018): "The Gender Gap in Citations:
 Lessons from Demographic Economic Journals," Discussion Paper 2018-078, HCEO
 Working Paper.
Haley, H., and J. Sidanius (2005): "Person-organization congruence and the mainte-
 nance of group-based social hierarchy: A social dominance perspective," Group Processes
 & Intergroup Relations, 8(2), 187­203.
Hammock, M. R., P. W. Routon, and J. K. Walker (2016): "The Opinions of
 Economics Majors before and after Learning Economics," The Journal of Economic Ed-
 ucation, 47(1), 76­83.
Heckman, J. J. (1979): "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error," Econometrica,
 47(1), 153­161.




                                              32
Hengel, E. (2017): "Publishing while Female. Are women held to higher standards?
 Evidence from peer review," Cambridge Working Papers in Economics 1753, Faculty of
 Economics, University of Cambridge.
Hospido, L., and C. Sanz (2019): "Gender Gaps in the Evaluation of Research: Evidence
 from Submissions to Economics Conferences," IZA Discussion Paper 12494.
Inglehart, R. F., and P. Norris (2016): "Trump, Brexit, and the Rise of Populism:
  Economic Have-Nots and Cultural Backlash," Discussion Paper RWP16-026, Harvard
  Kennedy School.
Kirkeboen, L. J., E. Leuven, and M. Mogstad (2016): "Field of Study, Earnings,
 and Self-Selection," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(3), 1057­1111.
Langan, A. (2019): "Female Managers and Gender Disparities: The Case of Academic
 Department Chairs," Discussion paper, Princeton University.
Larroulet Vignau, C., and M. d. l. L. Domper (2006): "La enseñanza de economía y
 administración en las instituciones de educación superior," Discussion paper, Universidad
 del Desarrollo, School of Business and Economics.
Lavy, V. (2008): "Do gender stereotypes reduce girls' or boys' human capital outcomes?
  Evidence from a natural experiment," Journal of Public Economics, 92(10-11), 2083­
  2105.
Lee, D. S. (2009): "Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on
  Treatment Effects," The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 1071­1102.
Lopez Bohle, S., and L. Paredes Rojas (2007): "Análisis exploratorio de los planes
 de estudio de Ingeniería Comercial en Chile," Pensamiento & Gestión, 23, 58­71.
Lucas, A. M., and I. M. Mbiti (2014): "Effects of School Quality on Student Achieve-
 ment: Discontinuity Evidence from Kenya," American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
 nomics, 6(3), 234­63.
Lundberg, S. (2018): "Report: Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics
 Profession (CSWEP)," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108, 704­21.
          (ed.) (2020): Women in Economics. CEPR Press.
Lundberg, S., and J. Stearns (2019): "Women in Economics: Stalled Progress," Jour-
 nal of Economic Perspectives, 33(1), 3­22.
Mankiw, N. G. (2011): Principles of Economics. South-Western College Pub; 6th edition.
McConnell, A. R., and J. M. Leibold (2001): "Relations among the Implicit Associa-
 tion Test, Discriminatory Behavior, and Explicit Measures of Racial Attitudes," Journal
 of Experimental Social Psychology, 37(5), 435­442.
        (2009): "Weak criticisms and selective evidence: Reply to Blanton et al. (2009),"
  Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(3), 583­589.


                                           33
Mengel, F., J. Sauermann, and U. Zölitz (2019): "Gender Bias in Teaching Evalu-
 ations," Journal of the European Economic Association, 17(2), 535­566.
Mudde, C. (2007): Populist Radical Right Parties in Europe. Cambridge University Press.
Norris, P. (2005): Radical Right: Voters and Parties in the Electoral Market. Cambridge
 University Press.
OECD (2018): Education at a Glance 2018: OECD Indicators. OECD Publishing, Paris.
Paredes, V. (2014): "A teacher like me or a student like me? Role model versus teacher
  bias effect," Economics of Educacion Review, 39, 38­49.
Pop-Eleches, C., and M. Urquiola (2013): "Going to a Better School: Effects and
 Behavioral Responses," The American Economic Review, 103(4), 1289­1324.
Porter, C., and D. Serra (forthcoming): "Gender differences in the choice of major:
 The importance of female role models," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Romano, J. P., and M. Wolf (2005a): "Exact and Approximate Stepdown Methods for
 Multiple Hypothesis Testing," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 100(469),
 94­108.
         (2005b): "Stepwise Multiple Testing as Formalized Data Snooping," Econometrica,
  73(4), 1237­1282.
Rooth, D.-O. (2010): "Automatic associations and discrimination in hiring: Real world
 evidence," Labour Economics, 17, 523­534.
Rubinstein, A. (2006): "A Sceptic's Comment on the Study of Economics," The Economic
 Journal, 116(510), C1­C9.
Samuelson, P., and W. Nordhaus (2009): Economics. McGraw-Hill Education; 19th
  edition.
Sarsons, H. (2017): "Recognition for Group Work: Gender Differences in Academia,"
  American Economic Review, 107(5), 141­45.
Siegfried, J. J. (2014): "Trends in Undergraduate Economics Degrees, 1991­2013," The
  Journal of Economic Education, 45(4), 387­391.
Stevenson, B., and H. Zlotnik (2018): "Representations of Men and Women in Intro-
  ductory Economics Textbooks," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108, 180­85.
Vigneau, E., and E. Qannari (2003): "Clustering of variables around latent compo-
  nents," Communications in Statistics-Simulation and Computation, 32(4), 1131­1150.
Williams, W. M., and S. J. Ceci (2015): "National hiring experiments reveal 2: 1 fac-
 ulty preference for women on STEM tenure track," Proceedings of the National Academy
 of Sciences, p. 201418878.



                                           34
Wolfers,     J.    (2015):     "How    Economists   Came     to   Dominate
 the       Conversation,"       https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/24/upshot/
 how-economists-came-to-dominate-the-conversation.html.
Wu, A. (2018): "Gender Stereotype in Academia: Evidence from Economics Job Market
 Rumors Forum," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108, 175­179.
Zafar, B. (2013): "College Major Choice and the Gender Gap," Journal of Human Re-
  sources, 48(3), 545­595.
Zimmerman, S. D. (2019): "Elite Colleges and Upward Mobility to Top Jobs and Top
  Incomes," The American Economic Review, 109(1), 1­47.




                                       35
Figures

                       Figure 1: Gender attitudes in OECD countries


                 Turkey                                                                        0.682
            South Korea                                                                0.462
                 Poland                                                              0.440
                 Mexico                                                    0.326
          OECD average                                               0.293
                   Chile                                           0.266
           United States                                    0.232
                  Spain                                     0.231
           New Zealand                                     0.218
                Sweden                                     0.213
               Australia                                0.193
               Germany                             0.156
                  Japan                          0.142
               Slovenia                         0.125
            Netherlands            0.058


                           0                .2              .4                 .6             .8
                               % of respondents under 25 who agree/strongly agree with statement
                                        When a mother works for pay, the children suffer



                Turkey                                                                                 0.559
                 Japan                                                       0.266
                Poland                                              0.214
              Germany                                        0.181
           South Korea                                     0.165
      OECD average                                       0.158
                Mexico                                  0.149
                  Chile                         0.102
          United States                   0.080
                 Spain                  0.059
               Sweden                  0.053
              Australia          0.029
           New Zealand          0.017
           Netherlands         0.016
               Slovenia        0.009


                          0                     .2                   .4                     .6
                            % of respondents under 25 who agree/strongly agree with statement
                           When jobs are scarce, men should have more right to a job than women




                                                                      36
    Figure 2: Students enrolled in Higher Education and in Business and Economics




                                                                 800




                                                                                                                                             .1
                         Number of Students in Higher Ed (1,000)




                                                                                                                                                                        .08
                                                                                                                                               % students enrolled in B&E
                                                      600




                                                                                                                                                               .06
                                          400




                                                                                                                                                      .04
                              200




                                                                                                                                             .02
                                               0




                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                       2005   2007      2009        2011          2013       2015     2017
                                                                                                    year

                                                                                Students enrolled in all fields                % in B&E




Figure 3: Number of students and percentage of female students in Business and Economics
                                              50




                                                                                                                                             1
                         Students enrolled in B&E (1,000)
                                                      40




                                                                                                                                             .8
                                                                                                                                             % of women in B&E
                                             30




                                                                                                                                                         .6
                                   20




                                                                                                                                                 .4
                           10




                                                                                                                                             .2
                                              0




                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                       2005   2007      2009        2011          2013       2015     2017
                                                                                                    year

                                                                              Students enrolled in B&E                   % of women in B&E




                                                                                         37
                                                               Figure 4: Survey timeline

2017                                                                                                         2018
Jan    Feb     Mar   Apr                    May          Jun    Jul   Aug      Sep     Oct    Nov     Dec    Jan     Feb      Mar   Apr      May




   Pilot                  Wave 1                                               Wave 2                                              Wave 3
First year              First year                                        Upper class students                                  First year
1 University           7 Universities                                       7 Universities                                      7 Universities
No incentives          No incentives                                        Movie tickets                                       Movie tickets
Registration Day       Email                                                Email                                               Email


                                                                      2019
Jun    Jul     Aug   Sep                      Oct        Nov   Dec    Jan      Feb     Mar    Apr     May    Jun




                             Wave 4                                                                      Wave 5
                      Upper class students                                                             Upper class students
                      Follow-up to Wave 0                                                              Follow-up to Wave 3
                      Movie tickets                                                                    2 iPads
                      Email                                                                            Email & WhatsApp




                               Figure 5: Trends in Score (principal component)
                                         .2
                           Score (principal component)
                           -.4        -.2-.6    0




                             1 (2017Sem1) 2 (2017Sem2) 3 (2018Sem1) 4 (2018Sem2) 5 (2019Sem1)
                                                           Wave

                                                                      First year             Upper class




                                                                                38
                               Figure 6: Trends in Hostile Sexism




              .2
              0
Hostile Sexism
 -.4      -.2 -.6
              -.8




  1 (2017Sem1) 2 (2017Sem2) 3 (2018Sem1) 4 (2018Sem2) 5 (2019Sem1)
                                Wave

                                         First year    Upper class




                     Figure 7: Trends in Gender and Science IAT
              .4          .2
   Gender and Science IAT
-.4     -.2   -.60




  1 (2017Sem1) 2 (2017Sem2) 3 (2018Sem1) 4 (2018Sem2) 5 (2019Sem1)
                                Wave

                                         First year    Upper class




                                                  39
Tables

               Table 1: Number of Students and Fraction B&E by University


       Wave:                      0-1        2           3         4          5      Total
       Date:                   Jan-Jul    Aug-Nov Mar-May Oct-Nov          May-Jun
                                 2017      2017        2018      2018       2019
       First year/Upperclass: First year Upperclass First year Upperclass Upperclass
       Follow up:                  -         -           -         0          3
                                  (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)      (6)
       University 1                453         670         443        34           201      1,801
                                 [26.05]     [23.28]     [19.86]    [58.82]      [17.41]   [23.15]
       University 2                 97         200          45                      17       359
                                 [39.18]     [56.00]      [2.22]                  [5.88]   [42.34]
       University 3                 86         182          26                      11       305
                                  [9.30]     [18.68]     [53.85]                 [45.45]   [20.00]
       University 4                102         175         131                      47       455
                                 [30.39]     [23.43]     [32.82]                 [38.30]   [29.23]
       University 5                 45          31          11                      1         88
                                 [15.56]     [38.71]      [0.00]                  [0.00]   [21.59]
       University 6                 86         145          97                      28       356
                                 [18.60]      [8.97]     [16.49]                  [7.14]   [13.20]
       University 7                 47         107          93                      27       274
                                 [48.94]     [36.45]     [31.18]                 [22.22]   [35.40]
       Other universities           49          18           5                      13       85
                                 [63.27]     [38.89]      [0.00]                  [7.69]   [45.88]
       Total                       965        1,528        851        34           345      3,723
                                 [28.19]     [27.09]     [22.44]    [58.82]      [19.71]   [25.92]

Notes: First year includes students enrolled in first year, while Upperclass includes students enrolled in
years 2 to 6. Wave 4 corresponds to a follow-up to students surveyed in wave 0 and wave 5 corresponds to a
follow-up to students surveyed in wave 3. The percentage of students in Business & Economics is presented
in square brackets.




                                                   40
                Table 2: Number and Percentage of Students by Field of Study


       Wave:                      0-1        2           3         4          5             Total
       Date:                   Jan-Jul    Aug-Nov Mar-May Oct-Nov          May-Jun
                                 2017      2017        2018      2018       2019
       First year/Upperclass: First year Upperclass First year Upperclass Upperclass
       Follow up:                  -         -           -         0          3
                                  (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)             (6)
        Accounting                 131         137         125         13           37       443
                                 [13.58]      [8.97]     [14.69]    [38.24]      [10.72]    [11.9]
        Economics                  272         414         191         20           68       965
                                 [28.19]     [27.09]     [22.44]    [58.82]      [19.71]   [25.92]
        Engineering                207         482         190          1           93       973
                                 [21.45]     [31.54]     [22.33]     [2.94]      [26.96]   [26.13]
        Law                         85         172         108          0           53       418
                                  [8.81]     [11.26]     [12.69]     [0.00]      [15.36]   [11.23]
        Other                      180         163         143          0           62       548
                                 [18.65]     [10.67]     [16.80]     [0.00]      [17.97]   [14.72]
        Psychology                  34          69          18          0           9        130
                                  [3.52]      [4.52]      [2.12]     [0.00]       [2.61]    [3.49]
        Sciences                    56          91          76          0           23       246
                                  [5.80]      [5.96]      [8.93]     [0.00]       [6.67]    [6.61]

        Total                     965        1,528        851          34         345       3,723
                                [100.00]    [100.00]    [100.00]    [100.00]    [100.00]   [100.00]

Notes: First year includes students enrolled in first year, while Upperclass includes students enrolled in
years 2 to 6. Wave 4 corresponds to a follow-up to students surveyed in wave 0 and wave 5 corresponds to
a follow-up to students surveyed in wave 3. The percentage of students in each field of study is presented
in square brackets.




                                                   41
                                                                       Table 3: Correlation matrix


                                             (1)        (2)      (3)     (4)          (5)         (6)             (7)                 (8)                    (9)
                                        Gender and Gender and Hostile Benevolent Gender roles Gender roles Gender differences Gender pay gap due Gender pay gap due
                                        science IAT career IAT Sexism  Sexism     traditional  proactive       in math         to discrimination to skills and preferences
     Gender and science                       1
     IAT

     Gender and career                        -         1
     IAT

     Hostile Sexism                       0.0659     0.118         1


     Benevolent Sexism                     0.0414    0.0887     0.609        1


     Gender roles,                         0.0382    0.0904     0.567     0.542          1
     traditional
42




     Gender roles,                        0.0609     0.0754     0.367     0.293       0.361           1
     proactive

     Gender differences                  0.0902      0.0699     0.444     0.359       0.424        0.254             1
     in math

     Gender pay gap due                    0.0412    0.0681     0.287     0.194       0.279        0.426          0.186                 1
     to discrimination

     Gender pay gap due                    0.0207     0.0235    0.277     0.194       0.206       0.0791          0.166              -0.0557                  1
     to skills and preferences

     Score                                0.142      0.194      0.764     0.690       0.796        0.656          0.653              0.547                 0.337


                                   
        p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001
                     Table 4: Difference between male and female students


                Sample:                 Female students Male Students        Difference
                                              (1)            (2)           (3)        (4)
                IATscience                  -0.115           0.128       0.243*      0.199
                                                                         (0.130)    (0.163)
                IATcareer                   -0.016           0.019         0.035     0.055
                                                                         (0.045)    (0.047)
                Hostile                     -0.286           0.298      0.584***   0.586***
                                                                         (0.038)    (0.045)
                Benevolent                  -0.254           0.265      0.518***   0.522***
                                                                         (0.033)    (0.031)
                Roles: traditional          -0.246           0.246      0.493***   0.466***
                                                                         (0.050)    (0.040)
                Roles: normative            -0.212           0.212      0.424***   0.390***
                                                                         (0.032)    (0.047)
                Math                        -0.240           0.253      0.493***   0.495***
                                                                         (0.040)    (0.038)
                Discrimination              -0.230           0.244      0.475***   0.473***
                                                                         (0.033)    (0.046)
                Skill and preferences       0.002           -0.013        -0.015     0.023
                                                                         (0.039)    (0.037)
                Score                       -0.330           0.343      0.673***   0.670***
                                                                         (0.039)    (0.039)
                Observations Score          1,729            1,678        3,407     3,358
                Controls                                                   no        yes

Notes: The sample includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018 and students enrolled
in years 2 to 6 who were surveyed in 2017, 2018 and 2019. Column 1 shows the mean of each dependent
variable for female students and Column 2 shows the mean for male students. In columns 3-4, each coefficient
comes from a separate regression of the dependent variable on a dummy for male students. Controls are
dummies for mother's education, working mother, school type (private, public, voucher), education type
(mixed, single-sex school, single-sex classroom), highschool GPA, college admission test scores (PSU) and
university dummies. Standard errors, clustered at the university/major level, are presented in parentheses.
***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.




                                                     43
                Table 5: Are economic students more sexist than other students?


      Sample:                 B&E students Other Students                   Difference
                                                                 All students       Male      Female
                                  (1)             (2)           (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)
      IATscience                 0.090           -0.036       0.127**      0.050     -0.046    0.184*
                                                              (0.063)    (0.048)    (0.074)    (0.107)
      IATcareer                  0.126           -0.044      0.170***   0.145***   0.231***     0.054
                                                              (0.041)    (0.037)    (0.056)    (0.049)
      Hostile                    0.128           -0.041        0.169    0.147***   0.157**     0.146**
                                                              (0.116)    (0.054)    (0.061)    (0.062)
      Benevolent                 0.146           -0.049       0.194**   0.152***    0.153**   0.157***
                                                              (0.091)    (0.052)    (0.070)    (0.056)
      Roles: traditional         0.067           -0.022        0.089       0.057      0.074     0.063
                                                              (0.086)    (0.049)    (0.052)    (0.061)
      Roles: normative           0.135           -0.046       0.181**    0.110**    0.119**   0.114**
                                                              (0.072)    (0.041)    (0.055)    (0.052)
      Math                       0.114           -0.038       0.152**      0.102    0.168**      0.075
                                                              (0.062)    (0.062)    (0.079)    (0.046)
      Discrimination             0.009           -0.003        0.012      -0.012     -0.012     -0.015
                                                              (0.066)    (0.044)    (0.067)    (0.039)
      Skill and preferences      0.074           -0.028        0.102    0.105**      0.089*      0.114
                                                              (0.067)    (0.047)    (0.049)    (0.076)
      Score                      0.153           -0.050       0.203*    0.144**     0.169**    0.145**
                                                              (0.107)    (0.063)    (0.070)    (0.071)
      Observations Score          874            2,554         3,428     3,358      1,651      1,707
      Controls                                                  no        yes        yes        yes

Notes: The sample includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018 and students enrolled
in years 2 to 6 who were surveyed in 2017, 2018 and 2019. Column 1 shows the mean of each dependent
variable for B&E students students and Column 2 shows the mean for students in other fields. In columns
3-6, each coefficient comes from a separate regression of the dependent variable on a dummy for whether
the student is enrolled in B&E. Controls are female, dummies for mother's education, working mother,
school type (private, public, voucher), education type (mixed, single-sex school, single-sex classroom),
highschool GPA, college admission test scores (PSU) and university dummies. Standard errors, clustered
at the university/major level, are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance
at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.




                                                    44
Table 6: Are there differences in background characteristics between economic and non
           economic students?


                       Sample:                     First year Upperclass Dif-in-Dif
                                                      (1)        (2)        (3)
                       Female student              -0.051         -0.042       0.008
                                                  (0.059)        (0.052)      (0.035)
                       Mother years of schooling    0.262          0.475        0.213
                                                  (0.587)        (0.499)      (0.379)
                       Working mother              -0.027         -0.010        0.016
                                                  (0.033)        (0.028)      (0.026)
                       Single-sex school            0.039          0.013       -0.026
                                                  (0.044)        (0.039)      (0.030)
                       Single-sex classroom         0.012          0.002       -0.010
                                                  (0.010)        (0.003)      (0.008)
                       Coeducational school        -0.056         -0.020        0.036
                                                  (0.053)        (0.039)      (0.035)
                       Public                    -0.077**       -0.102**       -0.025
                                                  (0.038)        (0.049)      (0.052)
                       Private school             0.195*         0.188*        -0.007
                                                  (0.107)        (0.096)      (0.079)
                       Voucher school              -0.120         -0.094        0.026
                                                  (0.080)        (0.069)      (0.043)
                       PSU math                   19.973         22.059         2.086
                                                 (28.293)       (29.162)     (12.209)
                       High school gpa             -0.694          1.995       2.689
                                                 (21.659)       (21.737)      (9.238)
                       Controls                        no          no           no

Notes: First year includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018, while Upperclass includes
students enrolled in years 2 to 6 who were surveyed in 2017, 2018 and 2019. In columns 1 and 2, each
coefficient comes from a separate regression of the dependent variable (specified in each row) on a dummy
for whether the student is enrolled in Business & Economics (B&E). In column 3 each coefficient comes from
a separate regression of the dependent variable on the interaction of B&E and an indicator of Upperclass.
Standard errors, clustered at the university/major level, are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate
statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.




                                                     45
    Table 7a: Economics and gender biases, selection or treatment effect? All students


                                                           All students
                          Sample:               First year Upperclass Dif-in-Dif
                                                   (1)        (2)        (3)
                          IATscience               0.037       0.065        0.028
                                                 (0.066)      (0.055)     (0.061)
                          IATcareer               0.081      0.193***       0.112
                                                 (0.061)      (0.046)     (0.076)
                          Hostile               0.146**       0.168**       0.022
                                                 (0.060)      (0.071)     (0.063)
                          Benevolent             0.123*      0.192***      0.069
                                                 (0.066)      (0.054)     (0.057)
                          Roles: traditional       0.061       0.070       0.009
                                                 (0.055)      (0.062)     (0.063)
                          Roles: normative      0.115***      0.137*        0.022
                                                 (0.039)      (0.071)     (0.073)
                          Math                  0.072**        0.135        0.063
                                                 (0.031)      (0.095)     (0.076)
                          Discrimination          -0.030       0.014        0.044
                                                 (0.049)      (0.059)     (0.064)
                          Skill and preferences 0.119*        0.116*       -0.003
                                                 (0.069)      (0.064)     (0.092)
                          Score                  0.106*      0.199**       0.092
                                                 (0.059)      (0.089)     (0.080)
                          Observations Score       1556        1802        3358
                          Controls                  yes         yes         yes

Notes: First year includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018, while Upperclass includes
students enrolled in years 2 to 6 who were surveyed in 2017, 2018 and 2019. In columns 1, 2, 4, 5,
7 and 8, each coefficient comes from a separate regression of the dependent variable on a dummy for
whether the student is enrolled in Business & Economics (B&E). In columns 3, 6 and 9 each coefficient
comes from a separate regression of the dependent variable on the interaction of B&E and an indicator of
Upperclass. Controls are female, dummies for mother's education, working mother, school type (private,
public, voucher), education type (mixed, single-sex school, single-sex classroom), highschool GPA, college
admission test scores (PSU) and university dummies. Standard errors, clustered at the university/major
level, are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%,
respectively.




                                                     46
Table 7b: Economics and gender biases, selection or treatment effect? Male and female
             students


                                           Male students                      Female students
        Sample:                 First year Upperclass Dif-in-Dif First year Upperclass Dif-in-Dif
                                   (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)
        IATscience                -0.055       -0.053          0.002    0.141     0.243*         0.102
                                 (0.133)      (0.071)        (0.115)   (0.108)    (0.141)       (0.134)
        IATcareer                  0.188     0.263***          0.075    -0.036      0.119         0.155
                                 (0.113)      (0.076)        (0.157)   (0.072)    (0.106)       (0.148)
        Hostile                    0.122     0.222***          0.100   0.161**    0.149*         -0.013
                                 (0.077)      (0.079)        (0.087)   (0.062)    (0.085)       (0.072)
        Benevolent                 0.066     0.263***        0.197**   0.178**    0.145*         -0.034
                                 (0.079)      (0.078)        (0.078)   (0.068)    (0.080)       (0.092)
        Roles: traditional         0.072       0.113           0.040    0.072       0.054        -0.018
                                 (0.057)      (0.070)        (0.073)   (0.074)    (0.078)       (0.091)
        Roles: normative         0.089*       0.170*           0.081   0.152**      0.124        -0.029
                                 (0.053)      (0.086)        (0.086)   (0.061)    (0.078)       (0.078)
        Math                     0.144**      0.195*           0.052    0.019       0.126         0.107
                                 (0.056)      (0.114)        (0.078)   (0.062)    (0.084)       (0.120)
        Discrimination            -0.094        0.069         0.164*    0.022      -0.023        -0.045
                                 (0.060)      (0.093)        (0.086)   (0.058)    (0.067)       (0.095)
        Skill and preferences      0.124        0.066         -0.058    0.089       0.147        0.059
                                 (0.080)      (0.069)        (0.110)   (0.107)    (0.091)       (0.114)
        Score                      0.085     0.269***        0.183**   0.137*       0.172         0.035
                                 (0.065)      (0.092)        (0.074)   (0.079)    (0.109)       (0.121)
        Observations Score         772         879            1651      784        923           1707
        Controls                   yes         yes             yes      yes        yes            yes

Notes: First year includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018, while Upperclass includes
students enrolled in years 2 to 6 who were surveyed in 2017, 2018 and 2019. In columns 1, 2, 4, 5,
7 and 8, each coefficient comes from a separate regression of the dependent variable on a dummy for
whether the student is enrolled in Business & Economics (B&E). In columns 3, 6 and 9 each coefficient
comes from a separate regression of the dependent variable on the interaction of B&E and an indicator of
Upperclass. Controls are female, dummies for mother's education, working mother, school type (private,
public, voucher), education type (mixed, single-sex school, single-sex classroom), highschool GPA, college
admission test scores (PSU) and university dummies. Standard errors, clustered at the university/major
level, are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%,
respectively.




                                                        47
               Table 8a: Gender Bias and Economics - Panel Data, all students


                                                                All
                  Sample:                1st year 2nd Year     DiD     DiD-FD Heckman
                                           (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)    (5)
                  IATscience               0.032  -0.022  -0.054   0.004   -0.052
                                         (0.136) (0.170) (0.212) (0.212) (0.212)
                  IATcareer             0.298*** 0.030 -0.268* 0.179       -0.182
                                         (0.061) (0.128) (0.150) (0.182) (0.306)
                  Hostile                 0.011    0.078   0.067   0.043    0.183
                                         (0.124) (0.093) (0.117) (0.118) (0.144)
                  Benevolent              -0.009   0.143 0.153*    0.057    0.156
                                         (0.080) (0.090) (0.083) (0.142) (0.112)
                  Roles: traditional      -0.018  -0.045  -0.026 -0.134** -0.051
                                         (0.064) (0.070) (0.073) (0.060) (0.074)
                  Roles: normative         0.048   0.036  -0.012 -0.179    -0.092
                                         (0.092) (0.072) (0.151) (0.194) (0.183)
                  Math                    0.084  0.224** 0.140*    0.130  0.204***
                                         (0.060) (0.108) (0.074) (0.080) (0.071)
                  Discrimination        -0.208**   0.083 0.291* 0.229*** 0.318***
                                         (0.088) (0.123) (0.150) (0.075) (0.068)
                  Skill and preferences -0.119     0.058   0.177 0.220** 0.280**
                                         (0.085) (0.125) (0.148) (0.107) (0.141)
                  Score                   -0.071  0.089    0.160   0.112  0.179***
                                         (0.065) (0.109) (0.104) (0.086) (0.065)
                  Observations Score       301        305       606      291        766
                  Controls                 yes        yes       yes      no         no
                  Student FE               no         no        no       yes        yes

Notes: First year includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018, while Second year
includes students enrolled in second year who were surveyed in 2018 and 2019. In columns 1 and 2,
each coefficient comes from a separate regression of the dependent variable on a dummy for whether the
student is enrolled in Business & Economics (B&E). In columns 3-9 each coefficient comes from a separate
regression of the dependent variable on the interaction of B&E and an indicator of Upperclass. Columns
4, 6 and 8 are estimated in first differences. In columns 5, 7 and 9, we use a heckman selection model
to correct for attrition bias in the model with student fixed effect. Variables included in the selection
model are a dummy for whether the student is enrolled in Business & Economics (B&E), the score in
either wave 0 or 3, and a dummy for whether the student gave their contact phone in addition to their
contact email. Controls are female, dummies for mother's education, working mother, school type (private,
public, voucher), education type (mixed, single-sex school, single-sex classroom), highschool GPA, college
admission test scores (PSU) and university dummies. Standard errors, clustered at the university/major
level, are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%,
respectively.




                                                     48
      Table 8b: Gender Bias and Economics - Panel Data, male and female students


                                                Male students        Female students
                      Sample:                DiD-FD Heckman DiD-FD Heckman
                                               (6)    (7)     (8)    (9)
                      IATscience             0.016          -0.069    -0.108     -0.118
                                            (0.317)        (0.278)   (0.246)    (0.271)
                      IATcareer               0.042          0.103     0.296      0.106
                                            (0.236)        (0.252)   (0.208)    (0.332)
                      Hostile                 0.094         0.204     -0.003      0.065
                                            (0.124)        (0.157)   (0.151)    (0.156)
                      Benevolent              0.244        0.328**    -0.109     -0.072
                                            (0.214)        (0.153)   (0.127)    (0.132)
                      Roles: traditional    -0.199*         -0.097    -0.079      0.005
                                            (0.103)        (0.132)   (0.092)    (0.087)
                      Roles: normative       -0.053         -0.004    -0.295     -0.188
                                            (0.164)        (0.194)   (0.212)    (0.180)
                      Math                    0.076          0.106     0.219   0.365***
                                            (0.087)        (0.098)   (0.152)    (0.125)
                      Discrimination          0.183        0.335**   0.248*     0.294**
                                            (0.127)        (0.139)   (0.124)    (0.128)
                      Skill and preferences 0.221**        0.299**     0.217      0.074
                                            (0.101)        (0.133)   (0.170)    (0.202)
                      Score                   0.132        0.197**     0.093      0.167
                                            (0.095)        (0.091)   (0.134)    (0.130)
                      Observations Score        129         383       162        379
                      Controls                  no           no       no         no
                      Student FE                yes          yes      yes        yes

Notes: First year includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018, while Second year
includes students enrolled in second year who were surveyed in 2018 and 2019. In columns 1 and 2,
each coefficient comes from a separate regression of the dependent variable on a dummy for whether the
student is enrolled in Business & Economics (B&E). In columns 3-9 each coefficient comes from a separate
regression of the dependent variable on the interaction of B&E and an indicator of Upperclass. Columns
4, 6 and 8 are estimated in first differences. In columns 5, 7 and 9, we use a heckman selection model
to correct for attrition bias in the model with student fixed effect. Variables included in the selection
model are a dummy for whether the student is enrolled in Business & Economics (B&E), the score in
either wave 0 or 3, and a dummy for whether the student gave their contact phone in addition to their
contact email. Controls are female, dummies for mother's education, working mother, school type (private,
public, voucher), education type (mixed, single-sex school, single-sex classroom), highschool GPA, college
admission test scores (PSU) and university dummies. Standard errors, clustered at the university/major
level, are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%,
respectively.




                                                      49
                        Table 9: Gender Bias and Economics - IV results


                                                  First year Upperclass Dif-in-Dif
                                                     (1)        (2)        (3)
                       Panel A: All students                     2SLS
                       Score                         -0.709      -0.052      0.657
                                                    (0.738)     (0.272)     (0.738)
                                                              First stage
                       Above cutoff score          0.345***    0.413***
                                                    (0.079)     (0.067)
                       F-test                       18.968      38.504
                       Observations                   439         601        1040
                       Panel B: Male students                    2SLS
                       Score                         -0.541      0.417       0.958
                                                    (0.896)     (0.538)     (0.969)
                                                              First stage
                       Above cutoff score          0.423**     0.333***
                                                   (0.176)      (0.111)
                       F-test                       5.742        8.985
                       Observations                   236         298         534
                       Panel C: Female students                  2SLS
                       Score                         -0.866      -0.316      0.550
                                                    (0.887)     (0.230)     (0.852)
                                                              First stage
                       Above cutoff score          0.331***    0.505***
                                                    (0.071)     (0.078)
                       F-test                       21.889      41.729
                       Observations                   203         303         506

Notes: The sample includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018 and students enrolled
in years 2 to 6 who were surveyed in 2017, 2018 and 2019 and that applied to Business and Economics. In
columns 1 and 2 we show the coefficient of an instrumental variable regression of the score on a dummy for
whether the student is enrolled in Business & Economics (B&E), where B&E is instrumented by a dummy
variable that indicates whether the PSU score is above the threshold for getting into B&E. In column 3
we show the coefficient of an instrumental variable regression of the score on the interaction of B&E and
an indicator of Upperclass. Controls are female, dummies for mother's education, working mother, school
type (private, public, voucher), education type (mixed, single-sex school, single-sex classroom), highschool
GPA, college admission test scores (PSU) and university dummies. Standard errors, clustered at the
university/major level, are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the
99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.




                                                    50
                          Table 10: Gender Bias and Economics - Controlling for political ideology and religiosity


                Dependent variable: Score
                Control:                                                            Political ideology                     Religiosity
                Sample:                     All students    Men      Women All students     Men      Women All students         Men      Women
                                                 (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)       (7)             (8)       (9)
                B&E                           0.106*        0.085    0.137*      -0.046     -0.053  -0.010        0.066         0.039   0.107
                                              (0.059)      (0.065)   (0.079)    (0.038)    (0.041) (0.065)       (0.053)      (0.066) (0.077)
                Upperclass                     -0.631       -1.521    -0.376     -0.263     -0.459  -0.351        -0.518       -1.095  -0.158
                                              (0.639)      (0.962)   (0.639)    (0.577)    (0.884) (0.585)       (0.596)      (0.825) (0.622)
                DiD                             0.092      0.183**    0.035      0.078     0.127**   0.040         0.089      0.169*    0.034
                                              (0.080)      (0.074)   (0.121)    (0.068)    (0.062) (0.124)       (0.092)      (0.085) (0.146)
                Control                                                        0.185***   0.238*** 0.136***     0.253***     0.312*** 0.205***
                                                                                (0.012)    (0.021) (0.010)       (0.030)      (0.052) (0.018)
                Upperclass*Control                                               0.016       0.016   0.017        -0.003       -0.005   0.010
                                                                                (0.011)    (0.021) (0.016)       (0.039)      (0.071) (0.042)
                Observations                   3358         1651      1707      3288        1621         1667    3274          1613      1661
51




     Notes: First year includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018, while Upperclass includes students enrolled in years 2 to
     6 who were surveyed in 2017, 2018 and 2019. B&E is an indicator for whether the student is enrolled in Business & Economics and DiD
     is the difference-in-difference coefficient. In columns 1-3, Control corresponds to self-reported political ideology on a 0 to 10 scale, where 0
     corresponds to the left, and 10 corresponds to the right. In columns 4-6, Control corresponds to religiosity, on a scale from 1 to 4, where
     1 indicates not religious and 4 indicates strongly religious. All columns include dummies for mother's education, working mother, school
     type (private, public, voucher), education type (mixed, single-sex school, single-sex classroom), highschool GPA, college admission test scores
     (PSU) and university dummies. Columns 1 and 4 also include controls for female students. Standard errors, clustered at the university/major
     level, are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.
               Table 11: Heterogeneous effects by the share of female students


                   Dependent variable: Score
                   Sample:                             All students    Men      Women
                                                            (1)        (2)       (3)
                   B&E                                      0.081        0.104   -0.140
                                                          (0.330)      (0.356) (0.427)
                   Upperclass                              -0.633       -1.973   -0.219
                                                          (0.808)      (1.177) (0.858)
                   DiD                                    0.671**        0.358 1.057***
                                                          (0.263)      (0.375) (0.332)
                   B&E*Share female students               0.003        -0.085    0.585
                                                          (0.752)      (0.798) (1.009)
                   DiD*Share female students             -1.360**       -0.318 -2.451***
                                                          (0.602)      (0.929) (0.746)
                   Share female students                   -0.568     -1.424**   0.064
                                                          (0.365)      (0.556) (0.332)
                   Upperclass*Share female students       -0.636*       -0.178 -0.872**
                                                          (0.352)      (0.557) (0.386)
                   Observations                            2900        1453      1447

Notes: First year includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018, while Upperclass includes
students enrolled in years 2 to 6 who were surveyed in 2017, 2018 and 2019. B&E is an indicator for whether
the student is enrolled in Business & Economics and DiD is the difference-in-difference coefficient. All
columns include dummies for mother's education, working mother, school type (private, public, voucher),
education type (mixed, single-sex school, single-sex classroom), highschool GPA, college admission test
scores (PSU) and university dummies. Column 1 also include controls for female students. Standard errors,
clustered at the university/major level, are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate statistical
significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.




                                                    52
               Table 12: Heterogeneous effects by the share of female professors


  Dependent Variable: Score
  Sample:                                             All                  Men                   Women
  Model:                                     DiD-FD Heckman DiD-FD Heckman DiD-FD Heckman
                                               (1)    (2)     (3)    (4)     (5)    (6)
  less than 10% female professors         0.198         0.211**     -0.020     -0.023   0.399*** 0.428***
                                        (0.132)         (0.105)    (0.275)    (0.206)    (0.124) (0.121)
  between 10% and 30% female professors 0.133*          0.148**    0.135**    0.133*       0.137   0.173
                                        (0.074)         (0.069)    (0.060)    (0.070)    (0.143) (0.124)
  more than 30% female professors        -0.103          -0.054      0.110     0.152      -0.314  -0.260
                                        (0.063)         (0.053)    (0.092)    (0.100)    (0.206) (0.228)
  Observations                                  283         873      123         441       160        422
  Controls                                      no          no       no          no        no         no
  Student FE                                    yes         yes      yes         yes       yes        yes

Notes: Each column presents the difference-in-difference coefficient interacted with an indicator variable
that takes the value of 1 if students had less than 10% female professors, an indicator variable that takes
the value of 1 if students had between 10% and 30% female professors, and an indicator variable that
takes the value of 1 if students had more than 30% female professors. All columns are estimated in first
differences. In columns 5, 7 and 9, we use a heckman selection model to correct for attrition bias in the
model with student fixed effect. Variables included in the selection model are a dummy for whether the
student is enrolled in Business & Economics (B&E), the score in either wave 0 or 3, and a dummy for
whether the student gave their contact phone in addition to their contact email. Standard errors, clustered
at the student level, are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%,
95% and 90%, respectively.




                                                      53
Appendix
Survey Questions
  · Hostile Sexism: simple average of answer to following questions: (6 point scale, from
    strongly disagree to strongly agree)

      1. Women are easily offended.
      2. Women try to gain power by controlling men.
      3. Women exaggerate the problems they have at work.
      4. Once a woman gets a man to commit to her, she usually tries to control him
         tightly.
      5. When women are beaten or outperformed by men in a fair competition, they
         generally argue they have been discriminated against.

  · Benevolent Sexism: simple average of answer to following questions: (6 point scale,
    from strongly disagree to strongly agree)

      1. Even when a man accomplishes many goals in his life, he can never feel truly
         complete unless he has the love of a woman.
      2. People cannot be truly happy in their lives unless they have a partner of the
         opposite gender.
      3. Every man must have a woman to love.
      4. Men are incomplete without a woman.
      5. Men should be willing to sacrifice their own well-being in order to provide eco-
         nomic stability to women.

  · Gender Roles: Traditional. Simple average of responses to following questions (5
    point scale, from strongly agree to strongly disagree; reversed if appropriate)

      1. A working mother can establish a relationship as warm and solid with their
         children as a non-working mother.
      2. A preschool kid is likely to suffer if his or her mother works.



                                           54
    3. Overall, after considering everything good and bad, family life is likely to be
       negatively affected if the female works full time.
    4. Most women are not interested in having important jobs
    5. Most women are happier staying at home to take care of their children
    6. It is more important for a woman to help her husband than having a career
    7. When it comes to getting a job, men should be prioritized over women for most
       jobs because they have the responsibility of generating an income for their fam-
       ilies
    8. Both men and women must contribute to generating income for the family
    9. Men's job is to make money, whereas women's responsibility is to take care of
       the domestic work and the family.

· Gender Roles: Proactive. Simple average of responses to following questions (5 point
  scale, from strongly agree to strongly disagree)

    1. Men should assume a greater degree of responsibility in domestic work than they
       currently do.
    2. Men should assume a greater degree of responsibility in the care of their children
       than they currently do
    3. Young men should be incentivized to take jobs that are usually done by women
       (nurses, secretaries, etc.)
    4. School counselors should incentivize women to prepare for jobs that are now
       usually done by men.
    5. Schools teach women to aim for less important jobs.

· Gender Differences in Math. Simple average of responses to following questions (5
  point scale, from strongly agree to strongly disagree)

    1. It is possible that men are currently more skilled in maths than women.
    2. In general, men are better than women in maths.




                                         55
· Gender Pay Gap Due to Skills and Preferences. Respondents asked to evaluate how
  important differences in skills/preferences are for explaining gender gap. Simple aver-
  age of responses to following questions (5 point scale, from strongly agree to strongly
  disagree, reversed if appropriate)

    1. Women tend to work in low-wage occupations, in order to have more time to
       spend on other activities.
    2. On average, women tend to be less productive than men in the same task or job.
    3. Women earn lower wages because, on average, they have accumulated fewer years
       of schooling and work experience.
    4. Women do not like to compete for jobs or promotions.
    5. Women prefer jobs with low but safe wages than jobs with higher but more
       uncertain wages.
    6. Women prefer not to work in high-paying jobs because they fear that it will be
       hard for them to find and keep a stable relationship.
    7. Women accept the first wage they are being offered, whereas men tend to nego-
       tiate their wages.

· Gender Pay Gap Due to Discrimination. Simple average of responses to following
  questions (5 point scale, from strongly agree to strongly disagree, reversed if appro-
  priate)

    1. Many qualified women cannot get good jobs; for men with the same qualifications
       it is easier to get them.
    2. How important are the following factors in explaining the gender pay gap? [list
       of factors] On average, either consciously or not, men are favored in negotiations
       for new jobs or promotions.




                                         56
Additional Tables




                    57
                                                        Table A-1: Sample vs. enrolled students


                                              All Students                               B&E Students                 Students in Other Disciplines
                                 Enrolled Sample        Diff.      Diff.     Enrolled Sample     Diff.     Diff.   Enrolled Sample       Diff.      Diff.
                                   (1)      (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)      (6)      (7)       (8)       (9)     (10)        (11)       (12)
        Pecentage female          0.414     0.505      0.091***   0.090***    0.439     0.477   0.038** 0.058***    0.405    0.515      0.111***   0.106***
                                                        (0.010)    (0.010)                       (0.019)  (0.019)                        (0.012)    (0.011)
                                 [40,166]   [2,632]    [42,798]   [42,798]   [10,421]    [708]  [11,129] [11,129] [29,745]   [1,924]    [31,669]   [31,669]
        Mother studied college     0.514     0.566     0.052***     0.008      0.560     0.623 0.063*** -0.031*     0.499     0.546    0.047***      0.015
        or more                                         (0.011)    (0.010)                       (0.020)  (0.018)                        (0.012)    (0.012)
                                 [36,323]   [2,377]    [38,700]   [38,700]   [9,261]     [626]   [9,887]  [9,887] [27,062]   [1,751]    [28,813]   [28,813]
        Father studied college    0.559      0.627     0.068***   0.024**     0.610      0.688 0.078***    -0.006   0.542     0.604     0.063***    0.029**
        or more                                         (0.011)    (0.010)                       (0.021)  (0.018)                        (0.013)    (0.012)
                                 [32,621]   [2,145]    [34,766]   [34,766]   [8,465]     [583]   [9,048]  [9,048] [24,156]   [1,562]    [25,718]   [25,718]
        Working mother            0.499      0.539     0.040***    0.025*     0.497     0.550   0.053**    0.023    0.500     0.535     0.035**      0.024
                                                        (0.013)    (0.013)                       (0.025)  (0.025)                        (0.015)    (0.015)
                                 [27,580]   [1,610]    [29,190]   [29,190]   [7,388]     [431]   [7,819]  [7,819] [20,192]   [1,179]    [21,371]   [21,371]
        Public school              0.243     0.251       0.007     0.016*     0.187     0.187     0.000  0.039***   0.263     0.274       0.011      0.014
58




                                                        (0.009)    (0.009)                       (0.015)  (0.015)                        (0.010)    (0.010)
                                 [40,166]   [2,598]    [42,764]   [42,764]   [10,421]    [694]  [11,115] [11,115] [29,745]   [1,904]    [31,649]   [31,649]
        Voucher school            0.456      0.413    -0.043***     -0.013     0.392     0.334 -0.058***   0.015    0.478     0.441    -0.037***     -0.013
                                                        (0.010)    (0.010)                       (0.019)  (0.018)                        (0.012)    (0.012)
                                 [40,166]   [2,598]    [42,764]   [42,764]   [10,421]    [694]  [11,115] [11,115] [29,745]   [1,904]    [31,649]   [31,649]
        Private school             0.281     0.334     0.053***     0.011      0.401    0.474 0.073*** -0.043*** 0.239        0.283     0.044***     0.014
                                                        (0.009)    (0.008)                       (0.019)  (0.015)                        (0.010)    (0.010)
                                 [40,166]   [2,598]    [42,764]   [42,764]   [10,421]    [694]  [11,115] [11,115] [29,745]   [1,904]    [31,649]   [31,649]
        PSU math                  659.17    680.13     20.96***   7.38***     662.52    694.61 32.09***    3.11*   657.99    674.80    16.81***     7.18***
                                                        (1.580)    (1.259)                       (3.047)  (1.836)                        (1.846)    (1.524)
                                 [40,166]   [2,632]    [42,798]   [42,798]   [10,421]    [708]  [11,129] [11,129] [29,745]   [1,924]    [31,669]   [31,669]
        High school gpa           665.00    682.50    17.50***    6.45***     662.21    684.59 22.38***     -0.93  665.98    681.72     15.75***    8.42***
                                                        (1.537)    (1.273)                       (3.046)  (2.143)                        (1.779)    (1.531)
                                 [40,166]   [2,632]    [42,798]   [42,798]   [10,421]    [708]  [11,129] [11,129] [29,745]   [1,924]    [31,669]   [31,669]
        University FE                                    no         yes                           no       yes                            no         yes

     Notes: Column 1 includes all students enrolled in university-major pairs contacted for this study, including students who answered the
     survey. Column 2 includes students who answered our survey. Columns 3 and 4 show the difference between the previous columns. Columns
     5-8 shows all students enrolled in Business and Economics contacted for this study, students in Business and Economics who answered our
     survey and the difference between the previous samples. Columns 9-12 shows all students enrolled in majors other than B&E contacted for
     this study, students in majors other than B&E who answered our survey and the difference between the previous samples. Standard errors
     are presented in parentheses. Square brackets indicate the number of observations. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%,
     95% and 90%, respectively.
               Table A-2: Descriptive Statistics - Dependent Variables by Wave


                                                          Sample of students                    Difference between samples
                                                 First year               Upperclass                    First year
                                               2017      2018      2017      2018      2019           vs Upperclass
                                                (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)                (6)
 Gender and Science IAT                        0.033     -0.065     0.028    -0.083    -0.060              0.023
                                              (0.998)   (1.055)   (0.994)   (0.985)   (0.908)             (0.047)
                                               [448]      [421]     [718]      [21]     [177]             [1,785]
 Gender and Career IAT                         0.125     -0.024    -0.069    -0.244     0.025            -0.112**
                                              (0.967)   (1.025)   (1.014)   (0.945)   (0.952)             (0.046)
                                               [490]      [413]     [796]      [13]     [167]             [1,879]
 Hostile Sexism                                0.230     -0.001    -0.013    -0.378    -0.468           -0.219***
                                              (0.967)   (0.992)   (1.024)   (0.899)   (0.808)             (0.034)
                                               [858]      [782]   [1,515]      [32]     [333]             [3,520]
 Benevolent Sexims                             0.223      0.018    -0.053    -0.188    -0.343           -0.232***
                                              (1.051)   (1.018)   (0.970)   (1.013)   (0.819)             (0.034)
                                               [859]      [782]   [1,516]      [32]     [333]             [3,522]
 Gender roles, traditional                     0.213      0.028    -0.088    -0.172    -0.223           -0.240***
                                              (1.012)   (1.016)   (0.980)   (0.839)   (0.926)             (0.033)
                                               [931]      [837]   [1,528]      [34]     [344]             [3,674]
 Gender Roles Proactive                        0.283      0.055    -0.126     0.129    -0.338           -0.335***
                                              (0.924)   (0.992)   (1.004)   (1.248)   (0.979)             (0.033)
                                               [930]      [836]   [1,528]      [34]     [344]             [3,672]
 Gender differences in math                    0.066     -0.109     0.089     0.031    -0.295              0.035
                                              (0.982)   (0.964)   (1.041)   (0.939)   (0.886)             (0.033)
                                               [930]      [834]   [1,513]      [34]     [344]             [3,655]
 Gender pay gap due to discrimination          0.076      0.044    -0.016    -0.156    -0.219           -0.116***
                                              (0.979)   (1.013)   (1.006)   (0.872)   (0.980)             (0.033)
                                               [927]      [826]   [1,528]      [33]     [344]             [3,658]
 Gender pay gap due to skills and preferences 0.112      -0.036    -0.049    -0.108     0.007            -0.082**
                                              (0.998)   (1.059)   (0.962)   (0.940)   (1.026)             (0.034)
                                               [878]      [785]   [1,510]      [32]     [340]             [3,545]
 Score                                         0.261      0.018    -0.058    -0.122    -0.421           -0.271***
                                              (0.959)   (0.991)   (1.006)   (1.050)   (0.913)             (0.034)
                                               [842]      [750]   [1,475]      [31]     [330]             [3,428]

Notes: First year students includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018, while Upperclass
includes students enrolled in years 2 to 6 who were surveyed in 2017, 2018 and 2019. Columns 1-5 show
the mean, standard deviation (in parentheses) and number of observations (in square brackets) of each
dependent variable. Column 6 shows the differences between samples, standard error (in parenthesis) and
number of observations (in square brackets). ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95%
and 90%, respectively.




                                                         59
                Table A-3: Descriptive Statistics - Control Variables by Wave


                                               Sample of students                      Difference between samples
                                  First year                   Upperclass                      First year
                                2017      2018       2017        2018        2019            vs Upperclass
                                 (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)                 (6)
         Academic year          1.000      1.000      3.636       2.000       2.000             2.311***
                               (0.000)    (0.000)    (1.329)     (0.000)     (0.000)             (0.032)
                                [965]      [851]     [1,528]       [34]       [345]              [3,723]
         Percentage female      0.505      0.498      0.505       0.471       0.554               0.011
                               (0.500)    (0.500)    (0.500)     (0.507)     (0.498)             (0.017)
                                [925]      [831]     [1,525]       [34]       [341]              [3,656]
         Mother education      13.932     13.715     14.122      13.882      13.472                0.171
                               (3.224)    (3.221)    (3.105)     (3.102)     (3.405)             (0.106)
                                [915]      [821]     [1,520]       [34]       [343]              [3,633]
         Working mother         0.756      0.779      0.775       0.742       0.782                0.008
                               (0.430)    (0.415)    (0.418)     (0.445)     (0.413)             (0.015)
                                [721]      [743]     [1,500]       [31]       [340]              [3,335]
         Single sex school      0.172      0.187      0.239       0.353       0.215             0.057***
                               (0.378)    (0.390)    (0.426)     (0.485)     (0.411)             (0.013)
                                [923]      [829]     [1,522]       [34]       [321]              [3,629]
         Single sex classroom   0.012      0.001      0.005       0.029       0.000               -0.003
                               (0.109)    (0.035)    (0.068)     (0.171)     (0.000)             (0.002)
                                [923]      [829]     [1,522]       [34]       [321]              [3,629]
         Coeducational school 0.820        0.814      0.762       0.618       0.791            -0.053***
                               (0.384)    (0.389)    (0.426)     (0.493)     (0.407)             (0.014)
                                [923]      [829]     [1,522]       [34]       [321]              [3,629]
         Public school          0.240      0.295      0.256       0.235       0.357               0.007
                               (0.427)    (0.456)    (0.437)     (0.431)     (0.480)             (0.015)
                                [920]      [834]     [1,524]       [34]       [322]              [3,634]
         Voucher school         0.405      0.438      0.404       0.294       0.373               -0.024
                               (0.491)    (0.496)    (0.491)     (0.462)     (0.484)             (0.016)
                                [920]      [834]     [1,524]       [34]       [322]              [3,634]
         Private school         0.362      0.285      0.350       0.471       0.276               0.014
                               (0.481)    (0.452)    (0.477)     (0.507)     (0.448)             (0.016)
                                [920]      [834]     [1,524]       [34]       [322]              [3,634]
         PSU math             674.900    662.046    685.328     716.647     671.612            14.984***
                              (74.111)   (77.075)   (77.324)    (49.735)    (79.506)             (2.746)
                                [733]      [736]     [1,329]       [34]       [307]              [3,139]
         High school gpa      679.450    670.590    682.052     695.294     678.296              6.620**
                              (70.555)   (75.398)   (71.506)    (49.095)    (74.612)             (2.589)
                                [733]      [736]     [1,329]       [34]       [307]              [3,139]

Notes: First year students includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018, while Upperclass
includes students enrolled in years 2 to 6 who were surveyed in 2017, 2018 and 2019. Columns 1-5 show the
mean, standard deviation (in parentheses) and number of observations (in square brackets) of each control
variable. Column 6 shows the differences between samples, standard error (in parenthesis) and number of
observations (in square brackets). ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%,
respectively.




                                                         60
                            Table A-4: Testing for Selective Attrition


                                     Dependent Variable: Prob Follow-up

                                     Economics              -0.091**
                                                             (0.037)
                                     Score                  -0.072**
                                                             (0.033)
                                     Economics × Score        0.008
                                                             (0.035)
                                     Constant               0.370***
                                                             (0.034)
                                     Observations             893

Notes: The sample includes students enrolled in first year in 2017 and 2018 that were surveyed in waves
0 and 3. The dependent variable is the probability of observing student i in the follow-up survey (waves 4
or 5). Standard errors, clustered at the university/major level, are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and *
indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.




                                                    61
    Table A-5: Are economic students more sexist than other students? - All controls


    Sample:                                       All students     Male     Female     All students     Male       Female
                                                       (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)
    B&E                                             0.144**      0.169**    0.145**       0.106*        0.085      0.137*
                                                    (0.063)      (0.070)    (0.071)       (0.059)      (0.065)     (0.079)
    Female student                                 -0.667***                            -0.643***
                                                    (0.040)                               (0.046)
    Mother education                                -0.011*        -0.003 -0.020***      -0.018**       -0.006    -0.033***
                                                    (0.006)       (0.011)   (0.007)       (0.008)      (0.014)      (0.009)
    Working mother                                 -0.259***     -0.304*** -0.209***    -0.248***     -0.281***    -0.200**
                                                    (0.030)       (0.051)   (0.053)       (0.045)      (0.091)      (0.078)
    Working mother status missing                   0.161**        0.152*     0.141         0.073        0.026       0.072
                                                    (0.074)       (0.084)   (0.108)       (0.066)      (0.112)      (0.106)
    Private school                                    0.125         0.152     0.084         0.174        0.273        0.058
                                                    (0.104)       (0.130)   (0.095)       (0.153)      (0.182)      (0.154)
    Voucher school                                    0.049         0.042     0.064         0.075        0.081        0.064
                                                    (0.048)       (0.081)   (0.043)       (0.060)      (0.097)      (0.071)
    Only-boys school                                 -0.219        -0.225     0.249         0.025        0.131     0.951***
                                                    (0.219)       (0.363)   (0.620)       (0.261)      (0.642)      (0.250)
    Only-girls school                                -0.187        -0.704    -0.204        -0.023       -0.699       -0.137
                                                    (0.207)       (0.520)   (0.137)       (0.248)      (0.898)      (0.164)
    Coeducational school                             -0.185        -0.190    -0.200        -0.027        0.078       -0.152
                                                    (0.220)       (0.366)   (0.145)       (0.276)      (0.677)      (0.166)
    PSU math                                         -0.000        -0.000    -0.000        -0.001       -0.001       -0.000
                                                    (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
    High school GPA                                  -0.000        -0.001    -0.000        -0.000       -0.001       0.000
                                                    (0.000)       (0.001)   (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
    B&E× Upperclass                                                                         0.092      0.183**       0.035
                                                                                          (0.080)      (0.074)      (0.121)
    Upperclass students                                                                    -0.631       -1.521       -0.376
                                                                                          (0.639)      (0.962)      (0.639)
    Missing PSU and High school GPA                                                        -0.363       -0.899        0.210
                                                                                          (0.526)      (0.756)      (0.492)
    Upperclass× Working mother                                                             -0.021       -0.037       -0.026
                                                                                          (0.065)      (0.126)      (0.108)
    Upperclass× Working mother status missing                                            -0.314**       -0.055    -0.483***
                                                                                          (0.133)      (0.262)      (0.170)
    Upperclass× Mother education                                                          0.015*         0.003      0.029**
                                                                                          (0.009)      (0.016)      (0.012)
    Upperclass× Private school                                                             -0.104       -0.208        0.025
                                                                                          (0.117)      (0.176)      (0.144)
    Upperclass× Voucher school                                                             -0.060       -0.078       -0.008
                                                                                          (0.064)      (0.122)      (0.091)
    Upperclass× Only-boys school                                                           -0.486       -0.527    -1.326***
                                                                                          (0.457)      (0.765)      (0.361)
    Upperclass× Only-girls school                                                          -0.331        0.177       -0.001
                                                                                          (0.405)      (1.005)      (0.294)
    Upperclass× Coeducational school                                                       -0.351       -0.390        0.000
                                                                                          (0.428)      (0.746)      (0.288)
    Upperclass× PSU math                                                                  0.001*       0.002**       0.000
                                                                                          (0.000)      (0.001)      (0.001)
    Upperclass× High school GPA                                                            -0.000        0.000       -0.001
                                                                                          (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
    Upperclass× Missing PSU and High school GPA                                             0.523      1.633**       -0.306
                                                                                          (0.523)      (0.798)      (0.564)
    Observations                                     3358          1651      1707         3358          1651        1707


Notes: The sample includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018 and students enrolled in
years 2 to 6 who were surveyed in 2017, 2018 and 2019. All columns include university dummies. Standard
                                                       62
errors, clustered at the university/major level, are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate statistical
significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.
Table A-6: Are economic students more sexist than other students? - Adjusting for mul-
              tiple hypotheses testing


                      Sample:                     All students      Male      Female
                                                  (1)      (2)      (3)         (4)
                      IATscience             0.127         0.050    -0.046     0.184
                                            [0.201]       [0.551]   [0.792]   [0.405]
                      IATcareer              0.170         0.145     0.231     0.054
                                            [0.000]       [0.000]   [0.000]   [0.608]
                      Hostile                0.169         0.147     0.157     0.146
                                            [0.402]       [0.047]   [0.068]   [0.129]
                      Benevolent             0.194         0.152     0.153     0.157
                                            [0.180]       [0.026]   [0.169]   [0.041]
                      Roles: traditional     0.089         0.057     0.074     0.063
                                            [0.505]       [0.551]   [0.392]   [0.608]
                      Roles: normative       0.181         0.110     0.119     0.114
                                            [0.086]       [0.049]   [0.169]   [0.179]
                      Math                   0.152         0.102     0.168     0.075
                                            [0.093]       [0.335]   [0.169]   [0.424]
                      Discrimination         0.012        -0.012    -0.012    -0.015
                                            [0.853]       [0.794]   [0.856]   [0.714]
                      Skill and preferences 0.102          0.105     0.089     0.114
                                            [0.402]       [0.137]   [0.244]   [0.424]
                      Observations Score         3,428     3,358    1,651     1,707
                      Controls                    no        yes      yes       yes

Notes: The sample includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018 and students enrolled
in years 2 to 6 who were surveyed in 2017, 2018 and 2019. Column 1 shows the mean of each dependent
variable for B&E students students and Column 2 shows the mean for students in other fields. In columns
3-6, each coefficient comes from a separate regression of the dependent variable on a dummy for whether
the student is enrolled in B&E. Controls are female, dummies for mother's education, working mother,
school type (private, public, voucher), education type (mixed, single-sex school, single-sex classroom),
highschool GPA, college admission test scores (PSU) and university dummies. Standard errors, clustered
at the university/major level, are presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance
at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.




                                                    63
       Table A-7: Economics and gender biases, selection or treatment effect? - Adjusting for multiple hypotheses testing


                                               All students                       Male students                       Female students
            Sample:                 First year Upperclass Dif-in-Dif First year Upperclass Dif-in-Dif First year Upperclass Dif-in-Dif
                                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)
            IATscience                0.037       0.065        0.028    -0.055       -0.053        0.002     0.141         0.243         0.102
                                     [0.778]     [0.546]      [0.996]   [0.686]      [0.715]      [0.981]   [0.711]       [0.463]       [0.979]
            IATcareer                 0.081       0.193        0.112     0.188        0.263        0.075    -0.036         0.119         0.155
                                     [0.546]     [0.000]      [0.716]   [0.487]      [0.004]      [0.970]   [0.941]       [0.603]       [0.946]
            Hostile                   0.146       0.168        0.022     0.122        0.222        0.100     0.161         0.149        -0.013
                                     [0.103]     [0.101]      [0.997]   [0.487]      [0.030]      [0.849]   [0.074]       [0.463]       [0.996]
            Benevolent                0.123       0.192        0.069     0.066        0.263        0.197     0.178         0.145        -0.034
                                     [0.324]     [0.002]      [0.838]   [0.643]      [0.004]      [0.097]   [0.073]       [0.433]       [0.996]
            Roles: traditional        0.061       0.070        0.009     0.072        0.113        0.040     0.072         0.054        -0.018
                                     [0.614]     [0.546]      [0.997]   [0.487]      [0.365]      [0.970]   [0.859]       [0.742]       [0.996]
            Roles: normative          0.115       0.137        0.022     0.089        0.170        0.081     0.152         0.124        -0.029
                                     [0.022]     [0.285]      [0.997]   [0.487]      [0.244]      [0.919]   [0.076]       [0.475]       [0.996]
64




            Math                      0.072       0.135        0.063     0.144        0.195        0.052     0.019         0.126         0.107
                                     [0.138]     [0.484]      [0.970]   [0.088]      [0.346]      [0.967]   [0.941]       [0.475]       [0.968]
            Discrimination           -0.030       0.014        0.044    -0.094        0.069        0.164     0.022        -0.023        -0.045
                                     [0.778]     [0.811]      [0.980]   [0.487]      [0.715]      [0.350]   [0.941]       [0.742]       [0.996]
            Skill and preferences     0.119       0.116       -0.003     0.124        0.066       -0.058     0.089         0.147         0.059
                                     [0.360]     [0.305]      [0.997]   [0.487]      [0.715]      [0.970]   [0.867]       [0.475]       [0.996]
            Observations Score        1556        1802         3358      772          879          1651      784           923           1707
            Controls                   yes         yes          yes      yes          yes           yes      yes           yes            yes

     Notes: First year includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018, while Upperclass includes students enrolled in years 2 to 6
     who were surveyed in 2017, 2018 and 2019. In columns 1, 2, 4, 5, 7 and 8, each coefficient comes from a separate regression of the dependent
     variable on a dummy for whether the student is enrolled in Business & Economics (B&E). In columns 3, 6 and 9 each coefficient comes from
     a separate regression of the dependent variable on the interaction of B&E and an indicator of Upperclass. Controls are female, dummies for
     mother's education, working mother, school type (private, public, voucher), education type (mixed, single-sex school, single-sex classroom),
     highschool GPA, college admission test scores (PSU) and university dummies. Standard errors, clustered at the university/major level, are
     presented in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.
                  Table A-8: Gender Bias and Economics - Panel Data - Adjusting for multiple hypotheses testing


                                                                   All                                Men                 Women
                       Sample:              1st year 2nd Year     DiD      DiD-FD Heckman DiD-FD Heckman DiD-FD Heckman
                                              (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)    (5)     (6)    (7)     (8)    (9)
                       IATscience             0.032    -0.022    -0.054     0.004    -0.052     0.016    -0.069    -0.108    -0.118
                                             [0.944]   [0.968]   [0.969]   [0.986]   [0.747]   [0.972]   [0.949]   [0.881]   [0.982]
                       IATcareer              0.298     0.030    -0.268     0.179    -0.182     0.042     0.103     0.296     0.106
                                             [0.022]   [0.968]   [0.195]   [0.714]   [0.717]   [0.972]   [0.929]   [0.515]   [0.982]
                       Hostile                0.011     0.078     0.067     0.043     0.183     0.094     0.204    -0.003     0.065
                                             [0.964]   [0.712]   [0.820]   [0.956]   [0.336]   [0.776]   [0.426]   [0.988]   [0.982]
                       Benevolent            -0.009     0.143     0.153     0.057     0.156     0.244     0.328    -0.109    -0.072
                                             [0.964]   [0.302]   [0.195]   [0.956]   [0.279]   [0.518]   [0.183]   [0.768]   [0.973]
                       Roles: traditional    -0.018    -0.045    -0.026    -0.134    -0.051    -0.199    -0.097    -0.079     0.005
                                             [0.936]   [0.844]   [0.948]   [0.124]   [0.657]   [0.226]   [0.770]   [0.768]   [0.982]
                       Roles: normative       0.048     0.036    -0.012    -0.179    -0.092    -0.053    -0.004    -0.295    -0.188
                                             [0.904]   [0.915]   [0.969]   [0.724]   [0.717]   [0.972]   [0.976]   [0.515]   [0.785]
65




                       Math                   0.084     0.224     0.140     0.130     0.204     0.076     0.106     0.219     0.365
                                             [0.312]   [0.158]   [0.195]   [0.278]   [0.021]   [0.709]   [0.534]   [0.515]   [0.075]
                       Discrimination        -0.208     0.083     0.291     0.229     0.318     0.183     0.335     0.248     0.294
                                             [0.127]   [0.832]   [0.195]   [0.066]   [0.000]   [0.383]   [0.161]   [0.205]   [0.145]
                       Skill and preferences -0.119     0.058     0.177     0.220     0.280     0.221     0.299     0.217     0.074
                                             [0.312]   [0.915]   [0.326]   [0.151]   [0.110]   [0.181]   [0.181]   [0.515]   [0.982]
                       Controls                yes      yes       yes       no        no        no          no      no        no
                       Student FE              no       no        no        yes       yes       yes         yes     yes       yes

     Notes: First year includes students enrolled in first year in years 2017 and 2018, while Second year includes students enrolled in second year
     who were surveyed in 2018 and 2019. In columns 1 and 2, each coefficient comes from a separate regression of the dependent variable on a
     dummy for whether the student is enrolled in Business & Economics (B&E). In columns 3-9 each coefficient comes from a separate regression
     of the dependent variable on the interaction of B&E and an indicator of Upperclass. Columns 4, 6 and 8 are estimated in first differences. In
     columns 5, 7 and 9, we use a heckman selection model to correct for attrition bias in the model with student fixed effect. Variables included
     in the selection model are a dummy for whether the student is enrolled in Business & Economics (B&E), the score in either wave 0 or 3, and
     a dummy for whether the student gave their contact phone in addition to their contact email. Controls are female, dummies for mother's
     education, working mother, school type (private, public, voucher), education type (mixed, single-sex school, single-sex classroom), highschool
     GPA, college admission test scores (PSU) and university dummies. Standard errors, clustered at the university/major level, are presented in
     parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.
Additional Figures

                                                      Figure A-1

               Differences in gender biases between B&E and non-B&E students
                                        Excluding one major at a time, full Sample
        .6




                                             .176*
                                             (.093)

                              .059
                             (.076)
        .4




              DiD = .092                                                  .1
                  (.08)                                                               .046      .086
                                                                       (.082)                  (.065)
                                                            .098                     (.096)
                                                           (.079)
        .2
        0
        -.2




              Benchmark    Accounting     Engineering      Law         Other     Psychology   Sciences

                                           Freshmen                   Upperclassmen



Notes: The figure shows estimates of studying B&E on the aggregate sexism score, for first years (left
bar), upperclassmen (right bar), and the interaction of studying B&E and upperclass (indicated as DiD).
Standard errors, clustered at the university/major level, are presented in parentheses. Benchmark corre-
sponds to results where all other majors in the sample are included as controls, as in Table 7a. The other
bars show results where one major is excluded from the control group. ***, ** and * indicate statistical
significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.




                                                          66
                                                        Figure A-2

                Differences in gender biases between B&E and non-B&E students
                                          Excluding one major at a time, males only
                                               .253**
                                               (.096)
        .6




                               .163**
                               (.078)
              DiD = .183**                                              .182**
                  (.074)                                                (.079)                      .167**
                                                            .202**                                  (.067)
                                                                                        .126*
        .4




                                                            (.083)
                                                                                        (.074)
        .2
        0
        -.2




              Benchmark      Accounting     Engineering      Law        Other         Psychology   Sciences

                                             Freshmen                  Upperclassmen



Notes: The figure shows estimates of studying B&E on the aggregate sexism score, for first years (left
bar), upperclassmen (right bar), and the interaction of studying B&E and upperclass (indicated as DiD).
Standard errors, clustered at the university/major level, are presented in parentheses. Benchmark corre-
sponds to results where all other majors in the sample are included as controls, as in Table 7a. The other
bars show results where one major is excluded from the control group. ***, ** and * indicate statistical
significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.




                                                            67
                                                     Figure A-3

               Differences in gender biases between B&E and non-B&E students
                                      Excluding one major at a time, females only
        .6




                                             .121
                                            (.136)
                              .007
              DiD = .035     (.113)                                                  -.011
                                                                      .042                     .038
        .4




                 (.121)                                                             (.148)      (.1)
                                                                     (.129)
                                                           .025
                                                          (.111)
        .2
        0
        -.2




              Benchmark    Accounting    Engineering      Law        Other      Psychology   Sciences

                                          Freshmen                  Upperclassmen



Notes: The figure shows estimates of studying B&E on the aggregate sexism score, for first years (left
bar), upperclassmen (right bar), and the interaction of studying B&E and upperclass (indicated as DiD).
Standard errors, clustered at the university/major level, are presented in parentheses. Benchmark corre-
sponds to results where all other majors in the sample are included as controls, as in Table 7a. The other
bars show results where one major is excluded from the control group. ***, ** and * indicate statistical
significance at the 99%, 95% and 90%, respectively.




                                                         68
