                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      IMMIGRATION, INNOVATION, AND GROWTH

                                      Konrad B. Burchardi
                                         Thomas Chaney
                                     Tarek Alexander Hassan
                                          Lisa Tarquinio
                                         Stephen J. Terry

                                       Working Paper 27075
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27075


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020


We are grateful to Ran Abramitzky, Daron Acemoglu, David Autor, David Atkin, Murat Celik,
William Kerr, Klaus Desmet, Ray Fisman, Lisa Kahn, Kevin Lang, Ethan Lewis, Ömer Özak,
Michael Peters, Chris Tonetti, and Pascual Restrepo for helpful comments. We also thank
seminar participants at AEA Annual Meeting, the University of California San Diego, University
of Toronto, Imperial College London, the Federal Reserve banks of Boston, Philadelphia, and
Richmond, Southern Methodist University, University of Toronto, Goethe University Frankfurt,
Duke, Princeton, the University of Chicago, London Business School, the Wharton Conference
on Migration, and the NBER EFG, EFEG, and PRMP group meetings. Chaney is grateful for
financial support from ERC grant N 337272­FiNet. All remaining mistakes are our own. This
paper is dedicated to the memory of Dr. Sherif A. Hassan. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Konrad B. Burchardi, Thomas Chaney, Tarek Alexander Hassan, Lisa Tarquinio, and
Stephen J. Terry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Immigration, Innovation, and Growth
Konrad B. Burchardi, Thomas Chaney, Tarek Alexander Hassan, Lisa Tarquinio, and Stephen
J. Terry
NBER Working Paper No. 27075
May 2020
JEL No. J61,O31,O40

                                          ABSTRACT

We show a causal impact of immigration on innovation and dynamism in US counties. To
identify the causal impact of immigration, we use 130 years of detailed data on migrations from
foreign countries to US counties to isolate quasi-random variation in the ancestry composition of
US counties that results purely from the interaction of two historical forces: (i) changes over time
in the relative attractiveness of different destinations within the US to the average migrant
arriving at the time and (ii) the staggered timing of the arrival of migrants from different origin
countries. We then use this plausibly exogenous variation in ancestry composition to predict the
total number of migrants flowing into each US county in recent decades. We show four main
results. First, immigration has a positive impact on innovation, measured by the patenting of local
firms. Second, immigration has a positive impact on measures of local economic dynamism.
Third, the positive impact of immigration on innovation percolates over space, but spatial
spillovers quickly die out with distance. Fourth, the impact of immigration on innovation is
stronger for more educated migrants.

Konrad B. Burchardi                              Lisa Tarquinio
Institute for International Economic Studies     Department of Economics
Stockholm University                             Boston University
SE-106 91 Stockholm                              270 Bay State Road
Sweden                                           Boston, MA
konrad.burchardi@iies.su.se                      ltarq@bu.edu

Thomas Chaney                                    Stephen J. Terry
Sciences Po                                      Department of Economics
28 rue des Saints Peres                          Boston University
75005 Paris                                      Boston, MA 02215
France                                           stephenjamesterry@gmail.com
thomas.chaney@gmail.com

Tarek Alexander Hassan
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
thassan@bu.edu
1     Introduction
Does immigration cause more or less innovation and economic dynamism? In this paper, we
answer this question in the context of international migration to the US over the last three
decades. We find a positive causal impact of immigration on both innovation and economic
dynamism at the county level.
    Theories crafted to study endogenous growth, economic geography, and dynamism suggest
a role for immigrants in driving local economic outcomes. When immigrants bring ideas, skills,
and effort into the research process, or when they stimulate demand for new inventions, they will
also stimulate growth according to the logic of a range of endogenous growth models ( Romer,
1990; Jones, 1995). In the presence of frictions on mobility, trade, or idea flows, a range of
models of regional growth suggest immigrants should have local, not just aggregate, effects on
innovation and wages (Desmet et al., 2018; Peters, 2019). Innovations or growth caused by
immigrants but embodied in new firms or creative destruction should also affect local measures
of economic dynamism (Karahan et al., 2016; Hopenhayn et al., 2018).
    In contrast to these predictions of canonical theory, fierce political controversies surround
the economic contribution of migrants: Are the new arrivals draining resources of their host
communities and stifling innovation and economic dynamism?
    A rigorous quantification of the causal impact of immigration on innovation and dynamism
has proven difficult. The reason is that migrants do not allocate randomly across space, but
instead are likely to choose destinations that offer the best prospects for them and their families.
In particular, migrants arriving in the US might select into regions that are more innovative,
economically dynamic, and fast-growing, creating a spurious correlation between local immi-
gration, local innovation, and local economic dynamism.
    In this paper, we propose a formal identification strategy that allows us to identify the causal
impact of migration on local innovation and dynamism. To do so, we use 130 years of detailed
data on immigration from foreign countries to US counties. Our identification strategy combines
a set of instruments for the pre-existing ethnic composition of US counties ( Burchardi et al.,
2019) with a version of the canonical shift-share approach (Bartik, 1991; Katz and Murphy,
1992; Card, 2001) to construct a valid instrument for immigration into each US county in the
last 30 years. In a first step, we isolate plausibly exogenous variation in the number of residents
of a US county with ancestry from each foreign country, following Burchardi et al. (2019). In a
second step, we use these exogenous components of pre-existing ancestry shares to predict where
recent migrants will settle within the US, using a shift-share instrument. Doing so, we guard

                                                 1
against the potential critique that where migrants settle within the US, both in recent decades
(the distribution of immigrants) and in the more distant past (the distribution of ancestry),
may be correlated with unobserved factors that also affect local innovation and dynamism.
   In our first step, we use the interaction of time-series variation in the relative attractiveness
of different destinations within the US with the staggered timing of arrival of migrants from
different origins to isolate quasi-random variation in the ancestry composition of US counties.
Implicitly, we assume historical migration patterns are in part driven by ( i) a push factor,
causing emigration from a given foreign country to the entire US, and ( ii) an economic pull
factor, attracting migrants from all origins to a given US county at a given point in time. To
further ensure our predicted historical migration is not contaminated by endogenous unobserved
factors, we carefully leave out large population groups when predicting ancestry. In particular,
because our focus is on immigration to the US after 1975, primarily originating from non-
European countries, we use the historical location choices of European migrants to predict where
non-European migrants settled prior to 1975. In other words, we predict that US counties that
were attractive to migrants from Europe in a period when a large number of migrants from
a given non-European origin country were arriving in the US will receive a large number of
migrants from that (non-European) origin country. Iterating this procedure over 100 years, we
isolate quasi-random variation in the distribution of ancestry across US counties in 1975.
   In our second step, we then use this predicted pre-existing distribution of ancestry to predict
where new migrants arriving in the US after 1975 will settle. Implicitly, we assume migrants'
choice of destination is also driven by a social pull factor, such that new migrants will tend to
settle in locations with a large pre-existing community from the same ethnic background. So,
if a large community with ancestry from origin country o already resides in destination county
d, and many migrants from o arrive in the US, we predict a large inflow of migrants from o
to d. Summing over all possible origin countries, we are then able to predict the total number
of migrants flowing into different US counties at each point in time post 1975. This predicted
immigration shock is plausibly orthogonal to any origin-destination-specific factor that may
make a destination US county more innovative and dynamic after 1975.
   Finally, to further guard against any lingering concerns about identification, we estimate
the impact of plausibly exogenous variations in immigration on changes in local innovation,
dynamism, and growth, not on levels. In many specifications, we are even able to include
county fixed effects, thus controlling for any county-specific trend in innovation.
   This formal identification strategy allows us to reach four main conclusions.


                                                 2
   First, we find a strong and significant causal impact of immigration on the number of
patents filed per person: on average, the arrival of 10,000 additional immigrants increases the
flow of patents over a five-year period by one patent per 100,000 people. Put differently, a one
standard deviation increase in the number of migrants (about 12,000 migrants) increases the
flow of patents by 27% relative to its mean.
   Second, we find a strong and significant causal impact of immigration on measures of eco-
nomic dynamism and growth at the local level. For our measures of economic dynamism, or
creative destruction, we use several variables, each shedding light on different aspects of eco-
nomic dynamism: a one standard deviation increase in local immigration increases the job
creation rate by 7%, the job destruction rate by 11%, the job growth skewness by 3%, and local
wages by 3%, all expressed as changes relative to their mean. The significant increase in local
wages suggests immigration not only affects innovation and creative destruction, but also the
overall level of economic growth.
   Third, we find evidence that the positive effect of immigration on innovation and growth
diffuses over space, but this spatial diffusion dies out quickly with distance. For instance, if
more migrants settle in counties near d, innovation in d increases significantly. However, this
spillover effect of immigration to nearby counties decays rapidly with distance: compared to
the direct effect of immigration in a county, the indirect effect is 30% smaller for immigration
100km away (60 miles), 80% smaller at 250km (150 miles), and statistically indistinguishable
from zero beyond 500km (300 miles).
   Fourth, we find the positive effect of immigration on innovation and growth is significantly
stronger for more educated migrants. We are able to reach this conclusion because our identi-
fication strategy allows us to construct separate instruments for migrations from each origin to
each destination at each point in time. This versatility is one of the strengths of our identifi-
cation strategy and makes it potentially applicable in a range of other contexts. To separately
identify the impact of the total number of incoming migrants from that of their education level,
we leverage the fact that the level of education of migrants varies dramatically across countries
of origin and over time. For example, Japanese immigrants, on average, have about twice the
number of years of schooling as those from Guatemala, whereas the education levels of Mexican
arrivals increased by about 30% during our sample period. We find large heterogeneity in the
impact of immigration on innovation as we exogenously vary the education level of migrants.
For instance, an inflow of relatively uneducated migrants (in the bottom third of the distribu-
tion of years of schooling among incoming migrants) has almost no effect on local innovation,


                                                3
whereas the increase in innovation induced by highly educated migrants (in the top third) is
an order of magnitude larger than for the average migrant.


Related Literature.      Our paper contributes to several strands of the literature.
   First, standard theories of endogenous growth predict strong positive impacts of overall
population growth on economic growth and innovation (Romer, 1990), with the nature of these
effects depending upon the details of the technology for producing ideas and the horizon of
analysis (Jones, 1995, 1999; Peretto, 1998; Young, 1998; Laincz and Peretto, 2006; Bloom et al.,
2017). Our empirical work can be thought of broadly as a reduced-form test of these predictions,
in the sense that immigration constitutes a large part of regional population growth in the US.
(We show an illustrative example of such a model in Appendix B.) However, we also differ from
this literature because of our focus on the local, rather than the aggregate, effects of immigration
on innovation and growth. In this sense, our evidence relates more closely to a burgeoning set
of theories of the spatial distribution of economic growth, which also tend to predict a positive
impact of immigration on local innovation and economic dynamism. The exact nature of the
local effects of immigration differ in such models based on the type and extent of frictions
on mobility, trade, and idea diffusion. Some theories emphasize migration restrictions and
local market size (Desmet et al., 2018), others tease out subtle distinctions between the long-
run and short-run effects of migration (Peters, 2019), and still others link migration frictions
to traditional gravity relationships across regions (Monte et al., 2018). Rather than sharply
distinguishing between these approaches, our empirical evidence offers a reduced-form test of
common predictions of this class of models, as well as a useful empirical methodology to identify
and discipline key parameters in those models.
   Second, a long tradition studies economic dynamism or creative destruction using a combina-
tion of theory and empirics. If innovations appear through creative destruction, Schumpeterian
growth models link immigrants' impact on innovation to churn and gross flows ( Aghion and
Howitt, 1992; Grossman and Helpman, 1991; Klette and Kortum, 2004), a prediction we test at
the local level. In the US, dynamism has declined recently, a pattern emphasized by multiple
recent papers using rich empirical evidence (Decker et al., 2014; Hathaway and Litan, 2014;
Alon et al., 2018). We bring new causal evidence to bear to this line of work. Theoretical ex-
planations for declining dynamism related to knowledge diffusion, IT developments, markups,
or population growth have been proposed by a burgeoning set of papers ( Akcigit and Ates,
2019; Aghion et al., 2019; Gordon, 2012; Karahan et al., 2016; Hopenhayn et al., 2018; Walsh,



                                                 4
2019). Our paper suggests immigration may also be a local driver of dynamism.
       Finally, we contribute to a growing empirical literature on the link between immigration,
innovation, and technology adoption. Different branches of this literature have documented
large contributions of high-skilled immigrants to innovation in the US ( Kerr and Lincoln, 2010;
Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle, 2010; Akcigit et al., 2017), spillovers from the arrival of high-skilled
scientists and inventors on the productivity of their American peers ( Borjas and Doran, 2012;
Moser et al., 2014; Bernstein et al., 2018), and the contribution of migrants to the diffusion
of knowledge across borders (Kerr, 2008).1 Lewis (2011) and Lafortune et al. (2019) study
the effect of immigration on local technology adoption, whereas Tabellini (2018) shows positive
effects of immigration on output and employment. Khanna and Lee (2018) show a positive
association between high-skilled migration and firm-level measures of dynamism. Many of these
studies use variants of the canonical shift-share instrument (Card, 2001) that takes pre-existing
ancestry shares as given (exogenous). Consistent with our intuition linking local innovation
to the endogenous presence of particular ethnicities in the local population, this approach
has recently been shown to lead to bias and over-rejection in a number of different contexts
(Borusyak et al., 2018; Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2018; Ad~
                                                          ao et al., 2019). We contribute
to this literature by isolating exogenous variation in the pre-existing spatial distribution of
ancestry and using this variation to construct plausibly exogenous immigration shocks to US
counties in recent decades.
       Closely related to our own work, Sequeira et al. (2020) also develop an alternative to the
canonical shift-share approach using the gradual expansion of railways across the US for identi-
fication. Consistent with our finding that a positive immigration shock increases local economic
dynamism in the short-run (over 5 or 10 years), they document positive long-term effects of
European immigration to the US 1850-1920 on local economic development that persists to the
present day.
       The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces our data. Section
3 lays out our strategy for identification and isolates quasi-random immigration shocks to US
counties. Section 4 estimates the causal effect of immigration on innovation and economic dy-
namism. Section 5 tests for geographic spillovers in the effect of immigration on innovation and
disentangles the impact of high-skilled from that of low-skilled migration. Section 6 concludes.
   Hanson (2009, 2010) and Lewis (2013) provide early surveys. Lewis and Peri (2015) and Abramitzky and
   1

Boustan (2017) give an overview of the broader literature on the effect of immigration on regional economies.




                                                     5
2         Data
We collect detailed data on migration, ancestry, the education level of migrants, patents issued,
and measures of dynamism of local firms and local labor markets. Below is a description of our
data sources and the construction of our main variables. Further details on the construction
and sources of the data are given in Appendix A.


Immigration and Ancestry.               Following Burchardi et al. (2019), our immigration and an-
cestry data are constructed from the individual files of the Integrated Public Use Microdata
Series (IPUMS) samples of the 1880, 1900, 1910, 1920, 1930, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 waves
of the US census, and the 2006-2010 five-year sample of the American Community Survey. 2 We
weigh observations using the personal weights provided by these data sources. Appendix A.1
gives details on specific samples and weights used.
        Throughout the paper, we use t - 1 and t to denote the end years of consecutive five-
year periods,3 o for the foreign country of origin, and d for the US destination county. We
                                                                            t
construct the number of migrants from origin o to destination d at time t, Io,d , as the number
of respondents born in o who live in d in a given census year and emigrated to the US between
t - 1 and t. The exception to this rule is the 1880 census (the first in our sample), which did not
                                              1880
record the year of immigration. The variable Io,d  instead measures the number of residents
who were either born in o or whose parents were born in o, thus covering the two generations of
immigrants arriving prior to 1880. 4 Since 1980, respondents have also been asked about their
primary ancestry in both the US Census and the American Community Survey, with the option
to provide multiple answers. Ancestry At
                                       o,d corresponds to the number of individuals residing

in d at time t who report o as their first ancestry. Note this measure captures self-reported
ancestry and is thus subject to (endogenous) recall. 5
        The respondents' residence is recorded at the level of historic counties, and at the level of
historic county groups or PUMAs from 1970 onwards. Whenever necessary, we use contempo-
raneous population weights to transition data from the historic county group or PUMA level
to the historic county, and then use area weights to transition data from the historic county
    2
     We cannot use data from the 1940, 1950, and 1960 censuses, because these censuses did not collect infor-
mation on the year of immigration. The original 1890 census files were lost in a fire.
   3
     Due to variation in the question regarding the year of arrival for migrants across the 1970, 1980, and 1990
censuses, the period length may vary slightly. For more details, see Appendix A.1.
   4
     If the own birthplace is in the US, imprecisely specific (e.g., a continent), or missing, we instead use the
parents' birthplace, assigning equal weights to each parent's birthplace.
   5
     See Duncan and Trejo (2017) for recent evidence on recalled versus factual ancestry in CPS data.



                                                       6
level to the 1990 US county level. The respondents' stated ancestry (birthplace) often, but
not always, directly corresponds to foreign countries in their 1990 borders (e.g., "Spanish" or
"Denmark"). When no direct mapping exists (e.g., "Basque" or "Lapland"), we construct tran-
sition matrices that map data from the answer level to the 1990 foreign-country level, using
approximate population weights where possible and approximate area weights otherwise. In
the few cases when answers are imprecisely specific or such a mapping cannot be constructed
(for example, "European" or "born at sea"), we omit the data. 6 The resulting dyadic dataset
covers 3,141 US counties, 195 foreign countries, and 10 census waves.


Innovation. We use patent data to measure innovation. Starting from the universe of patent
microdata provided by the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) from 1975 until 2010, we
study corporate utility patents with US assignees, around 4.7 million observations. We convert
assignee locations provided by the USPTO in coordinate form to 2010 US counties, tabulating
the number of corporate utility patents granted to assignees in each county in each year of the
sample, and then use area weights to transition to 1990 US counties. In earlier periods, the
location of inventors was a more natural choice for the location of innovations ( Akcigit et al.,
2017); however, in recent years, the overwhelming majority of patents are assigned to corpora-
tions, making assignees the natural baseline location measure for our purposes. In addition to
this baseline choice, we also explore alternative means of locating patents by inventors, and we
also conduct various quality or citation weighting checks following Hall et al. (2001). We sum
patent flows over five-year periods, with the measure in t corresponding to the sum of patents
in a given county d over the five years between t - 1 and t. We then scale this measure by the
1970 population of county d from the Census microdata to yield a five-year patents-per-capita
variable. The change in the flow of patents per capita from period t - 1 to t is our primary
outcome of interest.7 Appendix A.3 gives additional details.


Dynamism. A growing empirical literature emphasizes that measures of dynamism and cre-
ative destruction in the US have declined in recent decades (Decker et al., 2014). Our dynamism
measures come from two sources, motivated by the prior work on this subject. The first dataset ­
the US Business Dynamism Statistics (BDS) database from the US Census ­ contains measures
   6
    Appendix A.1 provides a detailed description of the data transformation.
   7
    We manually check the patents-per-capita measure for outliers likely due to errors in location coding by
the USPTO, finding a few instances in which manual correction was possible. However, to guard against the
possibility that any miscoding remains, we winsorize the resulting distribution of the change in patents-per-
capita outcome variable at the 1st and 99th percentile.



                                                     7
computed from the underlying Longitudinal Business Data (LBD) microdata on the employ-
ment levels of the universe of US business establishments. The BDS data include job creation
and job destruction rates at the yearly level and spanning 1977­2015. 8 We apportion the native
MSA geography to 1990 US counties by population. 9 Our main dynamism outcomes of interest
from the BDS data in county d in period t correspond to the change in either job creation or
job destruction rates from t - 1 to t.
       In addition to measures of gross employment flows, the dynamism literature also emphasizes
a decline over time in the skewness of employment growth rates, that is, a decline in the relative
importance of "superstar" growth performance in driving US employment dynamism ( Decker
et al., 2014). In this spirit, we construct growth rate skewness measures starting from the US
Census County Business Patterns (CBP) dataset. The raw data contain county-by-year-by-4-
digit industry employment levels from 1985 to 2010. For each county and year, we compute
the Kelley Skewness of employment growth rates across 4-digit sectors. This measure gives
a sense of whether certain strongly performing industries drive overall employment growth in
that period and location. The final measure of interest for county d in period t is the change
in the growth rate skewness measure over the five years from t - 1 to t.


Other Data. We compute local average annual wages from the Quarterly Census of Wages
(QCEW) dataset provided by the US Bureau of Labor Statistics. The data stem from state-level
unemployment insurance records. The QCEW records employment and wages at the county-
by-industry-by-year level starting in 1975. We compute the total wages per capita in a given
county-year combination, and deflate using the Personal Consumption Expenditure price index
from the same source. The outcomes of interest in specifications studying income growth is the
change in wages per capita in county d over the five-year period ending in t. We also construct
data on the change in average annual wages for US-born working individuals (natives) and the
subset of US-born working individuals who have lived in their county of residence for the past
five years at the time of the Census (native non-movers) using data from IPUMS USA; for
these outcomes, we consider the change in average CPI-deflated wages for natives (or native
non-movers) in county d over the 10-year period ending in t.
   8
     Job creation and destruction rates are gross flows representing the ratio of the number of jobs created or
destroyed as a fraction of total average employment in the current and past year. See Davis and Haltiwanger
(1999) for an overview of gross labor market flows.
   9
     This apportionment is necessary because the BDS statistics are available only at the local level for MSAs
rather than for the universe of individual counties. Creating equivalent county measures would require use of
the underlying confidential Census LBD microdata.



                                                      8
Summary Statistics.       Table 1 reports summary statistics on the outcomes described above,
as well as various other instruments and derived variables studied below. The series are observed
at the county by five-year-window level. The table reveals sensible patterns. Counties, on
average, received around 1,400 non-European immigrants in each five-year period between 1975
and 2010, a meaningful contribution to overall average population growth of around 4,000.
Innovation (as measured by per-capita patenting) increased on average over the period, with
substantial heterogeneity across counties. As emphasized by the dynamism literature, measures
of creative destruction including job creation rates, job destruction rates, and growth rate
skewness declined on average during our sample period, although the average obscures wide
differences in experience: some counties became substantially more dynamic over the period
we study. Wages per capita grew on average, as expected. The statistics on the remaining
variables, reflecting the variation in subsets of our data and in several constructed instruments,
will become useful in our discussion below.


3     Constructing a Valid Instrument for Immigration
Our aim is to estimate the causal impact of immigration on innovation and local economic
dynamsim. To do so, we estimate the following equation:

                             Ydt = t + s +   Immigrationt
                                                        d+
                                                                    t
                                                                    d,                          (1)

where Immigrationt
                 d measures the number of migrants flowing into destination county d between

t - 1 and t, Ydt is a change from t - 1 to t in the outcome of interest, and t and s are time and
state fixed effects, respectively. Our most conservative specifications also include a county fixed
effect, d , which controls for any county-specific trend in Ydt , so that we exploit only variation
over time within a given county.
    The main concern with a simple OLS estimate of (1) is that unobserved factors may affect
both immigration and innovation or dynamism. For instance, it is likely that migrants are
disproportionately drawn to more innovative destinations within the US. We estimate ( 1) in
differences, so that any systematic differences in the level of innovation are controlled for.
Nevertheless, migrants may be disproportionately drawn to counties within the US that are
temporarily on an upward innovation trend.
    To address this concern, one possibility would be to construct a "shift-share" instrument in
the spirit of Card (2001), predicting immigration flows using the interaction of pre-existing for-
eign ancestry shares in a given destination county with the total number of migrants arriving in

                                                 9
the US from that origin country. However, omitted factors that make a set of US counties more
innovative may also have attracted disproportionately many migrants from specific sets of origin
countries in the past, rendering pre-existing ancestry shares endogenous. For example, Indian
engineers may be particularly good programmers and may have historically migrated to Silicon
Valley (and to other information technology hubs) because those destinations provided attrac-
tive employment opportunities for programmers; for the same reason, Indian engineers would
systematically migrate to Silicon Valley (and other information technology hubs) whenever the
information technology industry experiences a boom. In this case, the canonical shift-share
approach would falsely identify a causal effect of immigration on innovation: innovations in
software are both the reason why some destinations have high pre-existing Indian ancestry
shares, and why those destinations experience more Indian immigration. Ancestry shares that
are themselves endogenous ­ potentially correlated with unobserved factors affecting innovation
­ thus pose a challenge to the canonical shift-share approach.
   To overcome this challenge, we augment the canonical shift-share approach with a set of
instruments that isolate quasi-random variation in the pre-existing ancestry composition of
US counties. This variation results only from the coincidental timing of two forces driving
historical migration patterns to the US: (i) time-series variation in the relative attractiveness
of different destinations within the US to the average migrant arriving at the time (e.g., end
of 19th century Midwest vs early 20th century West) and (ii) the staggered arrival of migrants
from different origins (e.g., end of 19th century China vs early 20th century Japan). We argue
the interaction of these two forces can be used to construct valid instruments for the distribution
of ancestries across US counties that are orthogonal to origin-destination specific confounding
factors, such as the affinity of Silicon Valley and Indian engineers for software development
mentioned above. We then use only the exogenous component of the pre-existing distribution
of ancestries to predict migration into each US county post 1975. Doing so, we eliminate a wide
range of concerns relating to the endogeneity of pre-existing ancestry composition. We discuss
this procedure, its merits, and also limits, in detail below.

3.1    Constructing an Instrument for Immigration
To construct our instrument for the number of migrants flowing into a given destination county
at a given point in time, we build upon Burchardi et al. (2019), and start from a simple reduced-
form model of migration. Migrants from origin country o settle in destination county d at time




                                                10
t according to
                                                                      -1
                     t
                                                            t
                                                           Id      At
                                                                    o,d
                    Io,d        t
                         =  t + o   t
                                  + d            t
                                      + Xo,d  + Io    at      + b t t-1    + ut
                                                                              o,d ,            (2)
                                                           It      Ao
where ancestry evolves recursively as cohorts of migrants accumulate,
                                                              t-1
                      At     t  t   t               t                t
                       o,d =  + o + d + Xo,d  + ct Io,d + dt Ao,d + vo,d .                     (3)

In both equations, the  terms are fixed effects, and the vector Xo,d controls for observables.
   Our key assumption on the forces driving migration, upon which our identification is built,
                                       t      t              t-1   t-1
corresponds to the interaction terms, Io at (Id /I t ) + bt Ao,d /Ao   . We model the choices
of migrants as driven by two distinct forces, which we label "economic push-pull" and "social
                                                                     t   t
push-pull". The economic push-pull force is captured by the term at Io (Id /I t ): in time periods
                                                             t
when many migrants arrive from country o to the US (a large Io push factor), and when a
destination county d is particularly attractive to the average migrant arriving at the time (a
                     t
large economic pull Id /I t factor), we expect many migrants from o to settle in d. This force
corresponds to an economic motive for migration: upon arriving in the US, migrants tend to
flock to destination counties that are attractive to the average migrant arriving at the time.
                                                       t  t-1   t-1
The social push-pull force is captured by the term bt Io Ao,d /Ao   : migrants arriving from o
                  t
(the push factor Io ) tend to locate in destinations d with a pre-existing community from their
                                      t-1   t-1
home country (the social pull factor Ao,d /Ao   ). This force corresponds to a social motive for
migration: all else equal, migrants tend to settle near others of their own ethnicity.
   The seminal Card (2001) shift-share approach is simply a special case of our model (2)-(3),
ignoring the economic push-pull in (2) by setting at = 0, and using pre-existing ancestry shares
as an instrument for contemporaneous migrations, ignoring the recursive nature of ancestry
in (3). As we discuss above, this shift-share instrument is invalid if omitted factors affect both
innovation and past immigration, inducing endogenous ancestry shares.
   Our full model (2)-(3) offers a solution: we use the recursive set of equations to construct a
valid instrument for immigration. Iterating (2)-(3) over several periods prior to 1975, we isolate
plausibly exogenous variation in pre-existing ancestry inherited exclusively from the cumulated
series of economic push-pull forces. We can then use this predicted stock of ancestry in the
social push-pull term of (2) post 1975 to isolate plausibly exogenous immigration shocks.
   To fix ideas more concretely, Figures 1 and 2 directly examine the underlying variation in
economic push and pull factors.
   Figure 1 shows time variation in the economic push factor. It plots the share of non-
European immigration to the US from the five non-European origin nations with the largest

                                               11
cumulative immigration to the US. This push-factor variation within countries is generally
clustered in time in bursts of immigration to the US, often driven by historic events in the
home countries or by changes in origin-specific rules for migration to the US. For example,
Mexican migration to the US experiences a spike during the period of the Mexican Revolution
from 1910-20. Cuban immigration flows increase during the 1960s and 1970s in the decades after
the Cuban revolution. Immigration from Vietnam reaches substantial numbers only from the
mid 1970s onwards in the wake of US involvement in the Vietnam War. Chinese and Japanese
migration to the US fell from relatively higher levels early in the sample to low levels before
increasing over time, in this case as various US immigration exclusion acts were repealed.
   Figure 2 shows time variation in the economic pull factor. It plots color-coded maps of
European migration to the US over Census waves from 1880 to 2010, with darker shades repre-
senting a higher intensity of migration to a given county. The location of relatively attractive
destination counties ­ our source of variation for the economic pull factor ­ changed substan-
tially over time. Early on in the sample during the late 19th century, northeastern locations
were particularly attractive destinations. By the early 1900s, the average European immigrants'
favored destinations shifted to the midwestern and western regions, before shifting again to the
coastal and southeastern regions.
   So, to summarize, the rich variation in Figures 1 and 2 allows us to isolate variation in pre-
existing ancestry attributable to the coincidence of historical push and economic pull factors
operating on the average immigrant arriving in the US at different times from different origins.
Instead of, say, considering the stock of individuals with Mexican ancestry in each US county
in 1975, our eventual set of quasi-random variation instead exploits, for example, the fact that
certain southeastern and midwestern regions happened to be popular destinations (economically
"pulling" people into destination counties d  {Southeast, M idwest}) during the period of
heavy Mexican immigration around the Mexican Revolution ("pushing" people out of that
origin nation o = M exico).
   Having isolated plausibly exogenous variations in pre-existing ancestry, we can then con-
fidently use the social push-pull force to predict contemporaneous immigration shocks post
1975.
   In practice, we construct our instrument for the number of migrants flowing into a given
destination county at a given point in time in three steps, each of which is easy to implement
and follows the simple logic of the above model of migration.




                                               12
Step 1: Isolating quasi-random variation in ancestry.                                         We predict the number of resi-
dents of destination county d with ancestry from origin country o in baseline year t (in thou-
sands), At
         o,d , by using the economic push-pull force in (2), and by cumulating successive mi-

gration waves using (3). We complement this model by adding "leave-outs," to ensure our
instruments are not polluted by any, potentially confounding, origin-destination-specific fac-
tors. Formally, we estimate
                                                                       t                             
                                                                                                   Ileaveout,d
                 At
                  o,d   =   t
                            o,r (d )   +   t
                                           c (o),d   + Xo,d  +                a       
                                                                               r (d) Io,leaveout     
                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                               + vo,d .   (4)
                                                                      =1880
                                                                                                    Ileaveout

The leave-outs ensure we do not use the endogenous choice of migrants from o to settle in d to
                                                                                        
predict ancestry from o in d. In our baseline, we use as our push factor Io,leaveout = Io, -r (d) , the

total number of migrants arriving from o who settle in locations outside of the region where
d is located over the five-year period ending in  (our regions are defined as Census divisions,
a grouping of several adjacent US states, as shown in Appendix Table 1); and we use for our
                                                 
pull factor Ileaveout,d /Ileaveout = IEurope,d /IEurope , the fraction of all incoming European migrants
who settle in d.10 Our results are robust to using various alternative leave-out strategies, as we
            t           t
show below. o,r (d) and c(o),d are a series of origin country × destination region and continent

of origin × destination county interacted fixed effects, whereas Xo,d contains a series of time-
invariant controls for {o, d} characteristics (including distance and absolute latitude difference).
We estimate (4) separately for each t = 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005, 2010 using all non-
European countries in our sample.
       From this estimation, we derive predicted ancestry in county d from origin o at time t as
                                                      t                                            
                                                                                Ileaveout,d
                                       ^t =
                                       A                  ^
                                                          a           
                                                                     Io,leaveout                      ,                   (5)
                                         o,d                r (d )
                                                  =1880
                                                                                 Ileaveout

                                                                                                   
where Io,leaveout Ileaveout,d/Ileaveout
                                                     are residuals of a regression of Io,leaveout Ileaveout,d/Ileaveout
                                                                                                                        on
t         t
o,r                             ^
    (d) , c(o),d and Xo,d , and a r (d) are the coefficients estimated from (4). This additional or-

thoganization ensures our constructed immigration shocks rely only on the exogenous compo-
nent of pre-existing ancestry, after removing all variation that could also be accounted for by
fixed effects or other observables. Again, our baseline specification uses region and continental
                                                                              
leave-outs, Io,leaveout = Io, -r (d) and Ileaveout,d /Ileaveout = IEurope,d /IEurope .

  10
    The focus of our main regression of interest is on non-European migrants who arrived in the US in recent
decades, a period during which most migrants were not coming from Europe. Using the historical migrations
of Europeans to predict the settlement patterns of non-Europeans ensures our results are not driven by other
origin countries with similar characteristics and settlement patterns. Note this leave-out imposes a stricter
requirement than simply removing o's migrants from Id   
                                                         /I  .

                                                                     13
Step 2: Predicting migration from individual countries.                                          Having isolated plausibly
exogenous variation in the stock of ancestry at the {o, d} level for all periods after 1975, we
use the social push-pull force from (2) to predict contemporaneous immigration. This method
is similar to Card (2001), except we address the concern that ancestry itself is an endogenous
variable. We predict immigration from o to d in period t by estimating

                   t
                  Io,d                                      ^t-1 × I
                       = o,r(d) + c(o),d + t + Xo,d  + bt  [A      ~t                 t
                                                              o,d    o,leave-out ] + uo,d ,                                 (6)

where again the  's are time, country ×region, and continent ×county fixed effects, Xo,d observ-
               ^t-1 is predicted ancestry from (5), and I
able controls, A                                        ~t               t        It
                                                          o,leave-out = Io,-r (d) Europe,r (d)/IEurope,-r(d) .
                                                                                                t
                 o,d

Because we leave out from Io,-r(d) all migrants from o who settle in d's region, I          ~t            in- o,leave-out
                                                             t
cludes a scaling factor at the regional level,              IEurope,r (d)/It
                                                                           Europe,-r (d)
                                                                                           , to correct for contemporaneous
differences in region sizes.


Step 3: Generating immigration shocks.                               We are finally able to generate our main in-
strument for the total number of migrants settling in county d in period t, Immigrationt
                                                                                       d in

equation (1),
                                       ^t =
                                       I                 ^     ^t-1 × I
                                                         bt  [ A      ~t
                                         d                       o,d    o,leave-out ].                                      (7)
                                                    o


Identifying assumption. A sufficient condition for the validity of this instrument is that
                       ^t-1 , is truly exogenous in equation (1). With our baseline regional and
instrumented ancestry, A      o,d

continental leave-outs, we can write this condition as
                                                      
                                       
                                                    IEurope,d         t
                                      Io, -r (d )     
                                                                      d   o, d,   t.                                        (8)
                                                     IEurope
It requires that any confounding factors that drive temporary increases in given US county's'
innovation post-1975 ( t
                       d ) do not systematically correlate with vintages of the historical in-
                                                                                     
teraction of pre-1975 immigration from that origin to other regions within the US ( Io, -r (d ) )

and past instances of the simultaneous settlement of European migrants in that US destina-
                      
tion (IEurope,r (d) /IEurope,-r (d) ). If this condition is satisfied, the ancestry shares used to predict

immigration in Step 2 are exogenous, as is the variation in total immigration calculated in ( 7).11
       We believe this assumption is plausible: consider again a productivity shock to software de-
                                    t                                                              t
velopment in Silicon Valley (       Santa Clara )       that attracts Indian software engineers ( IIndia,Santa Clara ).

  11
    Exogeneity of ancestry shares is a sufficient, but generally not a necessary, condition for the validity of the
canonical shift-share approach (Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2018). For work identifying necessary and sufficient
conditions for the validity of the shift-share instrument as proposed by Card (2001) and Bartik (1991), see
Borusyak, Hull, and Jaravel (2018).


                                                                14
This confounding shock, and any other origin-destination specific factor that drives migration
and might affect the destination's capacity for future innovation generally has no effect on
A^t-1
  India,Santa Clara : the fact that Indians excel at programming has no effect on how the histori-
                                                                 
cal destination choices of Europeans ( IEurope,r (Santa Clara) /IEurope,-r (Santa Clara) ) coincide with the
                                                                        
number of Indians arriving in US destinations outside the West Coast ( IIndia, -r (Santa Clara) ). To
                                                   t
violate (8), the confounding shock (               Santa Clara )     would instead have to systematically affect the
destination choices of a large number of Europeans, say French software engineers (a shock
                                                                         
to IF rance,Santa Clara large enough to affect IEurope,r (Santa Clara) /IEurope,-r (Santa Clara) ), while also

attracting a large number of Indians to US counties outside the West Coast, say to Route 128 in
                                                                    
Massachusetts (a shock to IIndia,M iddlesex large enough to affect IIndia,-r (Santa Clara) ). We address

this remaining (if unlikely-sounding) concern below by varying how we construct the leave-out
categories in our estimation. 12

3.2       The Construction and Performance of the Instrument
We now review the estimation results of each of the steps toward the construction of our
instrument, including the performance of the resulting instrument for county-level immigration
in the relevant first-stage regression.
                                                                                                 ^t )
       In Step 1 of our instrument construction, we isolate quasi-random variation in ancestry ( A o,d

using historical interactions between the push and economic pull factors in ( 5). Figure 3 reports
the estimated coefficients on these interactions when predicting 2010 ancestries (assuming for
presentational purposes only that a         
                                   r (d) = a r (d)). The results indicate we identify variation

in current ancestry levels across the full range of time periods in our sample, with statistically
precise contributions from periods as far back as the pre-1900s census waves. These coefficients
are positive and mostly significant. The negative coefficient in the late 1920s is consistent with
large return migrations during the Great Depression, when arriving migrants swiftly returned
home and possibly attracted earlier migrants to follow suit (Abramitzky and Boustan, 2017).
                                        ^2010 against realized ancestry in 2010. The two variables
Figure 4 presents a bin scatter plot of A             o,d

are tightly aligned along the 45-degree line, suggesting that the interaction of historical push
and economic pull factors is a powerful predictor of the present-day composition of ancestry.
    In Step 2, we interact lagged predicted ancestry with contemporaneous scaled push factors
 ^t-1 × I
(A       ~t
   o,d    o,-r (d) ) for each five-year period post 1975 to predict plausibly exogenous variation in

  12
       Note   this     scenario      implies      a     series       of  non-zero     correlations,    pairwise    between
 t             t             t                    t
 Santa Clara , M iddlesex , IIndia,Santa Clara , IIndia,M iddlesex    and IF
                                                                           
                                                                             rance,Santa Clara .    We  explicitly  explore
this possibility in Section 4.2.


                                                                 15
             t
immigration Io,d at the {o, d} level in (6). We allow the coefficient bt to vary by time period
t, and Table 2 reports the resulting estimates. Our ancestry and push factors positively and
significantly predict immigration at the country-county level in all seven time periods post
1975, with an R2 value of 65.6% in column 1 indicating high explanatory power with no other
predictors included. The following columns add controls for distance and latitude difference, as
well as a full set of origin-country, destination-county, and time fixed effects. Column 3 adds
a total of 12,564 interactions of origin-country × destination-census-division and destination-
county × continent-of-origin fixed effects. Throughout these variations, the coefficients on
our (instrumented) push-social pull terms remain virtually unchanged. Remarkably, they even
remain unchanged in column 5, where we control directly for contemporaneous economic forces
shaping migration by including economic push-pull interactions for each period post 1975, 13 and
even when we include the (endogenous) total flow of European migration to the same county
as an additional control in column 4. We conclude our instruments for origin-destination-
specific migration are orthogonal to a wide range of observables, and Step 2 successfully predicts
plausibly exogenous variation in immigration at the {o, d} level.
                                                                           ^t for total non-
       In Step 3, we sum across origin countries to compute our instrument I d

European immigration to county d at time t (7). Figure 5 presents a series of maps displaying
this exogenous immigration shock for each five-year period from 1975 to 2010. To highlight
the variation in this immigration shock, we remove county and year fixed effects. The maps
in Figure 5 show our "immigration shock" instrument picks up substantial variation both over
time and between counties.


4        The Impact of Immigration on Innovation and Growth


In this section, we exploit our quasi-random immigration shocks above to test and quantify the
causal link between immigration and innovation explicitly.

4.1       Immigration and Innovation
We first test the hypothesis that immigration causes an increase in innovation at the county
level. Table 3 panel A shows estimates of (1), where we instrument for the number of immigrants
  13
    Because this specification is saturated with controls, the incremental increase in R2 from adding this variable
appears small. However, if we allow for flexible coefficients at the census region level (as in ( 4)), the R2 increases
by about six percentage points.



                                                          16
arriving in the county during the five-year period using (7). The dependent variable is the
change in patenting per capita relative to the previous five-year period. Column 2 shows
our standard specification, which includes state and time fixed effects, thus controlling for
differential trends in innovation growth at the state level. The estimated effect is positive and
statistically highly significant (0.101, s.e.=0.031). We interpret it as the local average treatment
effect of immigration (particularly, immigration induced by the social push-pull factor in ( 2))
on county-level innovation. It implies the arrival of 10,000 additional immigrants in a given
county on average increases the flow of patents filed over a five-year period by one patent per
100,000 people. Comparing these magnitudes to the summary statistics above, an increase
in immigration flows of one standard deviation - 12,000 immigrants - causes around 1.2 more
patents per 100,000 people, an increase of 27% relative to the mean (4.45 patents per 100,000
people).14
       Panel B shows the immigration shock we construct through the procedure outlined before,
^t , is highly predictive of (non-European) immigration. In our standard specification shown in
I d
                                                                   ^t yields a coefficient of 2.119
column 2, a regression of a county's five-year immigration flow on I            d

(s.e.= 0.070), suggesting a one standard deviation increase in our immigration shock (4.99)
is associated with a 0.86 standard deviation increase in the county's number of newly arrived
immigrants. The F -statistic on the excluded instrument in the first stage of our standard
specification in (7) is 911, far above conventional critical values.
       Standard errors in this and all subsequent specifications are clustered by state. This choice
is conservative because it ensures our standard errors are robust to correlations in the error
structure both within counties over time, across counties within a state, and even across counties
in different time periods within a state. 15
       Column 1 shows the OLS estimate of (1) for comparison. As expected, it is larger than our
preferred estimate (by about two standard errors), consistent with the view that, all else equal,
immigrants select into innovative counties in equilibrium, resulting in an upward bias in OLS
estimates of the effect of immigration on innovation. 16
       Columns 3 and 4 show our results are robust and the estimated impact of immigration on
innovation varies little if we include interacted time and state fixed effects (0.100, s.e.=0.032 in
  14
     To first focus on issues of identification and the sign of the local average treatment effect, we defer a
detailed characterization of functional forms, particularly those commonly used in endogenous growth models,
to Section 5.3.
  15
     Appendix Table 2 reports results from a number of permutation tests of this choice. When reassigning the
instrument, right-hand-side rejection rates in the first stage vary between 0.00% and 2.70% where a nominal
rejection rate of 2.50% would be expected. For the reduced form, they vary between 0.70% and 4.40%.
  16
     Notice that with clustering, the OLS standard errors are not necessarily smaller than the IV standard errors.


                                                       17
column 3), or even county fixed effects (0.108, s.e.=0.033 in column 4). 17 Panel B of Table 3
shows the immigration shock we exploit continues to be highly predictive of immigration also
in these alternative specifications.
       We find similar results and magnitudes for the impact of population growth on innovation,
instrumenting population growth with immigration shocks; see Appendix Table 3. Consistent
with the positive effect of immigration on innovation, we also find immigration shocks generate
agglomerative effects. That is, an exogenous increase in the number of immigrants to a county
also attracts more native-born Americans to that same county; see Appendix Table 4.

4.2       Robustness
Below, we show our results are robust to a large array of alternative specifications.


Alternative Instruments.             Recall that a confounding factor violating our assumption (8)
would have to systematically generate economic dynamism in a given US destination (e.g.,
Silicon Valley), attract immigration from a non-European origin country (e.g., India) to that
US destination as well as to other US regions (e.g. Route 128), and would need to be correlated
with past instances of the simultaneous settlement of European migrants (e.g. France) in that
US destination and a large immigration from that non-European origin to other US regions.
An instance of such a concern would be that pre-1975 periods of IT innovation attracted Indian
as well as French software engineers to Silicon Valley as well as to Route 128, and post-1975
periods of IT innovation have the same effect.
       Table 4 shows how variants of our instrumentation affect our estimates of (1). Column
2 uses a different leave-out strategy for the push factor in step 1 of the construction of our
instrument: instead of leaving out migrants from country o who settle in the same census
division as county d when predicting migrations from o to d, we leave out migrants from o who
settle in counties with migrations that are serially correlated with those toward d. Because
this instrument removes immigrants to counties with a similar pattern of migration as county d
form the push factor, it is immune to the concern, highlighted above, that immigration from a
country (e.g., Indian software engineers) is driven by innovation in a set of correlated counties
(e.g., IT hubs in Silicon Valley and Route 128). Columns 1 and 3 present further variants
of our instrument. Column 1 freezes predicted ancestry at its 1975 level, instead of updating
  17
     The fact that the estimates with and without county fixed effects are almost identical (0.100, s.e.=0.032
                                              ^t is not spuriously correlated with highly persistent responses to
vs. 0.108, s.e.=0.033) strongly suggests that I d
prior shocks, a common problem with traditional implementations of the shift-share approach emphasized in
recent work by Jaeger et al. (2018).

                                                       18
predicted ancestry each period. Column 3 uses a different leave-out strategy for the pull factor
in step 1: instead of using the European migrants to county d as a measure of the pull toward
d when predicting migrations from o to d, we use all migrants to d originating from countries
outside o's continent. All of these variations yield estimates that are almost identical to the
one in our standard specification (0.101). If confounding factors as described above were indeed
at work, we would expect our estimates to change dramatically when we change the leave-out
categories in the construction of our instruments to exclude the number of migrants arriving in
destinations that tend to receive inflows of migrants at the same time (column 2) or when we
use shares of migrants from other continents (instead of Europeans) to measure historical pull
factors (column 3). Instead, our estimates remain virtually unchanged (0.098, s.e.=0.033 and
0.094, s.e.=0.027, respectively).


Construction of the Baseline Instrument. The construction of our baseline instrument
^t =
I           ^t-1 × I
       ^t  [A      ~t
  d   o       o,d    o,leave-out ] differs from canonical applications of the shift-share approach

(Card, 2001) in three respects. First, it instruments for pre-existing ancestry; second, it leaves
out all migrants from o who migrate to the same census region as d when calculating the
push (I~t      ); and third, it uses a different functional form, where migrants are assumed to
       o,leave-out

respond to the number of individuals of their own ancestry in d rather than their share in the
local population. Table 5 retraces each of these steps to make clear how each modification affects
our estimates and how they help address econometric shortcomings of canonical applications
of the shift-share approach highlighted in the recent literature (Ad~
                                                                    ao et al., 2019).
   Column 1 implements our baseline instrument but replaces ancestry in levels with ancestry
                ^t =
shares, so that I         ~t-1 /A
                     ^t  [A
                                ~t-1 × I
                                       ~t     ]. This procedure has the added complication
                 d     o      o,d   o     o,leave-out

that, in some instances, predicted ancestry shares lie outside of the [0 , 1] interval, because
predicted ancestry from the linear model in (5) is sometimes negative. We remedy this issue
                                                                                        ~t-1 =
by performing a simple translation of predicted ancestries that avoids negative shares, A   o,d
^t-1 - min[0, min [A
A                  ^t-1 ]], {t - 1, o}. Using this translation, we find a larger positive and
  o,d                o,

significant effect of immigration on innovation (0.195, s.e.=0.090), though the larger standard
error makes it statistically indistinguishable from our standard specification.
   Though less statistically precise, this formulation of our instrument has the advantage of al-
lowing us to test whether our instrumentation approach successfully addresses an over-rejection
problem that has been shown to arise in conventional applications of the shift-share approach,
which take pre-existing ancestry shares as given (Ad~
                                                    ao et al., 2019). This over-rejection problem



                                                19
arises because two US counties with similar pre-existing ancestry composition may also have
similar exposure to other (unobservable) economic forces, which may lead to a dependency
across regression residuals that is not accounted for by conventional clustered standard errors.
To test for this issue, we implement the statistical placebo test for shift-share instruments
               ao et al. (2019).18 Following their procedure, we randomly generate immigra-
pioneered by Ad~
tion shocks (for each {o, r, t} country-region-time triplet), and construct placebo instruments
by interacting these random shocks with our predicted ancestry shares. We then run 1,000
placebo regressions of actual immigration on our randomly generated instrument, and report
the fraction for which we reject the null hypothesis of no effect at the 5% statistical significance
threshold. Comforting for our inference, we find a false rejection rate of 4.5%, almost exactly
equal to the theoretical asymptotic 5% level. 19
    For comparison, column 2 repeats the same estimation as that of column 1 but utilizing
                                                        ^t =
realized rather than predicted ancestry shares, so that I            t-1
                                                              ^t  [Ao,d    t-1  ~t
                                                                               ×I
                                                          d  o           /Ao      o,leave-out ].

Consistent with the findings in Ad~
                                  ao et al. (2019), the false rejection rate is now close to 28%,
far above the expected 5%, pointing to a significant tendency to over-reject the null (and a
correspondingly much narrower standard error, although the point estimate remains similar).
Finally, in column 3, we fully converge to the conventional shift-share approach by also drop-
                                       ^t =
ping our leave-out adjustment (so that I              t-1
                                                ^t  [Ao,d   t-1  ~o
                                                                ×I t
                                         d     o          /Ao        ]). The coefficient of interest
is again close to our standard specification (0.132, s.e.=0.055) but continues to suffer from dra-
matic over-rejection in the placebo test, close to 28%. The fact that our instrument circumvents
this statistical problem is intuitive: although the spatial correlation of realized ancestry shares
is related to the spatial correlation of the second-stage error term, our instrument only exploits
a small share of the variation in ancestry shares.
       We conclude our instrumentation strategy is sufficiently powerful to isolate quasi-random
variation in ancestry levels, or shares, and that it effectively removes spurious correlations with
the error term, bolstering our confidence in a causal interpretation of the results. Finally, note
that all approaches to identification, including the simpler ones, unanimously find a positive
effect of innovation on county-level innovation.


Robustness: Additional Controls.                In Table 6, we go one step further and control paramet-
rically for a number of initial conditions that could be considered drivers of long-term economic
  18
     To clarify the comparison, the shifts are industry shocks in Ad~  ao et al. (2019) versus immigration shocks
in our case, whereas the shares are employment shares in Ad~  ao et al. (2019) versus ancestry shares in our case;
the variation is at the sector-commuting zone level in Ad~ ao et al. (2019), versus country-county in our case.
  19
     We report additional details of this placebo test in Appendix Table 5.


                                                       20
growth: population density in 1970, the number of patents generated in 1975 per 1,000 in-
habitants (1975 is the first year for which our patent data is available), and the share of the
1970 population that is high-school and college educated, respectively. All of these covariates
could be considered "bad controls" (Angrist and Pischke, 2009), in the sense that they may be
outcomes of migration and should thus more appropriately be thought of as various channels
through which historical migrations and ancestry affects innovation. Nevertheless, the finding
that controlling for these initial conditions has only modest effects on our result is comforting
for our identification assumption. The largest change in the coefficient of interest occurs when
we include the share of the population with a college education in 1970, lowering it from 0.101
to 0.082, less than one standard error (s.e.=0.031). Column 6 imposes an even stronger iden-
tification restriction, by including a county fixed effect to control for county-specific trends in
innovation (as already shown in Table 3). Throughout these variations, the estimated effect of
immigration varies little, and it remains positive and statistically highly significant.


Robustness: Alternative Samples.            Table 7 further probes the robustness of these results
by excluding important origin countries (panel A), or using only important origin countries
(panel B). In panel A, we exclude migrations from the five largest sending countries post 1975
(Mexico, China, India, Philippines, and Vietnam), one at a time, from the sum in ( 7), thus
treating migration from these countries as endogenous. Although dropping Mexican immigra-
tion from our instrument lowers the F-statistic in the first stage by about half (to 666), the
estimated coefficients vary little across these alternative samples, showing that no single large
sending country drives our results. In panel B, we include only migration from those individ-
ual origin countries. Again, although our F-statistics decrease as we move to smaller origin
countries, the coefficients vary surprisingly little across specifications.


Robustness: Different Time Horizons.              Table 8 serves two purposes. First and reassur-
ingly, we show in column 1 that contemporaneous migrations have no effect on past innovation.
This finding further strengthens our confidence in our identification strategy. Second, in column
2-4, we explore the dynamic impact of exogenous immigration shocks on innovation. Column
2 replicates our baseline results, the contemporaneous effect of immigration on innovation over
a five-year period, as in Table 3, Panel A, column 4. Columns 3 and 4 consider the impact of
immigration on patenting over a 10- and 15-year period. We find the effect of immigration on
innovation gradually increases, and stabilizes after about 10 years. In other words, the effect
more than doubles from 5 to 10 years, and remains constant beyond. This speed of adjustment

                                                 21
is plausible, and consistent with endogenous growth models, as the population shock induced by
immigration gradually percolates through the local labor market and firms are able to innovate.


Robustness: Alternative Measures of Innovation.                     We show in Appendix Table 6 that
our results are robust to alternative measures of innovation. Our measure for innovation comes
from USPTO patent microdata. In our main specification, we assign patents to a specific
county d according to the firm or assignee owning the patents, and we treat all patents as
equally important, simply counting the total number of patents. We consider two variations
on each dimension. First, we assign patents according to the place of residence of the inventor
of the patent, not the firm owning the patent. Second, we weight each patent according to
their relative citation counts following Hall et al. (2001) in order to distinguish between high-
impact/high-citation patents and low-impact/low-citation patents. Across all four possible
measures of patents, our results are similar, with a positive and significant effect of immigration
on innovation, and a similar estimated size for this effect. The differences in the point estimates
simply reflect differences in the scale of the various measures of innovation.

4.3       Immigration, Economic Dynamism, and Income Growth
In Table 9, we supplement our analysis of the impact of immigration on innovation with a range
of additional economic dynamism and income growth outcomes, which endogenous growth
theory suggests should link positively to innovation.
       Immigration causes an increase in creative destruction or gross flows in jobs, as reported in
columns 1 and 2. Both the job creation rate and job destruction rate increase with immigra-
tion, implying the overall churning or reallocation in the labor market also responds positively.
Recall that dynamism measures decline on average over this period, as emphasized by the
wide literature on declining creative destruction in the US. Our positive estimated responses
to immigration indicate immigration may help dampen such declines. Turning to magnitudes,
a one standard deviation increase in immigration in a county - around 12,000 more people -
causes an increase in the job creation rate of 2.1 percentage points (around 7% relative to the
mean decline) and an increase in the job destruction rate of 1.8 percentage points (around 11%
relative to the mean decline). 20
       Exploring an alternative measure of dynamism, higher immigration causes an increase in
  20
    Note that although most endogenous growth theories link higher dynamism to innovation, higher income
growth, and higher welfare, the impact of dynamism on the subjective well-being of individuals exposed to such
creative destruction is more ambiguous (Aghion et al., 2016).



                                                     22
the skewness of employment growth (column 3). Intuitively, when more immigrants arrive, the
best-performing "superstar" sectors outpace the broader growth of the local economy ( Decker
et al., 2014). A one standard deviation increase in immigration causes about a 3% increase in
skewness relative to the mean decline in this measure over the sample.
       At their core, endogenous growth models link innovation to income growth, and column 4 of
Table 9 confirms that more immigration causes an increase in wages per person. Immigration
of around 12,000 more people to a county, on average, increases wages per capita by around
3% relative to the mean observed growth.
       Because the QCEW wage data do not allow us to distinguish between wages of natives and
non-natives, columns 5 and 6 repeat this estimation using 10-year changes in average wages
measured from the US census, aggregating separately across all natives (individuals born in the
US) and natives who report having lived in the same county five years prior to the census. We
find a positive and statistically significant effect of immigration on the average wage of both
groups, with estimates of 0.049 (s.e.=0.106) and 0.056 (s.e.=0.020), respectively. 21 Because of
the different time horizon and various differences in how wages are measured in the two data
sources, these latter effects appear smaller than the one shown in column 4. Nevertheless,
they imply similar relative effects: the arrival of 12,000 additional migrants (half of a standard
deviation in 10-year immigration) leads to an increase in the average wage of natives and native
non-movers of 5.5% and 4%, respectively. 22
       To summarize the estimates in this section, immigration causes moderately large increases
in creative destruction and income growth at the local level, validating traditional endogenous
growth theories, and potentially serving as a potent counterweight to trend decline in dynamism
and growth in the US in recent decades.
  21
     Note this positive average effect of immigration to the US on the average wage of native non-movers does
not preclude the possibility that the influx of migrants may lower the wages of some native workers, or even the
average wage of all natives in some historical circumstances. For example, average wages may increase while
wages of a sub-group of native workers who are in direct competition with immigrants may fall. For an overview
of an active literature on this subject see, Borjas (2003), Cortes (2008), Ottaviano and Peri (2012), Foged and
Peri (2016), Dustmann et al. (2017), Monras (forthcoming), Jaeger et al. (2018), and Bratsberg et al. (2019).
We show some direct evidence of such heterogeneity in section 5.
  22
     Interesting for the interpretation of our results in the context of structural spatial growth models, we find
this effect of immigration on wages is higher in services (non-traded sector), with a coefficient of 0.239 (s.e.
0.082), than in manufacturing (traded sector), with a coefficient of 0.147 (s.e. 0.053).




                                                       23
5     Spillovers and Education
The local positive impact of immigration on innovation that we document above validates
long-standing theoretical mechanisms linking innovation to population growth. However, two
natural questions remain. First, if ideas and goods flow across regions, to what extent do the
impacts of immigration spill over across counties in our data? Second, because most theoretical
models predict more highly skilled workers bring more effective input to bear for innovation or
production, to what extent do the impacts of immigration on innovation vary with the education
level of migrants? We tackle both issues directly in this section, and find that positive spillovers
appear meaningful and that the impact of immigration on innovation increases with average
schooling levels.

5.1    Spatial Spillovers
To explore the impact of cross-county spillovers, we consider three geographic spillover concepts
in Table 10. First, we consider within-state spillovers, constructing for each destination county
d at each time t a measure of immigration to all counties other than d in the same state.
This measure, labeled Immigrationt
                                 State , varies at the same level as the county-specific baseline

immigration flow Immigrationt
                            d . To construct a separate instrument for state-level immigration

flows, we simply add up the immigration shocks for all other counties within the same state
as d. In a second approach, we consider a specification allowing spillovers from neighboring
counties to vary smoothly by distance. For county d at time t, we construct the sum of all
immigration to other counties, inversely weighted by the distance to the reference county d.
The distance measures reflect a matrix of great circle distances computed from county centroids
using the Census mapping files for county geographies. The resulting distance-weighted measure
of immigration to other counties, labeled N eighbor s Immigrationt
                                                                 d , varies at the county d by

time t level. Finally, we also consider a non-parametric estimate for the diffusion of the effect
of immigration, with separate instruments for immigration within 100km (60 miles), excluding
county d itself, immigration between 100km and 250km (150 miles), and between 250km and
500km (300 miles).
    We explore the spatial spillovers of immigration on both innovation (panel A of Table 10),
and on local wages (panel B of Table 10).


Innovation Spillovers.       In column 1 of Table 10, we first report an instrumental-variable
(IV) estimate of the effect of own-county immigration on innovation using census division in-

                                                24
stead of state fixed effects. The coefficient of interest is similar to those in Table 3 (0.130,
s.e.=0.039). Column 2 adds a second endogenous variable, the state-level sum across other
counties' immigration. The first-stage F statistics reveal strong power for both the own-county
and state-level immigration flows. 23 The impact of own-county migration on immigration re-
mains strongly positive with a similar magnitude. In addition to this direct effect of immigra-
tion, more immigration to other counties within the same state also increases local innovation.
The magnitudes implied by column 2 are sensible. A one standard deviation increase in immi-
gration to a county (12,000 people) on average increases patenting per capita by 29% relative
to mean, holding state-level immigration to other counties constant. Similarly, a one standard
deviation increase in immigration to all other counties in the state (1.4 million more immi-
grants), holding the county's own immigration flow constant, increases patenting per capita by
around 31% relative to the mean. In other words, both local immigration and immigration to
the surrounding state positively affect local innovation. Although migrants to other counties
matter less individually for a county's innovation, the larger scale of those flows means such
immigrants bring similarly sized innovation impacts to the local economy.
       Columns 3 and 4 explore the spatial diffusion of the effect of immigration on innovation,
doing away with the somewhat arbitrary notion of state boundaries. Column 3 shows immigra-
tion to nearby counties, where we discount distant counties inversely with distance. 24 We show
immigration to nearby counties (defined as geographically proximate counties) has a strong
positive effect on innovation. Column 4 quantifies this spatial diffusion in a non-parametric
way. It shows immigration to nearby counties has a positive effect on innovation, but this
effect dies out with distance. A one standard deviation increase in immigration within 100km
increases innovation by 80% relative to the mean; a one standard deviation increase in immigra-
tion between 100km and 250km increases innovation by 42%; but immigration beyond 250km
no longer has a statistically detectable effect on innovation.
       Appendix Table 7 displays the first-stage regression results, showcasing the strength of our
identification strategy. We are able to successfully identify independent variations for each
of the separate endogenous variables. For instance, columns 6-9 present the first-stage results
corresponding to each of the separate instruments for the non-parametric spatial diffusion model
                                                                         ^t ), immigration shocks
of column 4 in Table 10. Each instrument, for local immigration shocks ( I           d

within 100km      ^t
                 (I                                        ^t                                     ^t
                    100km ),   between 100km and 250km    (I 100km ),   between 250km and 500km ( I 500km ),
  23
     For all specifications involving multiple endogenous variables, we use the Angrist and Pischke (2009, p.
217-218) first-stage F -statistic, separately testing for each regressor the null of weak identification.
  24
     This measure is akin to a measure of market access in international trade.


                                                     25
correctly predicts actual local immigration, actual immigration within 100km, between 100km
and 250km, and between 250km and 500km. This ability to simultaneously identify exogenous
variations in immigration for different units is one of the strengths of our identification method.


Wage Growth Spillovers.           The spatial spillovers of the effect of immigration on wage growth,
shown in panel B of Table 10, are similar to those on innovation, although they seem more local
than the innovation spillovers. Immigration to other counties within the state (column 2) do not
have a significant impact on wage growth. Immigration to nearby counties, using an inverse-
distance-weighted sum of immigration to other counties, does have a strong and significant
impact on local wage growth (column 3), though it appears smaller than that for innovation.
Immigration within 100km positively affects local wage growth, with a one standard deviation
increase leading to around a 2% increase relative to mean. However, the effect is statistically
indistinguishable from zero beyond 100km (column 4).

5.2       Education of Immigrants
We now explore whether more educated immigrants have different impacts on local innovation
and wages. First, to measure educational attainment for individuals who might reasonably have
had the time to complete their schooling, we limit ourselves to the analysis of immigrants age
25 or older, constructing the endogenous measure of immigration at the county level within this
subset of immigrants. We then interact this overall adult immigration flow with the average
schooling levels of migrants arriving in a given county at a given time (which we again construct
from IPUMS), adding a second endogenous variable to our baseline specification. 25
       To successfully instrument for both the total immigration flow and the interaction of im-
migration and education, we exploit the fact that different origin countries send migrants with
different levels of education to the US at different times. (For example, Japanese immigrants, on
average, have about twice the number of years of schooling as those from Guatemala, whereas
the education levels of Mexican arrivals increased by about 30% during our sample period.) Our
identification strategy allows us to construct a separate instrument for each origin-destination
pair and each time period, I ^t = A  ^t-1 × I
                                            ~t
                              o,d     o,d     o,-r (d) . We disaggregate our baseline instrument to

this level, using the predicted immigration shocks for each of the the top 20 origin countries
as a joint set of instruments for both total immigration and immigration interacted with the
average education level of the new arrivals, so that the first stage for this additional endogenous
  25
    IPUMS lists information on the number of years of schooling and the number of years of college education
each respondent has received. See Appendix A.1 for details.


                                                    26
variable takes the form
                                                                                  20
             Average Y ears     Education t    ×   Immigrationt    = s +  t +            ^t +  t .
                                                                                       o I
                                          d                   d                            o,d d
                                                                                 o=1

Because migrants arriving from different countries at different times have different schooling
levels and emigrate to different counties, we are able to isolate exogenous variations in the level
of education of migrants arriving in a given destination at a given point in time. For example,
other things equal, an exogenous increase of Japanese arrivals to a given destination implies,
on average, a relative increase in the average education level of local immigrants at that point
in time.


Innovation and Education              Table 11 reports the results of our analysis. The top panel
examines heterogeneity in the impact of immigrants on innovation by education level. Column
1 replicates our standard specification for the age 25+ immigration sample, with a positive - now
slightly stronger than baseline - impact of immigration on the growth of patenting per capita. 26
Column 2 adds the interaction of immigration with (demeaned) average years of education for
immigrants to the same county. The estimates indicate more highly educated immigrants cause
a larger increase in innovation. To inspect the magnitude of the heterogeneity at work here,
consider two counties, both receiving 10,000 more migrants. A county receiving migrants of
average education (about 11 years) would see innovation increase by around 10 × 0.200 = 2 more
patents per 100,000 people. However, a county receiving the same number of immigrants with
one standard deviation extra years of education per person, about 3.7 years, would see 10 ×
(0.200+3.7 × 0.221)  10 more patents per 100,000 people. Column 4 reports a similar analysis,
but measuring educational attainment by average years of college completed rather than average
years of total schooling. Unsurprisingly, the impact of immigration on innovation increases
even more strongly with college attainment than with overall educational attainment. Note
columns 2-4 rely on a linear interaction of immigration and education, imposing functional-form
restrictions on the link between education and innovation responses. Column 5 instead conducts
a nonparametric analysis, separately instrumenting for the immigration into counties receiving
migrants with low, medium, and high levels of average education per person by terciles. The
more flexible analysis in this column reveals that counties receiving the most highly educated
  26
    In column 1 of Table 11 (both panels), we consider a specification with a single endogenous regressor and
multiple instruments, and therefore report the first-stage F-statistic developed in Montiel Olea and Pflueger
(2013). The remaining columns in this table report results for specifications with multiple endogenous variables
and multiple instruments and, to our knowledge, there is no comparable effective F-statistic to report in this
case.


                                                      27
immigrants see an order-of-magnitude higher impact on patenting relative to counties receiving
medium-education migrants, whereas the impact of the lowest-education immigrants is too
noisy to determine.


Wage Growth and Education             The bottom panel of Table 11 examines heterogeneity in
the impact of immigration on overall wages per capita by education levels, with a structure
identical to the top panel. The average immigrant in our sample, with approximately 11 years
of education, increases average wages in column 1. Column 2 reveals a higher impact in counties
that receive immigrants with a higher average education level. To evaluate magnitudes, once
again consider two counties, both receiving 10,000 more migrants. A county receiving migrants
of average education would see wages increase by around 10 × 0.367 × $100 = $367 more per
person over five years (measured at 2010 prices). A county receiving the same number of
immigrants with one standard deviation or about 3.7 extra years of education per person would
see more wage growth by around 10 × (0.367 + 3.7 × 0.352) × $100  $1,669 per person over five
years. Column 4 reveals similar - and unsurprisingly stronger - patterns for college education
rather than total years of education. And in column 5, a nonparametric analysis splitting
education levels into terciles reveals that, just as in the case of patenting, the most highly
skilled immigrants have an order-of-magnitude higher impact on local wages per person than
moderately educated immigrants, with only noisily estimated impacts from the lowest-educated
migrants.

5.3    Growth Models and Population Change
Endogenous growth models often link changes in macro growth to shifts in total population. By
contrast, all of our results are local, rather than aggregate, in nature. In our baseline results,
we also focus on immigration in particular, rather than on total population change. To provide
empirical results in a form more readily digestible by the theoretical literature, Table 12 explores
a range of variations on our baseline specification loosely inspired by endogenous growth models.
   First, column 1 replicates our baseline results. We then note that if population growth
rates determine innovation growth, counties with larger absolute immigration flows should see
smaller marginal increments in innovation. Column 2 tests for such concavity by adding the
squared immigration flow, instrumenting for this higher-order term with the square of the
baseline predicted immigration instrument. The negative coefficients on squared innovation
suggests such nonlinearities or concavities are present.


                                                28
    To this point, we have found it convenient to conservatively analyze the impact of immi-
gration on the change in patenting in order to flexibly account for any permanent destination-
county-specific variation in the levels of patent flows. However, baseline growth models typically
relate to the flow of patenting rather than its difference. So we explore the implications of a
switch to this flow measure, first duplicating our baseline specification and revealing a posi-
tive impact of immigration on patent flows (column 3) and evidence of some concavity again
(column 4).
    The final four columns switch to an alternative unit-free outcome measure, the inverse
hyperbolic sine (IHS) of patent flows. The inverse hyperbolic sine function, approximately
equivalent to the natural logarithm for non-negative values, allows us to examine the semi-
elasticity or elasticity of innovation to various changes. Column 5 reveals a positive semi-
elasticity of innovation to immigration. Column 6 reveals a positive semi-elasticity to total
population changes, although our instrument, designed to predict immigration rather than
overall population change, has less power, as measured by the first-stage F-statistic. Columns
7 and 8 repeat the exercise, instrumenting for the IHS of immigration or population change.
The resulting coefficients are interpretable as elasticities, with a 1% increase in immigration
inducing 1.7% higher innovation in column 7. Column 8, for which we have the least first-stage
power and more noisy estimates, reveals an increase in innovation of around 2.5% after a 1%
higher population change.


6     Conclusion
The economic, social, political, and cultural changes immigrants bring to their host communities
are often the subject of fierce political controversy. Is immigration an asset or a liability for
the receiving communities? Informing this debate with data has often proven difficult, not
only because different migrants may affect their host societies in many different and highly
heterogenous ways, but also due to an identification problem: immigrants do not randomly
allocate across space, but likely select into host communities that offer the best prospects for
them and their families. This selection generates endogenous correlation between past and
present immigration, ancestry composition, and local economic outcomes, making isolating the
causal effects of immigration on these outcomes difficult.
    In this paper, we introduced a novel approach to this identification problem that allows
the construction of local immigration shocks ­ instruments for the total number of migrants
arriving in each US county for each five-year period since 1975. Importantly, these immigration

                                               29
shocks remain valid even if migrations prior to 1975, and thus the county's pre-existing ancestry
composition, are endogenous to local economic activity, and can be flexibly disaggregated to
obtain different instruments for migrations from each of the origin countries to each destination
county at each point in time.
   We use these instruments to document three substantive facts. First, we show that, on
average, immigration to the US between 1975 and 2010 had a positive causal effect on local
innovation, local economic dynamism, and average wages of natives, where, for example, a 1%
increase in immigration to a given county on average increased the number of patents filed
by local residents by 1.7% over a five-year period. These positive local economic effects of
immigration are consistent with the predictions of a large theoretical literature on endogenous
growth but should also be interpreted with caution because they describe the average effect
of the average migrant on the economy of an average US county. Second, we find positive
spillovers of these positive local effects, where, for example, an increase in a given US county's
immigration significantly increases the patenting rate in surrounding areas up to a distance of
250km (150 miles). Third, we find the effect of immigration on innovation and local wages
is far from uniform. Instead, we show the arrival of highly educated migrants has a much
larger positive effect on local innovation and wages than the arrival of migrants with little or
no education.
   Although interesting in their own right, we hope these findings, and the exogenous im-
migration shocks used to generate them, will prove useful to discipline an emerging class of
quantitative spatial models of economic growth and to aid future empirical work quantifying
the highly complex and heterogenous effects of immigration on a broad range of social and
economic outcomes at the local level.
   Beyond our application to immigration, we believe our approach linking pre-existing (ances-
try) shares to the interaction of historical push and economic pull factors may prove useful in
other applications of the canonical shift-share instrument. For example, the cumulative forces
that lead to the establishment of migrants of a given ethnicity in a given location over time
may be quite similar to the historical forces that generate variation in pre-existing shares of
industries, occupations, and other specializations in a given location. Our procedure for isolat-
ing quasi-random variation in pre-existing shares may thus prove useful in other settings that
have studied the local effects of import competition, the local fiscal multiplier, local supply
elasticities, and other important subjects.




                                               30
References
Abramitzky, R. and L. Boustan (2017): "Immigration in American economic history,"
  Journal of economic literature, 55, 1311­45.

  ~ o, R., M. Kolesa
Ada                ´ r, and E. Morales (2019): "Shift-share designs: Theory and infer-
  ence," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 1949­2010.

Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, A. Deaton, and A. Roulet (2016): "Creative destruction and
  subjective well-being," American Economic Review, 106, 3869­97.

Aghion, P., A. Bergeaud, T. Boppart, P. J. Klenow, and H. Li (2019): "A theory
  of falling growth and rising rents," National Bureau of Economic Research working paper.

Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1992): "A model of growth through creative destruction,"
  Econometrica (1986-1998), 60, 323.

Akcigit, U. and S. T. Ates (2019): "Ten Facts on Declining Business Dynamism and
  Lessons from Endogenous Growth Theory," Working paper.

Akcigit, U., J. Grigsby, and T. Nicholas (2017): "The rise of American ingenuity:
  Innovation and inventors of the Golden Age," National Bureau of Economic Research working
  paper.

Alon, T., D. Berger, R. Dent, and B. Pugsley (2018): "Older and slower: The startup
  deficit's lasting effects on aggregate productivity growth," Journal of Monetary Economics,
  93, 68­85.

Angrist, J. D. and J.-S. Pischke (2009): Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's
  companion, Princeton university press.

Bartik, T. (1991): Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? , W.E.
  Upjohn Institute.

Bernstein, S., R. Diamond, T. McQuade, and B. Pousada (2018): "The Contribution
  of High-Skilled Immigrants to Innovation in the United States," Working paper.

Bloom, N., C. I. Jones, J. Van Reenen, and M. Webb (2017): "Are ideas getting harder
  to find?" National Bureau of Economic Research working paper.


                                             31
Borjas, G. J. (2003): "The labor demand curve is downward sloping: Reexamining the impact
  of immigration on the labor market," The quarterly journal of economics, 118, 1335­1374.

Borjas, G. J. and K. B. Doran (2012): "The collapse of the Soviet Union and the produc-
  tivity of American mathematicians," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1143­1203.

Borusyak, K., P. Hull, and X. Jaravel (2018): "Quasi-Experimental Shift-Share Re-
  search Designs," Working Paper.

Bratsberg, B., A. Moxnes, O. Raaum, K.-H. Ulltveit-Moe, et al. (2019): "Opening
  the Floodgates: Industry and Occupation Adjustments to Labor Immigration," Tech. rep.,
  CEPR Discussion Papers.

Burchardi, K. B., T. Chaney, and T. A. Hassan (2019): "Migrants, Ancestors, and
  Foreign Investments," The Review of Economic Studies, 86, 1448­86.

Card, D. (2001): "Immigrant Inflows, Native outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts
  of Higher Immigration," Journal of Labor Economics, 19, 22­64.

Cortes, P. (2008): "The Effect of Low-Skilled Immigration on U.S. Prices: Evidence from
  CPI Data," Journal of Political Economy, 116, 381­422.

Davis, S. J. and J. Haltiwanger (1999): "Gross job flows," Handbook of labor economics,
  3, 2711­2805.

Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2014): "The secular decline
  in business dynamism in the US," Working paper.

Desmet, K., D. K. Nagy, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2018): "The geography of develop-
  ment," Journal of Political Economy, 126, 903­983.

Duncan, B. and S. J. Trejo (2017): "The complexity of immigrant generations: Implica-
  tions for assessing the socioeconomic integration of Hispanics and Asians," ILR Review, 70,
  1146­1175.

                    ¨ nberg, and J. Stuhler (2017): "Labor supply shocks, native
Dustmann, C., U. Scho
  wages, and the adjustment of local employment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132,
  435­483.



                                             32
Foged, M. and G. Peri (2016): "Immigrants' effect on native workers: New analysis on
  longitudinal data," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics , 8, 1­34.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., I. Sorkin, and H. Swift (2018): "Bartik Instruments: What,
  When, Why and How," Working Paper.

Gordon, R. J. (2012): "Is US economic growth over? Faltering innovation confronts the six
  headwinds," National Bureau of Economic Research working paper.

Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman (1991): "Quality ladders in the theory of growth," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 58, 43­61.

Hall, B. H., A. B. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2001): "The NBER Patent Citaitons
  Data File: Lessons, Insights, and Methodological Tools," NBER Working Paper 8498.

Hanson, G. H. (2009): "The economic consequences of the international migration of labor,"
  Annual Review of Economics, 1, 179­208.

------ (2010): "Future Directions for Research on Immigration," American Economic Asso-
  ciation, Ten Years and Beyond: Economists Answer NSF's Call for Long-Term Research
  Agendas.

Hathaway, I. and R. E. Litan (2014): "Declining business dynamism in the United States:
  A look at states and metros," Brookings Institution, 2.

Hopenhayn, H., J. Neira, and R. Singhania (2018): "From Population Growth to Firm
  Demographics: Implications for Concentration, Entrepreneurship and the Labor Share," Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research working paper.

Hunt, J. and M. Gauthier-Loiselle (2010): "How Much Does Immigration Boost Inno-
  vation?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics , 2, 31­56.

Jaeger, D. A., J. Ruist, and J. Stuhler (2018): "Shift-share instruments and the impact
  of immigration," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jones, C. I. (1995): "R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth," Journal of Political Economy,
  103.

------ (1999): "Growth: with or without scale effects?" American Economic Review, 89,
  139­144.

                                              33
Karahan, F., B. Pugsley, and A. Sahin (2016): "Demographic origins of the startup
  deficit," New York Fed working paper.

Katz, L. F. and K. M. Murphy (1992): "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
  and Demand Factors," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 35­78.

Kerr, W. R. (2008): "Ethnic scientific communities and international technology diffusion,"
  The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 518­537.

Kerr, W. R. and W. F. Lincoln (2010): "The Supply Side of Innovation: H1B Visa
  Reforms and U.S. Ethnic Invention," Journal of Labor Economics, 28, 473­508.

Khanna, G. and M. Lee (2018): "High-skill Immigration, Innovation, and Creative Destruc-
  tion," NBER Working Paper 24824.

Klette, T. J. and S. Kortum (2004): "Innovating firms and aggregate innovation," Journal
  of Political Economy, 112, 986­1018.

                                    ´ (2019): "People and Machines: A Look at the
Lafortune, J., E. Lewis, and T. Jos e
  Evolving Relationships Between Capital and Skill in Manufacturing 1860-1930 Using Immi-
  gration Shocks," Review of Economics and Statistics, 101, 30­43.

Laincz, C. A. and P. F. Peretto (2006): "Scale effects in endogenous growth theory: An
  error of aggregation not specification," Journal of Economic Growth, 11, 263­288.

Lewis, E. (2011): "Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital Skill Complementarity," The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 126, 1029­1069.

------ (2013): "Immigration and production technology," Annual Review of Economics, 5,
  165­191.

Lewis, E. and G. Peri (2015): "Immigration and the Economy of Cities and Regions," in
  Handbook of regional and urban economics, Elsevier, vol. 5, 625­685.

Monras, J. (forthcoming): "Immigration and wage dynamics: Evidence from the mexican
  peso crisis," Journal of Political Economy.

Monte, F., S. J. Redding, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2018): "Commuting, migration, and
  local employment elasticities," American Economic Review, 108, 3855­90.


                                                34
Montiel Olea, J. L. and C. Pflueger (2013): "A Robust Test for Weak Instruments,"
  Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 31, 358­369.

Moser, P., A. Voena, and F. Waldinger (2014): "German Jewish ´
                                                             emigr´
                                                                  es and US
  invention," American Economic Review, 104, 3222­55.

Ottaviano, G. I. and G. Peri (2012): "Rethinking the effect of immigration on wages,"
  Journal of the European economic association, 10, 152­197.

Peretto, P. F. (1998): "Technological change and population growth," Journal of Economic
  Growth, 3, 283­311.

Peters, M. (2019): "Market Size and Spatial Growth ­ Evidence from Germanys Post-War
  Population Expulsions," Working paper.

Romer, P. M. (1990): "Endogenous technological change," Journal of Political Economy, 98,
  S71­S102.

Sequeira, S., N. Nunn, and N. Quian (2020): "Immigrants and the making of America,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 382­419.

Tabellini, M. (2018): "Gifts of the immigrants, woes of the natives: Lessons from the age of
  mass migration," Working paper.

Walsh, C. (2019): "Firm Creation and Local Growth," Working paper.

Young, A. (1998): "Growth without scale effects," Journal of political economy, 106, 41­63.




                                             35
                         Table 1: Summary Statistics by County-Year
                                                                       N      mean       sd        iqr
 Immigration Flows and Population Change
 Immigrationt d                                                      21,987    1.42     12.21     0.22
  Populationt   d                                                    21,986    4.03     19.56     2.56
 Immigration Shock, I ^t                                             21,987    0.00     4.99      0.24
                       d
 Patents
 Patenting per 100,000 People                                        21,987   32.60     94.73    20.66
 5-Year Diff. in Patenting per 100,000 People                        18,846    4.45     47.83     6.45
 5-Year Diff. in Patenting per 100,000 People (Inventors)            18,846   18.85     90.45    41.13
 5-Year Diff. in Patenting per 100,000 People (Citation Weighted)    18,846   5.23      63.91    6.04
 Dynamism and Wages
 5-Year Diff. in Job Creation Rate                                    6,600   -32.47   209.90    50.00
 5-Year Diff. in Job Destruction Rate                                 6,600   -17.37   199.58    38.46
 5-Year Diff. in Job Growth Rate Skewness                            12,564    -6.82   48.91     51.87
 5-Year Diff. in Average Annual Wage                                 21,978    46.07    25.41    25.54
 10-Year Diff. in Average Annual Wage of Natives                     12,546   10.75    25.80     32.20
 10-Year Diff. in Average Annual Wage of Native Non-Movers           6,274    16.85    27.19     33.08
 Immigration and Education
 Immigrationt d (Age 25+)                                            21,987    0.80     6.91      0.11
 Average Years Colleget  d (Age 25+)                                 21,987    1.50     1.41      1.82
 Average Years Education t   d (Age 25+)                             21,987   10.88     3.65      4.59
 Spillovers
 Immigrationt State                                                  21,987 808.00     1,438.90 557.47
 Neighbors' Immigration t  d (Inverse Distance Weight)               21,987 1.15         0.78    0.65
 Immigrationt within 100km                                           21,987 18.58        64.65   9.21
 Immigrationt within 250km                                           21,987 74.96       133.50  67.60
 Immigrationt within 500km                                           21,987 123.10      149.52 143.69

 Notes: This table displays the number of observations, mean, standard deviation, and interquartile
range for all outcome variables considered, as well as the variables for immigration and the immigration
instrument. The first section of the table contains summary statistics for immigration (here we focus
only on non-European migration) and population growth in 1000s of people. The second section lists
summary statistics for patenting and differences in patenting per 100,000 people. The third section re-
ports summary statistics for dynamism and wages ( $100). Finally, the fourth and fifth section provide
summary statistics on the immigration variables used in the education and spillovers analyses, respec-
tively. Variables for immigration, population growth, and education are all for five-year periods, as are
the differenced outcomes except in the case of differences in average annual wage for natives and native
non-movers, which are over 10-year periods.




                                                   36
Table 2: Regressions of Immigration on Push-Pull Instruments at the Country-County Level
                                                                        Immigrationt
                                                                                   o,d

                                                  (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)
        ^1975
        A        ×     ~1980
                       I                      0.0036***       0.0036***   0.0035***   0.0035***   0.0035***
          o,d            o,-r (d)
                                               (0.0000)        (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)
                ~1985
        ^1980 × I
        A                                     0.0016***       0.0016***   0.0016***   0.0016***   0.0016***
          o,d     o,-r (d)
                                               (0.0000)        (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)
        ^1985 × I
        A       ~1990                         0.0018***       0.0018***   0.0018***   0.0018***   0.0018***
          o,d     o,-r (d)
                                               (0.0000)        (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)
                ~1995
        ^1990 × I
        A                                     0.0005***       0.0005***   0.0005***   0.0005***   0.0005***
          o,d     o,-r (d)
                                               (0.0000)        (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)
                ~2000
        ^1995 × I
        A                                     0.0004***       0.0004***   0.0004***   0.0004***   0.0004***
          o,d     o,-r (d)
                                               (0.0000)        (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)
        ^2000 × I
        A       ~2005                         0.0002***       0.0002***   0.0002***   0.0002***   0.0002***
          o,d     o,-r (d)
                                               (0.0000)        (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)
                ~2010
        ^2005 × I
        A                                     0.0002***       0.0002***   0.0002***   0.0002***   0.0002***
          o,d     o,-r (d)
                                               (0.0000)        (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)    (0.0000)
         t
        IEuro,d                                                                       0.0109***
                                                                                       (0.0031)
                       t
                      IEuro,d
         t
        Io, -r (d )      t
                       IEuro
                                                                                                  0.3913**
                                                                                                  (0.1558)
        N                                     3,583,881       3,583,881   3,583,881   3,583,881   3,583,881
            2
        R                                        0.656          0.657       0.709        0.709      0.709
        Distance                                  No            Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes
        Latitude Dis.                             No            Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes
        Region-Country FE                         No            No           Yes         Yes        Yes
        County-Continent FE                       No            No           Yes         Yes        Yes
        Time FE                                   No            No           Yes         Yes        Yes
        Concurrent European Immigration           No            No           No          Yes        No
        Contemporaneous Push-Pull                 No            No           No          No         Yes
        Notes: This table reports coefficient estimates for step 2 of our instrument construction, shown in
       equation (6), at the country-county level. Moving from column 1 to column 3 we introduce controls
       for distance and latitude distance and then fixed effects into the regression specification. Column
       4 adds contemporaneous European migration as a control while column 5 instead introduces the
       contemporaneous push-economic pull factor for non-European migration. Standard errors are
       clustered by country for all specifications and *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the
       10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                         37
Table 3: County-Level Panel Regressions of Difference in Patenting on Immigration

                                       (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)
         Panel A: Second Stage         5-Year Difference in Patenting per
                                           100,000 People Post 1980
                                     (OLS)     (IV)        (IV)       (IV)
         Immigrationt
                    d               0.167**       0.101***   0.100***   0.108***
                                    (0.080)        (0.031)    (0.032)    (0.033)
         N                           18,846        18,846     18,840     18,846
         Panel B: First Stage                        Immigrationt
                                                                d
                             ^t )
         Immigration Shock ( I                    2.119***   2.124***   1.610***
                               d
                                                   (0.070)    (0.075)    (0.175)
         F-Stat                                     911        807        85
         R2                                        0.762      0.766      0.956
         Geography FE                State         State      State     County
         Time FE                      Yes           Yes        Yes       Yes
         State-Time FE                No            No         Yes        No
         Notes: Panel A of this table reports the results of our IV specifica-
        tion, described in equation (1), where the dependent variable is the
        change in patenting per 100,000 people (population is based on base-
        line 1970 levels) in county d in the five-year period ending in t and
        the endogenous variable is non-European immigration (1,000s) in d
        and period t. Panel B reports the results for step 3 of instrument con-
        struction, or the coefficient estimates for the first-stage specification
        for non-European immigration (1,000s) for the instrument described
        in equation (7). Column 1 provides the results of the OLS estimation
        of equation (1), whereas columns 2-4 provide an IV estimate of the
        second stage (panel A) and first stage (panel B). The table includes
        the first-stage F-statistic on the excluded instrument for each of the
        IV specifications. Standard errors are clustered by state for all speci-
        fications, and *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%,
        5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                             38
           Table 4: Robustness - Alternative Instruments
                         5-Year Difference in Patenting per 100,000
 Specification:       Ancestry in      Leave-Out           Leave-Out
                      1975 Only Correlated Counties Own Continent
                          (1)                (2)                  (3)
 Immigrationt
            d          0.093***           0.098***             0.094***
                        (0.027)            (0.033)              (0.027)
 N                       18,846            18,846               18,846
 First Stage F-Stat      1,171               127                  830
 Geography FE            State              State                State
 Time FE                  Yes                Yes                  Yes
 Notes: This table displays the results of estimating equation (1), where the
dependent variable is the change in patenting per 100,000 people (popula-
tion is based on baseline 1970 levels) and the endogenous variable is non-
European immigration (1,000s) to d in t. In this table, each column utilizes
the same approach for instrument construction as the main instrument but
with one adjustment. Column 1 replaces predicted ancestry in t - 1 with
predicted ancestry in 1975 for all periods. Column 2 uses an alternative
leave-out strategy in Step 1: the push factor excludes all destination coun-
ties whose overall time series of immigration flows are correlated with those
of d (as opposed to excluding counties in the same census division ( r(d)) as
d). Column 3 replaces the economic pull factor in Step 1 with the share of
all migrants who settle in d but excluding migrants from the same continent
as o (instead of using only European migrants). We report the first-stage
F -statistic on the excluded instrument for each specification. Standard er-
rors are clustered by state for all specifications, and *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                     39
Table 5: Robustness - Construction of the Baseline Instrument and Shares Instrument
                                  5-Year Difference in Patenting per 100,000 People Post 1980
  Specification:                  Predicted Ancestry    Realized Ancestry      Realized Ancestry
                                        Shares               Shares             No Leave-Out
                                          (1)                   (2)                    (3)
  Immigrationt
             d                          0.195**              0.106***               0.132**
                                        (0.090)               (0.035)               (0.055)
  N                                     18,846                18,846                 18,846
  First Stage F-Stat                      656                   265                    361
  Ad~ao et al (2019) First
  Stage False Rejection Rate:             4.5                  28.2                   28.2
  Instrument Functional Form:
  Instrumented Ancestry                   Yes                   No                     No
  Push Factor Leave-Out                   Yes                   Yes                    No
  Controls:
  Geography FE                           State                 State                  State
  Time FE                                 Yes                   Yes                    Yes
  Notes: This table displays the results of estimating equation (1), where the dependent variable
 is the change in patenting per 100,000 people (population is based on baseline 1970 levels) and
 the endogenous variable is non-European immigration (1,000s) to d in t. Column 1 is a Card-
 style instrument but replaces realized ancestry shares with predicted ancestry shares. Column
 2 utilizes the same instrument as column 1 but with realized ancestry shares. Finally, column 3
 takes the instrument in column 2 but removes the leave-out (as well as the regional adjustment)
 in the push factor as in the traditional Card-style shift-share instrument. We report the first-
 stage F -statistic on the excluded instrument for each specification. For each instrument, we
 report the false rejection rate in the first-stage regression for a robustness test that follows the
 method proposed by Ad~    ao et al. (2019). See Appendix Tabel 5 for details. Standard errors
 are clustered by state for all specifications, and *, **, and *** denote statistical significance
 at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                  40
         Table 6: Robustness - Additional Controls from Baseline Year (1970)
                                         5-Year Difference in Patents per 100,000 People for 1980 to 2010
                                            (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
 Immigrationt
            d                            0.101*** 0.102***      0.100***    0.092***    0.082***     0.108***
                                          (0.031)  (0.032)       (0.031)     (0.029)     (0.027)      (0.033)
 Population Density (1970)                         -0.001
                                                   (0.004)
 Patents per 1,000 People (1975)                                 0.089**
                                                                 (0.042)
 Share High School Education (1970)                                         27.821**
                                                                            (11.059)
 Share 4+ Years College (1970)                                                         103.990***
                                                                                        (29.961)
 N                                         18,846     18,846     18,846      18,846       18,846      18,846
 First Stage F-Stat                         911        1,658       911        945         1,017          85
 Geography FE                              State       State      State      State        State       County
 Time FE                                    Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
 Notes: This table reports the results of our IV specification, described in equation ( 1), where the dependent
variable is the change in patenting per 100,000 people (population is based on baseline 1970 levels) and
the endogenous variable is non-European immigration (1,000s) to d in t. Column 1 repeats our main
specification, whereas columns 2-5 add as a control county d's population density in 1970, patents per 1,000
people in 1975 (1970 population is used to match the dependent variable), share of high school educated,
and share of the population with 4+ years of college, respectively. Finally, column 6 then adds a county
fixed effect. We report the first-stage F -statistic on the excluded instrument for each specification. Standard
errors are clustered by state for all specifications, and *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                      41
                  Table 7: Robustness - Alternative Samples

                       Difference in Patenting per 100,000 People Post 1980
                       Mexico      China       India     Philippines   Vietnam
                         (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)
 Panel A: Excluding Given Country
 Immigrationt
            d         0.080*** 0.102***      0.101***     0.100***     0.101***
                       (0.025)  (0.032)       (0.031)      (0.031)      (0.031)
 N                      18,846     18,846      18,846      18,846       18,846
 First Stage F-Stat      666        1,576      1,267        1,261        1,179
 Panel B: Including Only Given Country
 Immigrationt
            d         0.103***    0.068**    0.129***      0.133**      0.123**
                       (0.032)    (0.032)     (0.032)      (0.051)      (0.060)
 N                      18,846     18,846      18,846      18,846       18,846
 First Stage F-Stat     2,094        535        318          22            2
 Geography FE           State       State      State        State        State
 Time FE                 Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
 Notes: This table reports the results of our IV specification, described in equa-
tion (1), run on alternative samples where the dependent variable is the change
in patenting per 100,000 people (population is based on baseline 1970 levels)
and the endogenous variable is non-European immigration (1,000s) to d in t.
In instrument construction, each column either drops migrants from the given
country (Panel A) or drops all other migrants except those from the specified
country (Panel B) from the sum in equation (7) for each of the five largest send-
ing countries post 1975 (Mexico, China, India, Philippines, and Vietnam). We
report the first-stage F -statistic on the excluded instrument for each specifica-
tion, and note the instrument constructed using only migrants from Vietnam
does not significantly predict non-European immigration. Standard errors are
clustered by state for all specifications, and *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                       42
Table 8: Robustness - The Effect of Immigration on Long Differences in Innovation

                               Difference in Patenting per 100,000 People
                                   t-1
                               P att -2    P att
                                               t-1    P att +1
                                                          t-1     P att +2
                                                                      t-1

                                  (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)
          Immigrationt
                     d           -0.099    0.108***   0.369***     0.332**
                                (0.069)     (0.033)    (0.098)     (0.137)
          N                     15,705      18,846     15,705       12,564
          First Stage F-Stat      80           85        11           7
          Geography FE          County     County      County      County
          Time FE                Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
          Notes: This table reports the results of our IV specification, de-
         scribed in equation (1), for changes in patenting per 100,000 peo-
         ple with non-European immigration to d in t as the endogenous
         variable. Column 1 uses the one-period lag of the dependent vari-
         able. Column 2 repeats the standard specification (5-year change in
         patenting). Columns 3 and 4 then utilize the two-period (10-year)
         and three-period (15-year) change in patenting as the dependent
         variable, respectively. We report the first-stage F -statistic on the
         excluded instrument for each specification. Standard errors are
         clustered by state for all specifications, and *, **, and *** denote
         statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                          43
                         Table 9: Immigration and Economic Dynamism
                                                                              10-Year Difference in
                                      5-Year Difference in:                    Avg. Annual Wage:
                         Job           Job         Job Growth     Average      Native       Native
                       Creation    Destruction        Rate        Annual                  Non-Mover
                        Rate          Rate          Skewness       Wage
                          (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
 Immigrationt
            d          0.176***      0.152***         0.019***    0.112***    0.049***     0.056***
                        (0.033)       (0.035)          (0.004)     (0.036)     (0.016)      (0.020)
 N                       6,600         6,600           12,564      21,978       9,411        6,274
 First Stage F-Stat       951           951             151         1,202       750          1,178
 Geography FE            State         State           State        State      State         State
 Time FE                  Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes        Yes           Yes
 Notes: This table reports the results of our IV specification, described in equation ( 1), for each
of our dependent variables with non-European immigration (1,000s) to d in t as the endogenous
variable. Columns 1 and 2 report the results of our second stage with the job creation rate and
job destruction rate as the dependent variable, respectively. Column 3 then provides results
for job growth rate skewness as the dependent variable, whereas the dependent variable for the
specification shown in column 4 is the change in the average annual real wage ( $100s, at 2010
prices) over the five-year period ending in t. Columns 5 and 6 reports results of a regression of the
change in the average annual real wage ( $100s) for natives and native non-movers over the 10-year
period ending in t on instrumented non-European immigration for the 10-year period ending in t.
We report the first-stage F -statistic on the excluded instrument for each specification. Standard
errors are clustered by state for all specifications, and *, **, and *** denote statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                 44
                              Table 10: Spillovers Analysis
                                                           (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)
 Panel A                                                5-Year Difference in Patenting per 100,000
                                                                     People Post 1980
 Immigrationt
            d                                           0.130***   0.107***    0.072**     0.080**
                                                         (0.039)    (0.035)    (0.032)     (0.037)
 Immigrationt
            State                                                  0.001***
                                                                    (0.000)
 Neighbors' Immigration t
                        d (Inverse Distance Weight)                           6.600***
                                                                               (1.593)
 Immigrationt
            100km                                                                          0.056***
                                                                                            (0.018)
 Immigrationt
            250km                                                                          0.014***
                                                                                            (0.005)
 Immigrationt
            500km                                                                            0.006
                                                                                            (0.005)
 N                                                       18,846     18,846     18,846       18,846
 First Stage F-Stat (first coefficient)                   876        1,792      2,175       6,065
 First Stage F-Stat (second coefficient)                              470        162         383
 First Stage F-Stat (third coefficient)                                                      150
 First Stage F-Stat (fourth coefficient)                                                      66
 Panel B                                                5-Year Difference in Average Annual Wage
                                                                     ($100) Post 1975
 Immigrationt
            d                                           0.124***   0.111***   0.077***    0.071***
                                                         (0.042)    (0.036)    (0.021)     (0.026)
 Immigrationt
            State                                                   0.001*
                                                                    (0.000)
 Neighbors' Immigration t
                        d (Inverse Distance Weight)                           5.502***
                                                                               (1.278)
 Immigrationt
            100km                                                                          0.067***
                                                                                            (0.009)
 Immigrationt
            250km                                                                            0.007
                                                                                            (0.006)
 Immigrationt
            500km                                                                            0.004
                                                                                            (0.007)
 N                                                       21,978     21,978     21,978       21,978
 First Stage F-Stat (first coefficient)                  1,166       2,312      3,487       7,969
 First Stage F-Stat (second coefficient)                              437        165         394
 First Stage F-Stat (third coefficient)                                                      156
 First Stage F-Stat (fourth coefficient)                                                      66
 Geography FE                                           Division   Division   Division     Division
 Time FE                                                  Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes
 Notes: This table reports the results of our IV specification (1) for the change in patenting per
100,000 people (population is based on baseline 1970 levels) (Panel A) and the change in the real
average annual wage ($100s, at 2010 prices) (Panel B) with non-European immigration (1,000s)
to d in t as the endogenous variable. The first column repeats our baseline specification but with
census division fixed effects. Column 2 adds as a second endogenous variable: total non-European
immigration to the state in which d is located, excluding own-immigration to d, in period t and a com-
parable instrument. Column 3 adds as a second endogenous variable the inverse-distance-weighted
sum of non-European immigration to all counties in the US, excluding own-immigration, and an
instrument constructed analogously. Column 4 includes variables, and appropriate instruments, for
non-European immigration to counties within 100km (excluding d), 100km to 250km, and 250km
to 500km of county d. For each specification we report the first-stage F -statistic(s), utilizing the
F -statistic described in Angrist and Pischke (2009, p. 217-218) in the case of multiple endogenous
variables. Standard errors are clustered by state for all specifications, and *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                 45
                                   Table 11: Education Analysis
                                                            (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
 Panel A                                                   5-Year Difference in Patenting per 100,000 People
 Immigrationt
            d                                           0.166***    0.200*** 0.485*** 0.415***
                                                         (0.053)     (0.070)  (0.165)  (0.076)
 Average Years Education t              t
                         d × Immigrationd                           0.221*** 0.251***
                                                                     (0.068)  (0.079)
 Average Years Colleget              t
                      d × Immigrationd                                                0.887***
                                                                                       (0.166)
 1{Low Avg. Years Education } × Immigrationt
                                           d                                                           1.863
                                                                                                      (4.539)
 1{Medium Avg. Years Education } × Immigrationt
                                              d                                                       0.084*
                                                                                                      (0.044)
 1{High Avg. Years Education } × Immigrationt
                                            d                                                         1.401*
                                                                                                      (0.792)
 N                                                         18,846    18,846     18,846     18,846      18,846
 Panel B                                                 5-year Difference in Average Annual Wage ( $100s)
 Immigrationt
            d                                            0.289**    0.367***   0.423*     0.617***
                                                         (0.115)     (0.065)   (0.229)     (0.155)
 Average Years Education t              t
                         d × Immigrationd                           0.352***   0.315**
                                                                     (0.078)   (0.119)
 Average Years Colleget              t
                      d × Immigrationd                                                    1.159***
                                                                                           (0.313)
 1{Low Avg. Years Education } × Immigrationt
                                           d                                                           -0.060
                                                                                                      (0.091)
 1{Medium Avg. Years Education } × Immigrationt
                                              d                                                       0.160**
                                                                                                      (0.062)
 1{High Avg. Years Education } × Immigrationt
                                            d                                                        2.534***
                                                                                                      (0.752)
 N                                                         21,978    21,978     21,978     21,978      21,978
 Geogrpahy FE                                              State      State    County       State      State
 Time FE                                                    Yes        Yes      Yes          Yes        Yes

 Notes: The table reports the results of our IV specification (1) for the change in patenting per 100,000 people
(population is based on baseline 1970 levels) in Panel A and the 5-year difference in county-level average real
annual wages ($100s) in Panel B. Column 1 repeats our main specification but adjusting the migrant pool
to those aged 25+ (1,000s). Columns 2 and 3 then add a second endogenous variable for the interaction
of immigration with the (demeaned) average years of education of the migrants arriving in the destination
county, whereas column 4 adds (demeaned) average years of college education of those migrants. Repeating
the regression in column 2 of the second panel for the 10-year difference in average annual wages ( $100s) of
native non-movers (US-born working individuals who have not moved outside of the county within the past
5 years) on 10-year migration and corresponding education results in coefficients of 0.246 (0.057) and 0.142
(0.040) on immigration and average years of education times immigration, respectively. Column 5 uses as
endogenous variables adult immigration interacted with indicators for the terciles of average years of education
of migrants across counties in period t. In all specifications, for instrumentation, we exploit the fact that in
our initial instrument construction we created quasi-exogenous immigration shocks for each origin country- o
× destination county- d pair in each time period t; each specification utilizes the predicted immigration shocks
for each of the the top 20 origin nations as a joint set of instruments. For column 1, the Montiel Olea and
Pflueger (2013) effective F -statistic is 39 (critical value 32 for  of 5%) for the first panel and 40 (critical
value 31 for  of 5%) for the second panel. Standard errors are clustered by state for all specifications, and *,
**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                      46
                                               Table 12: Growth Models and Population Change
                                                 Difference in Patenting per    Patenting per 100,000                  IHS of Patenting
                                                 100,000 People Post 1980         People Post 1975                        Post 1975
                                                   (1)             (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
      Immigrationt
                 d                               0.101***       0.509***        0.501**     2.505***     0.028***
                                                  (0.031)        (0.090)        (0.190)      (0.268)      (0.011)
      sq(Immigrationt
                    d)                                          -0.001***                   -0.004***
                                                                 (0.000)                     (0.000)
       Populationt
                 d                                                                                                   0.033***
                                                                                                                      (0.012)
      IHS(Immigrationt
                     d)                                                                                                          1.723***
                                                                                                                                  (0.111)
      IHS( Populationt
                     d)                                                                                                                     2.471***
                                                                                                                                             (0.510)




47
      N                                           18,846         18,846         21,987       21,987        21,987     21,986      21,987     21,986
      First Stage F-Stat (first coefficient)       911             95            1,202         102         1,202        102         94         16
      First Stage F-Stat (second coefficient)                    11,231                      11,879
      Geography FE                                State           State          State        State        State       State      State       State
      Time FE                                      Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
      Notes: This table reports the results of our IV specification, described in equation ( 1), for changes in patenting per 100,000 people (columns
     1 and 2), patenting per 100,000 people (columns 3 and 4), and the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of patenting (columns 5-8), where patenting
     is defined as the number of patents filed in the five-year period. Column 1 repeats our main specification while column 2 adds as a second
     endogenous variable the square of non-European immigration (1,000s) to d in t. Columns 3 and 4 repeat the specifications in columns 1 and
     2 but with patenting as the dependent variable. Finally, columns 5 and 6 include as endogenous variables non-European immigration and
     population change in d at t, respectively, whereas columns 7 and 8 include as endogenous variables the IHS of non-European immigration and
     population change in d at t, respectively. For each specification, we report the first-stage F -statistic(s), utilizing the F -statistic described
     in Angrist and Pischke (2009, p. 217-218) in the case of multiple endogenous variables. Standard errors are clustered by state for all
     specifications, and *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                          Mexico




                                          China




                                           India




                                        Philippines




                                         Vietnam




 Figure 1: Share Non-European Immigrants to the US by Origin Country
Notes : This figure plots the share of non-European immigration into the US from the 5
non-European origin nations with the largest cumulative immigration to the US: Mexico,
China, India, Philippines, and Vietnam. The figure highlights variation in the push factor,
showing the number of migrants from a given source country o to the US varies by period
t.


                                            48
      Pre 1880                1881 - 1885              1886 - 1890              1891 - 1895




     1896 - 1900              1901 - 1905              1906 - 1910              1911-1915




     1916-1920                1921 - 1925              1926 -1930               1925 -1934




     1935 - 1944              1945 - 1949              1950 - 1954              1955 - 1959




     1960 - 1964              1965 - 1970              1970 - 1974              1975 - 1980




     1980 - 1984              1985 - 1990              1991 - 1995              1996 - 2000




     2001 - 2005              2006 - 2010
          Figure 2: Destinations of European Immigrants to the US

Notes : This figure maps immigration flows into US counties by 5-year periods (except
between 1930 and 1950). We regress the number of European immigrants into US county
d at time t, Id
              t
                , on destination county d and year t fixed effects, and calculate the residuals.
The map's color coding depicts the 20 quantiles of the residuals across counties and within
census periods. Darker colors indicate a higher quantile.



                                              49
                     Figure 3: Step 1 ­ Predicting Ancestry

Notes : This figure displays the coefficients (bars) and 95% confidence intervals (red lines)
in the ancestry prediction regression, equation (5), for estimating 2010 reported ancestry
(assuming for presentational purposes only that a     r (d) = a r (d)). The figure shows we
                                                               

identify variation in current ancestry levels based on push-economic pull interactions from
the full range of time periods in our sample. Standard errors are clustered at the origin
country level.




                                             50
                 Figure 4: Step 1 ­ Predicting Ancestry (2010)

Notes: This figure plots actual ancestry in 2010 against predicted ancestry, as given in
equation (5), with the size of each circle indicating the log number of observations in a
given bin of predicted ancestry. The labeled counties are those with the highest number
of individuals declaring a given ancestry in 2010. The corresponding regression of A2010
                                                                                      o,d
on A^2010 , as defined in equation (5), yields an R2 of 74.9%.
     o,d




                                           51
           1975-1980                  1980 - 1985                  1985 - 1990




          1990 - 1995                 1995 - 2000                  2000 - 2005




          2005 - 2010
     Figure 5: Immigration Shock Conditional on County and Time FE

Notes : This figure maps the instrumented non-European immigration flows into US coun-
ties by 5-year periods. We regress the instrument for immigration into US county d at
time t on county and state-year fixed effects, and calculate the residuals. This figure
provides a visualization for the immigration shocks used as in instrument in the regres-
sion shown in column 3 of Table 3. The map's color coding depicts the 200 quantiles of
the residuals across counties and within census periods. Darker colors indicate a higher
quantile.




                                          52
                                Online Appendix
            "Immigration, Innovation, and Growth"
                             Konrad B. Burchardi
                                  Thomas Chaney
                                 Tarek A. Hassan
                                   Lisa Tarquinio
                                 Stephen J. Terry

A     Data Appendix
A.1     Details on the construction of migration and ethnicity data
To construct county-level data on migration, ancestry, and ethnicity, we follow the approach of
Burchardi et al. (2019). We utilize data from each available IPUMS wave from 1880 to 2010.
Specifically, we use the 10% sample of the 1880 Census, the 5% sample of the 1900 Census, the
1% sample of the 1910 Census, the 1% sample of the 1920 Census, the 5% sample of the 1930
Census, 1% Form 1 Metro sample of the 1970 Census, 5% State sample of the 1980 Census, 5%
State sample of the 1990 Census, 5% sample of the 2000 Census, and the American Community
Service 5-Year sample of the 2010 Census. The following section summarizes this approach,
highlighting any difference in data construction made in this paper.

Construction of post-1880 immigration flows

We start the construction of our immigration variable by identifying the number of individuals
located in a given US geography d at the time of each census who immigrated to the US since
the prior census and were born in a historic origin country o (based on the detailed birthplace
variable). For each census wave, we then separate this immigration count into (roughly) five-
year periods based on the year in which each migrant arrived to the US. For the 1970, 1980,
and 1990 censuses, the exact year of arrival for immigrants is not provided, and instead the
year of arrival is provided in bins (e.g., a person who arrived in 1964 has a year of arrival
of 1960-1964). For these years, we use as our five-year periods the bins that are reported in
each census: 1925-34, 1935-44, 1945-49, 1950-54, 1955-59, 1960-64, 1965-70, 1970-74, 1975-80,

                                              53
1980-84, and 1985-90. We then follow the approach outlined in Burchardi et al. (2019) to
transform foreign origin countries, given as birthplaces, to 1990 foreign countries and non-1990
counties and county groups into 1990 counties. Because some foreign birthplaces do not refer
to any modern (1990) country, we use population-based weights for transitioning birthplaces
to countries (for more details on the weighting scheme, see Burchardi et al. (2019)).

Construction of pre-1880 immigration stock

From the 1880 census, we count all individuals who were born in a foreign origin country o and
reside in a historic US geography d, regardless of the date of arrival to the US. We then add to
this count all individuals residing in d who were born in the US but whose parents were born
in origin country o (if an individual's parents were born in different countries, the individual
is assigned a count of one half for each parent's origin country o). We then transform the
given birthplace to 1990 foreign countries and the pre-1880 US geography to 1990 US counties
following the transition method outlined in Burchardi et al. (2019).

Construction of ancestry stock

For the years 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010, we take from the respective census all individuals in
a US county or county group that list as their primary ancestry a foreign nationality or area.
We then estimate the ancestry stock in each midyear (1975, 1985, 1995, and 2005) by taking
the individuals identified in each census year as belonging to a given ancestry and removing all
individuals who either were born or migrated to the US after the midyear. Ideally, we would
also remove all individuals who moved to the county after the midyear, but data is not available
for all census years; thus, for consistency, we do not remove these individuals. Again, we follow
Burchardi et al. (2019) in transforming ancestries to 1990 countries and US geographies to 1990
US counties. As with the data on foreign birthplaces, some ancestries do not correspond directly
to a modern (1990) country; again, we follow the weighting scheme outlined in Burchardi et al.
(2019) for transitioning stated ancestries to 1990 foreign countries.

Construction of education data for migrants

For the five-year migration periods from 1975 to 2010, whose construction is previously de-
scribed, we also identify the total number of years of education for each set of immigrants.
Specifically, we take the set of individuals that make up each five-year immigration flow and
limit to those individuals who are aged 25 years or older at the time of each respective census.
For each 1990 US county d, we then sum the number of years each individual is reported to have

                                               54
over all immigrants in this set, assigning the midpoint when a range of years of education is
provided instead of an exact number of years. We then generate the average years of education
for immigrants to county d in each period t and demean these values. Finally, we take the
demeaned average years of education and multiply by the count of immigrants aged 25 or older
to generate the (demeaned) total years of education. We construct this variable for total years
of education as well as for years of college education.
We also utilize information on education from the census to construct county-level demographic
controls for the share of the county's population that has a specified level of education in a
baseline year, 1970. Using data from the 1970 census, we calculate the share of all individuals,
regardless of birthplace, residing in a historic US county d who report having at least a Grade
12 education (share of high-school educated) and those who report having at least four years
of college education (share of college educated). These values are then transformed from 1970
US counties to 1990 US counties, again using the transition matrices described by Burchardi
et al. (2019).

A.2     Construction of population data
For the period 1970 to 2010, we collect county-level population data in each census year and
intercensal year. Population counts for the 2010 and 2000 census were taken directly from the
US Census Bureau. The 1990 census data are taken from the US Census Bureau's Population
of Counties by Decennial Census: 1900 to 1990. The 1970 and 1980 data are taken from Inter-
University Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICSPR) County Population by Singe
Years of Age, Sex, Race, 1970, 1980, 1990. All intercensal population counts are taken from the
NBER's Census U.S. Intercensal County Population Data, 1970-2014. For each period, data
are transformed from the given US counties to 1990 US counties using the transition matrices
described by Burchardi et al. (2019).

A.3     Construction of patenting data
We utilize data on corporate utility patents with a US assignee from the the US Patent and
Trademark Office microdata for the period 1975 to 2010. We translate the location of patents
from assignee (or inventor) location to 2010 US counties and then transition to 1990 counties
using area weights as in Burchardi et al. (2019) to estimate the number of patents granted to
assignees in each county and year. For our main measure of patenting, we utilize unweighted
patent counts with locations based on assignee, but we also consider location based on inventors


                                               55
and weighted patent counts as in Hall et al. (2001). We then construct a variable for the total
number of patents filed in each five-year period ending in t, for each measure of patenting, and
divide by the 1970 population (100,000 people) to get "per-capita patenting" in t. We then
winsorize the variables at the 1% and 99% levels. The main patenting outcome variable is then
the difference in this per-capita-patenting variable between t - 1 and t.

A.4     Construction of business dynamism data
In this section, we explain the construction of variables used to measure business dynamism.
In each case, we take the five-year difference in the dynamism or wage variable.


Wages. The county-level average annual wage for every five years from 1975 to 2010 is taken
from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. The data for each period are then
transformed from the US counties for that period to 1990 US counties using the transition
matrices developed in Burchardi et al. (2019) and then converted to 2010 US dollars using the
Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. We
generate this county-level average annual wage for all industries as well as manufacturing (SIC
20-39 and NAICS 31-33) and services (SIC 60-67 and NAICS 52-53).


Growth Rate Skewness. The growth rate skewness variable for 2010 US counties for each
five years from 1995 to 2010 is estimated using data from the Longitudinal Business Database.
We compute the Kelly Skewness of employment growth rates across 4-digit sectors, and then
transition this measure from 2010 to 1990 US counties.


Job Creation and Destruction Rates. Job creation and destruction data are taken from
the Business Dynamics Statistics for metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) and transitioned to
1990 US counties based on weights derived from 1990 population data.

A.5     Construction of native wages data
We construct variables for native wages in each census year from 1970 to 2010 using data
from the 1970 1% Form 1 Metro sample, 1980 5% State sample, 1990 5% State sample, 2000
5% Census sample, and 2010 American Community Service (ACS). In each year, we limit the
sample to the pre-tax wage and salary income (incwage) for individuals born in the US who
are employed (empstat is equal to 1), referred to here as natives. For the census years 1980


                                               56
to 2000, we also generate a wage measure for the subset of natives who report that they lived
in the same county five years prior to the census year, referred to as native non-movers. We
use the Consumer Price Index provided in IPUMS USA (CPI99) to adjust wages to a common
dollar year, 1999. We then follow the same method as that used in Burchardi et al. (2019)
to transform wages for county groups into 1990 US counties. Finally, we determine average
wages in each county using the person weight (PERWT) for the selected sample and generate a
variable for wage growth in each county that is the 10-year difference in average annual wages
for natives (or native non-movers).




                                              57
B     Growth, Population Growth, Innovation, and Dynamism


In this appendix, we sketch out a deliberately simple theoretical mechanism linking innova-
tion, income growth, dynamism, and population growth. We present the minimum ingredients
needed from a combination of the "semi-endogenous growth" model outlined in Jones (1995) and
the micro-level distribution of creative destruction from Schumpeterian growth models ( Aghion
and Howitt, 1992; Grossman and Helpman, 1991; Klette and Kortum, 2004). We show that in
such a model, the long-run balanced growth path per-capita growth rate of the economy must
be proportional to the growth rate of labor input in the economy and that the economy-wide
growth rate links positively to the rates of creative destruction and innovation at the micro
level. To the extent that local economies are segmented, these two outcomes concisely motivate
our empirical analysis linking population dynamics to measures of scaled innovation, dynamism
rates, and income growth, abstracting from cross-economy spillovers and heterogeneity in labor
input, both of which we nevertheless explore empirically.

B.1     Environment
Final Goods Production          We examine a closed local economy in continuous time t. Final
output Yt is produced according to the technology

                                        log Yt =        log yjt dj

utilizing a unit mass of intermediate varieties j .


Intermediate Goods Production            Intermediate goods are each produced with a symmetric
                                       P                                                     P
technology combining production labor ljt and variety-specific quality qjt , with yjt = qjt ljt .
Incumbent intermediate goods firms f produce portfolios of intermediate varieties j for which
they operate the current leading-edge quality level qjt . Let log Qt =   log qjt dj be the average
quality level in the economy.


Innovation For an individual variety, innovation is embodied in an instantaneous increase in
the quality level qjt in that good's production, that is, a switch from qjt to qjt+ = qjt , where
 > 1 is a quality ladder or innovation step size. Incumbent firms f may innovate by hiring
labor for innovation in the amount sI                                            I
                                    f t to guarantee an innovation arrival rate pf t satisfying

                                                      - 
                                          pI     I
                                           f t  sf t Qt ,


                                                   58
where ,  > 0. A mass of potential entrants each hires labor for innovation sE
                                                                            t to guarantee

an innovation arrival rate pE
                            t satisfying

                                                     - 
                                             pE   E
                                              t  st Qt .

In both of the innovation technologies, innovation arrival probabilities depend positively on
innovation input ­ labor ­ but negatively on the current average quality level in the economy
Qt . Solving harder problems to improve upon a higher existing average quality level requires
more input. When an innovation occurs, for either an entrant or incumbent, they become the
leading-edge incumbent producer of a random variety.

Labor Input The exogenous instantaneous growth rate of labor input or the population of
the economy Lt is n, and total labor input in any period must equal the sum of the total
amounts of labor used for production, incumbent innovation, and entrant innovation:

                                         L t = LP    I     E
                                                t + St + S t .


B.2     Balanced Growth
A range of straightforward and standard additional machinery needed for description of a
decentralized equilibrium along a stationary balanced growth path ­ along the lines of the
equilibria described in Klette and Kortum (2004) or Grossman and Helpman (1991) ­ could be
added to the framework already outlined above. But we do not need additional elements for our
desired implications. Instead, we simply note that in standard decentralizations, output per
capita is proportional to the average quality level Qt . We also note that along any stationary
balanced growth path in this economy, by definition, constant output growth rates, constant
quality growth rates, constant ratios of production labor and innovation labor to total labor
input, and a stationary distribution of outcomes at the firm and variety levels must exist.
   But then note that constant quality growth rates and constant innovation rates for incum-
bents and entrants - given the innovation technologies - imply
                                                                   
                       Q     I   E
                        t  S t  St  Lt  gQ = n  gQ =                 n.
                                                                   
In other words, average quality growth, which is equal to per-capita growth in this economy,
must be positively proportional to the population growth rate n. This is our first desired result,
echoing Jones (1995). Then, given the definition of average quality Qt , the implication of a
                             log Qt
constant growth rate gQ =     t
                                      is that

                                                gQ = p log ,

                                                    59
where p = pI + pE is the sum of the constant incumbent and entrant innovation rates, and  is
the quality ladder step size described above. But note that

                              p = P(Innovation) = P(Displacement)

in this Schumpeterian economy. So we obtain that
                                                          gQ      
                    P(Innovation) = P(Displacement) =         =       n;
                                                         log     log 
that is, the rate of creative destruction and the innovation rate are positively proportional
to population growth. This is our second result, following directly from the logic of creative
destruction-based growth models.

B.3     Implications
Along a balanced growth path, in models with the ingredients outlined above, we must have
the following implications.

   · Per-capita output and income growth rates positively link to population growth rates.

   · Innovation rates positively link to population growth rates.

   · Creative destruction or displacement rates positively link to population growth rates.




                                              60
               Appendix Table 1: Assignment of States to Census Divisions
Census Region        State Names
New England          Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont
Middle Atlantic      New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania
East North Central   Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin
West North Central   Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota
South Atlantic       Delaware, District Of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Maryland, North Carolina,
                     South Carolina, Virginia, West Virginia
East South Central   Alabama, Kentucky, Mississippi, Tennessee
West South Central   Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Texas
Mountain             Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, Wyoming
Pacific              Alaska, California, Hawaii, Oregon, Washington



              Appendix Table 2: Permutation Tests for Main Specification
                             (1)         (2)            (3)               (4)
                               Coefficient        Standard Error    RHS Rejection
                           (Mean) (St. Dev.)          (Mean)          Rate (%)
               Panel A: First Stage
               Placebo 1   -0.0003      0.013          0.007             0.20
               Placebo 2    0.0001      0.013          0.008             0.00
               Placebo 3   -0.0117      0.031          0.020             2.70
               Panel B: Reduced Form
               Placebo 1    0.0016      0.073          0.049             0.80
               Placebo 2    0.0026      0.069          0.048             0.70
               Placebo 3   -0.0023      0.069          0.044             4.40
               Notes: This table reports the results of three different placebo tests
              on our standard specification, corresponding to column 2 of Table 3.
              For each of the placebo tests, we randomly reassign the instrument
              across observations: in the first version, we randomly reassign within
              the entire sample (Placebo 1); in the second version, we randomly
              reassign within the same period t (Placebo 2); and in the third ver-
              sion, we reassign within the same period t and census division r(d)
              (Placebo 3). For each version, we perform 1000 placebo runs. We
              present summary statistics on the first stage (Panel A) and reduced
              form (Panel B) coefficients of interest across placebo runs. Columns 1
              and 2 report the average and standard deviation for the coefficient of
              interest, column 3 reports the mean standard errors, and columns 4
              reports the percentage of runs for which we reject that the coefficient
              of interest is different from 0 at the 5% level on the right-hand side.
              The standard errors are clustered by state in our standard specifica-
              tion and hence all placebo runs.




                                                61
Appendix Table 3: County-Level Panel Regressions of Difference in Patenting on Population
Growth

                                          (1)          (2)        (3)       (4)
            Panel A: Second Stage         5-Year Difference in Patenting per
                                              100,000 People Post 1980
                                        (OLS)      (IV)        (IV)      (IV)
             Populationt
                       d               0.223***      0.113***   0.113*** 0.087***
                                        (0.066)       (0.030)    (0.031)  (0.027)
            N                           18,846        18,846     18,840   18,846
            Panel B: First Stage                        Populationt
                                                                  d
                                ^t )
            Immigration Shock ( I                    1.885***   1.877*** 2.002***
                                  d
                                                      (0.178)    (0.183)  (0.276)
            F-Stat                                     112        105        53
            R2                                        0.324      0.338     0.808
            Geography FE                 State        State      State    County
            Time FE                       Yes          Yes        Yes      Yes
            State-Time FE                 No           No         Yes       No
            Notes: The first panel of this table reports the results of our second-
           stage specification, described in equation (1), where the dependent
           variable is the change in patenting per 100,000 people (population is
           based on baseline 1970 levels) in county d in the five-year period ending
           in t and the endogenous variable is population growth (1,000s) in d and
           period t. The second panel reports the results for step 3 of instrument
           construction, or the coefficient estimates for the first-stage specifica-
           tion for population change (1,000s) for the instrument described in
           equation (7). Column 1 provides the results of the OLS estimation
           of equation (1), whereas columns 2-4 provide an IV estimate of the
           second stage (first panel) and first stage (second panel). The table
           includes the first-stage F-statistic on the excluded instrument for each
           of the IV specifications. Standard errors are clustered by state for all
           specifications, and *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the
           10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                62
Appendix Table 4: Panel Regressions of Inflows of Native Migrants on Non-European Immi-
gration

                                          Inflows of Internal Migrants:
                                             All        Non-Hispanic
                                           Natives     White Natives
                                             (1)             (2)
                    Immigrationt
                               d          3.675***        2.100***
                                           (0.616)         (0.406)
                    N                      9,415            9,415
                    First Stage F-Stat     3,484            3,484
                    Geography FE           State            State
                    Time FE                 Yes              Yes
                    Notes: This table reports the results of our second-
                   stage specification, described in equation (1), for the
                   migration of natives (1,000s) into county d in period
                   t (for 1980, 1990, and 2000) with non-European im-
                   migration (1,000s) to d in t as the endogenous vari-
                   able. Note, migrants who moved into county d from
                   a foreign country are excluded. Standard errors are
                   clustered by state for all specifications and *,**, and
                   *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
                   and 1% levels, respectively.




                                             63
                                                            ~ o et al (2019)
Appendix Table 5: Results from Placebo Analysis Based on Ad a

                         (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)
                           Coefficient          Standard Error     Rejection
                       (Mean) (St. Dev.)           (Median)        Rate (%)
     Panel A: Realized Ancestry Shares
     First Stage      -0.003229      0.0776          0.0403           28.2
     Reduced Form     -0.000471      0.0168          0.0112           18.8
     Panel B: Predicted Ancestry Shares
     First Stage      -0.002000      0.0388          0.0240           4.5
     Reduced Form     -0.002597      0.1088          0.0904           8.2
    Notes: Following Ad~   ao et al. (2019), we randomly generate immigra-
   tion shocks (for each {o, r, t} country-region-time triplet), and construct
   placebo instruments by interacting these random shocks with actual
   baseline ancestry shares (as in a traditional shift-share instrument) and
   our predicted baseline ancestry shares (as in the ancestry-share version
   of our baseline instrument). We then run 1,000 placebo regressions
   of actual immigration on the randomly generated Card-style instru-
   ment (Panel A) and our randomly generated instrument (Panel B); we
   also run the comparable reduced-form regressions where the dependent
   variable is our primary measure of patenting, the five-year difference in
   patenting flows per 100,000 people. Column 1 reports the mean value
   of the coefficient over all placebo regressions, whereas column 2 reports
   the standard deviation. Column 3 then reports the median standard
   error for the coefficient of interest over all placebo regressions, and col-
   umn 4 reports the fraction of placebo regressions for which we reject
   the null hypothesis of no effect at the 5% statistical significance thresh-
   old. As shown, the traditional shift-share instrument suffers from the
   over-rejection identified in Ad~ ao et al. (2019) with false rejection rates
   of 28.2% in the first stage and 18.8% in the reduced-form specification.
   The ancestry-share version of our baseline instrument has false rejec-
   tion rates of 4.5% (first stage) and 8.2% (reduced form). The latter is
   similar to the false rejection rates reported in Ad~  ao et al. (2019) when
   using their proposed standard error correction (labelled "AKM").




                                       64
Appendix Table 6: Panel Regression of 5-Year Difference in Patenting per 100,000 People on
Immigration using Alternative Patent Counts

                              Difference in Patenting per 100,000 People Post 1980
                            Assignee         Assignee         Inventors        Inventors
                          (Unweighted)     (Cite Weight)    (Unweighted)     (Cite Weight)
                                (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)
     Immigrationt
                d            0.101***         0.162***        0.269***         0.487***
                              (0.031)          (0.042)         (0.092)          (0.140)
     N                        18,846           18,846           18,846           18,846
     First Stage F-Stat         911             911              911              911
     Geography FE              State           State            State            State
     Time FE                    Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
     Notes: This table reports the results of our second-stage specification, described in
    equation (1), for the change in patenting per 100,000 people (population is based on
    baseline 1970 levels) with non-European immigration (1,000s) to d in t as the en-
    dogenous variable. Column 1 repeats our main specification where patent location is
    based on assignees and raw patent counts are used. Column 2 also uses the assignee
    for patent location but uses citation-weighted patent counts. Columns 3 and 4 then
    provide results when inventors are used for identifying patent location where patent
    counts are unweighted and citation-weighted, respectively. Standard errors are clus-
    tered by state for all specifications, and *, **, and *** denote statistical significance
    at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                               65
                                                              Appendix Table 7: Spillover Analysis ­ First Stage
                                               Column 1                    Column 2                           Column 3                                             Column 4
                                                                                                                    Neighbors'
                                             Immigrationt
                                                        d     Immigrationt
                                                                         d    Immigrationt
                                                                                         State    Immigrationt
                                                                                                             d     Immigrationtd   Immigrationt
                                                                                                                                              d    Immigrationt
                                                                                                                                                              100km     Immigrationt
                                                                                                                                                                                   250km    Immigrationt
                                                                                                                                                                                                       500km
                                                 (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)              (5)             (6)               (7)                  (8)                 (9)
      Immigration Shock ( I
                          ^t )
                            d                   2.130***        2.120***            -1.212          2.093***           0.001         2.094***            -0.379               -0.080              0.345
                                                 (0.072)         (0.070)           (1.995)           (0.055)          (0.002)         (0.058)           (0.257)              (0.264)             (0.450)
      State Immigration Shock ( I
                                ^t )
                                  State                         0.001***          2.915***
                                                                 (0.000)           (0.217)
                                     ^t )
      Neighbors' Immigration Shock ( I N                                                             4.938*          2.388***
                                                                                                     (2.730)          (0.369)
                                ^t
      Immigration Shock 100km ( I                                                                                                       0.058           3.404***              -0.071               -1.264
                                  100km )
                                                                                                                                      (0.040)            (0.993)             (0.322)              (0.764)
                                ^t




66
      Immigration Shock 250km ( I 250km )                                                                                               0.006             -0.047            2.623***              -0.617*
                                                                                                                                      (0.011)            (0.095)             (0.387)              (0.315)
                                ^t
      Immigration Shock 500km ( I                                                                                                      -0.006            -0.201*              -0.339             2.030***
                                  500km )
                                                                                                                                      (0.007)            (0.120)             (0.232)              (0.263)
      N                                          18,846          18,846            18,846            18,846           18,846          18,846             18,846              18,846               18,846
      First Stage F-Stat                          876             1,792               470             2,175              162           6,065              383                  150                  66
      Geogrpahy FE                              Division        Division          Division          Division         Division        Division           Division            Division             Division
      Time FE                                     Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes             Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes
      Notes: This table reports the results of the first-stage regressions for the IV regressions shown in Table 10. Column 1 of this table provides the first stage regression for column 1 of Table 10.
     The first stages for column 2 of Table 10 are shown in columns 2 and 3 of this table while those for column 3 in Table 10 are shown in columns 4 and 5 of this table. Finally, columns 6-9 display
     the first-stage regressions for column 4 of Table 10. For each specification, we report the first-stage F -statistic for the IV estimation in Table 10, utilizing the F -statistic described in Angrist and
     Pischke (2009, p. 217-218) in the case of multiple endogenous variables. Standard errors are clustered by state for all specifications, and *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%,
     5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
