                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    OPTIMAL BAILOUTS AND THE DOOM LOOP WITH A FINANCIAL NETWORK

                                      Agostino Capponi
                                       Felix C. Corell
                                      Joseph E. Stiglitz

                                     Working Paper 27074
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27074


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We would like to thank Árpád Ábrahám, Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln, Paul Glasserman, Piero
Gottardi, Philipp Grübener, Philipp Kircher, Anton Korinek, Steve Kou, Lukas Nord, Giorgia
Piacentino, our discussant Flora Lutz, conference participants at the 5th Annual Conference on
Network Science in Economics, the SIAM Conference on Financial Mathematics & Engineering
2019, the 9th Workshop on Banks and Financial Markets (Vienna) and seminar participants at
NYU and EUI for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Agostino Capponi, Felix C. Corell, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Bailouts and the Doom Loop with a Financial Network
Agostino Capponi, Felix C. Corell, and Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 27074
May 2020
JEL No. G01,G21,G28,H63,H81

                                          ABSTRACT

Banks usually hold large amounts of domestic public debt which makes them vulnerable to their
own sovereign's default risk. At the same time, governments often resort to costly public bailouts
when their domestic banking sector is in trouble. We investigate how the interbank network
structure and the distribution of sovereign debt holdings jointly affect the optimal bailout policy
in the presence of this "doom loop". Rescuing banks with high domestic sovereign exposure is
optimal if these banks are sufficiently central in the network, even though that requires larger
bailout expenditures than rescuing low-exposure banks. Our findings imply that highly central
banks can use exposure to their own government as a strategic tool to increase the likelihood of
being bailed out. Our model thus illustrates how the "doom loop" exacerbates the "too
interconnected to fail" problem in banking.

Agostino Capponi                                 Joseph E. Stiglitz
Mudd Hall 535-G                                  Uris Hall, Columbia University
Columbia University                              3022 Broadway, Room 212
500 W 120th St.                                  New York, NY 10027
New York, NY 10027                               and NBER
ac3827@columbia.edu                              jes322@columbia.edu

Felix C. Corell
Department of Economics
European University Institute
felix.corell@eui.eu
                       10



                       8



                       6
                   %

                       4



                       2



                       0
                             DE       ES      FR        GR      IE      IT       PT


                            Source: ECB Statistical Data Warehouse (June 2018)

          Figure 1: Banks' domestic sovereign exposure (as a share of total assets)


1    Introduction
Throughout modern economic history, almost every major crisis has added its own signa-
ture terms to the dictionary of economic thought. For the European debt crisis that followed
the Great Recession in 2008/09, one of the front-running candidates is certainly the so-called
bank-sovereign "doom loop" - a term that has made its way into the vocabulary of policy-
makers, journalists, and researchers alike. The nexus between sovereigns and banks was
identified as a major culprit responsible for the amplification of adverse shocks during the
crisis.
    The doom loop can be described as follows: Banks usually hold large amounts of do-
mestic public debt which makes them vulnerable to sovereign default risk. For instance, as
of June 2018 some eurozone banking sectors held well beyond 15% of their government's
total stock of outstanding debt securities (see Figure 1). At the same time, governments of-
ten resort to costly public bailouts when their domestic banking sector is at stake. If these
bailouts are debt-financed and lead to an increase in risk premia on sovereign debt (i.e., a
decrease in bond prices), bank assets drop in value and the size of the bailouts required to
keep the banks solvent increases further. If a significant fraction of banks' assets consists of
domestic sovereign debt, this adverse feedback loop can leave both the government's and
banks' balance sheets severely impaired. 1 Historical examples for the devastating force of
the "doom loop" include Greece, where turmoil in sovereign debt markets damaged Greek
1 Notefor example that Italian banks currently hold around 10% of their assets in domestic sovereign debt
(Figure 1).



                                                    1
banks' balance sheets and made large bailouts necessary that further weakened Greece's fis-
cal position; and Ireland, where the loop originated in the banking sector and thus worked
in the opposite direction.
    In this paper we investigate how the distribution of sovereign debt across banks and the
structure of the interbank network jointly affect the government's optimal bailout decision
in the presence of the doom loop. In doing so, we combine two strands of literature that
have so far evolved separately, namely the doom loop literature (e.g. Acharya et al. (2014),
Cooper and Nikolov (2018), Farhi and Tirole (2018)) and the literature about contagion in
financial networks (Acemoglu et al. (2015), Elliott et al. (2014), Cabrales et al. (2017)). More
precisely, we consider an exogenous network of (unsecured) interbank liabilities after an ad-
verse shock has rendered a set of banks insolvent. Each bank holds an exogenous amount of
its own government's bonds. Without any government intervention, there may be a default
cascade that causes large welfare losses due to bankruptcy deadweight costs. The govern-
ment can, however, reduce these losses by bailing out some or all of the failing banks. To
do so, the government must borrow the required funds in the sovereign debt market which
pushes down bond prices and thus puts further pressure on banks' balance sheets. A ratio-
nal government internalizes this "second-round" effect, so bailouts are, by definition, large
enough to cover the total shortfall of the banks to be rescued. The government trades off the
welfare losses of a default cascade against those associated with a higher sovereign default
probability, as effectively bank liabilities move onto the government's balance sheet.
    Existing literature distinguishes two types of financial contagion, namely direct conta-
gion due to counterparty default (see Glasserman and Young (2016) for a survey) and indi-
rect contagion through common asset exposure (Adrian and Shin (2010); Greenwood et al.
(2015)). Our paper features both types of contagion and emphasizes a link between both
through the government's bailout decision. For example, a bailout may prevent direct con-
tagion emanating from the targeted bank(s), but cause indirect contagion of banks that are
critically exposed to the sovereign. On the other hand, our paper abstracts from more gen-
eral macroeconomic effects (such as an increase in unemployment, a reduction in output, or
a contraction of government revenues) that might emanate from any bailout policy. These
effects were, of course, central to some of the earlier doom loop literature (see, e.g., Brunner-
meier et al. (2016)).
    Our first set of results applies to the special case of complete bailouts where the govern-
ment can only bail out all banks or none. We show (not surprisingly) that the doom loop
makes complete bailouts socially more costly if a larger amount of sovereign debt is held
by domestic banks. Moreover, for a given aggregate amount of sovereign debt held by the
banking sector, it is socially preferable that it be held by relatively well-capitalized banks.
The intuition for these results is straightforward: Financing a bailout imposes a cost on


                                               2
banks that are exposed to sovereign default risk. The larger those banks' loss-absorbing eq-
uity buffer, the lower welfare losses will be. If, in contrast, public debt is largely held by
weakly capitalized banks, the doom loop hits them with a stronger force and the required
bailout may become very large.
    Our second set of results generalizes the bailout decision by allowing the government to
bail out any subset of banks (partial bailouts). The government chooses the set of surviving
banks to maximize social welfare, taking into account impacts of the bailout of any bank on
other banks and on sovereign risk. Our analysis shows that whether or not a given bank will
be bailed out jointly depends on its position in the network and its sovereign debt exposure.
We identify a measure of centrality ("node depth" as in Glasserman and Young (2015)) that
captures a bank's contagion potential depending on its position in the network. Among
two otherwise identical banks, the government prefers to bail out the one with higher node
depth, even without of the doom loop. With the doom loop active, however, the presence
of sovereign debt on banks' balance sheets - even if it is completely equally distributed -
further strengthens centrality as a determinant of the government's bailout choice.
    We also find that in general higher domestic sovereign exposure decreases banks' chances
of being bailed out because of a "doom loop multiplier" effect: Every dollar raised for the
bailout of a given bank lowers the value of sovereign debt on its balance sheet and thus
increases the required bailout expenditure by a few cents. This effect is stronger for banks
with larger domestic sovereign exposures. However, for systemically important banks there
can be a countervailing force: Letting a systemically important bank fail while others are bailed
out can lead to large additional deadweight losses among its creditors due to the associated
drop in the value of its sovereign debt holdings. This finding implies that given a network of
interbank liabilities, banks can use their sovereign debt position as a strategic tool to increase
the odds of being bailed out. Our model thus provides a novel, network-based explanation
for the increase in "home bias" in banks' sovereign portfolios during the European sovereign
debt crisis.


2    Related Literature
Our work is related to the seminal articles by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Allen and Gale
(2000) in regards to the financial stability implications of different network structures. These
studies use stylized networks to show how contagion propagates when individual financial
institutions are hit by idiosyncratic negative liquidity shocks. Subsequent developments in-
clude Eisenberg and Noe (2001) who show existence and uniqueness of payment vectors that
simultaneously clear liabilities in a general class of networks; Glasserman and Young (2015)
who assess the extent of contagion accounting for bankruptcy costs; Acemoglu et al. (2015)


                                                3
who focus on the systemic risk implications of different network topologies; and Elliott et al.
(2014) and Cabrales et al. (2017) who model network linkages as equity cross-holdings or
direct claims on other banks' projects. We refer to Cabrales et al. (2016) and Glasserman and
Young (2016) for excellent surveys on contagion in financial networks.
    Closely related to our paper is the small, yet growing, literature that analyzes govern-
ment interventions in interbank networks. For example, Bernard et al. (2018) study under
which conditions the government can credibly commit to organize an incentive-compatible
bail-in scheme in which solvent banks contribute to rescuing the defaulting banks. Altinoglu
and Stiglitz (2019) show how systemically important institutions can emerge as a result of
banks expecting a public bailout. Erol (2019) shows that the expectation of bailouts leads to
higher connectivity and a core-periphery network structure. In both of these papers the gov-
ernment's willingness to bail out the banks ex post makes the whole banking system more
fragile ex ante. In contrast to our model, however, Erol (2019) does not model the govern-
ment's bailout decision explicitly.
    Our paper leverages insights from two strands of literature: the financial contagion lit-
erature and the large "doom loop" literature that has emerged in recent years in response
to the European sovereign debt crisis. Brunnermeier et al. (2016) conceptually distinguish
two types of loops. The first is the "real economy loop" where sovereign stress reduces the
value of public debt on banks' balance sheets and thereby induces a credit crunch; through
reduced economic activity and lower tax revenues, this credit crunch then feeds back into
the fiscal position.2 The second is the "bailout loop" that constitutes the focus of this paper.
    Acharya et al. (2014) provide empirical evidence for both "directions" of the loop. They
show that (a) bailouts triggered the rise of sovereign credit risk in 2008 and (b) changes in
sovereign CDS rates in turn explain changes in bank CDS rates. The perceived stabilization
of the banking sector through a bailout can thus turn out to be a "Pyrrhic victory".
    Acharya et al. (2014) and Farhi and Tirole (2018) develop theoretical models of the "deadly
embrace" that are related to ours, but do not consider interbank linkages and therefore the
implications of network structure. Cooper and Nikolov (2018) study the strategic interaction
between banks and the government. They show that if the government cannot commit to a
credible no-bailout policy, banks in a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium anticipate a bailout
and choose insufficient equity buffers. While in our model banks are inactive agents with
exogenous balance sheets, our analysis of partial bailouts suggests that in a dynamic setting
banks could influence the odds of being bailed out through their sovereign debt exposure.
    Whereas Acharya et al. (2014), Farhi and Tirole (2018), and Cooper and Nikolov (2018)
model the doom loop qualitatively in stylized three-period models, other studies have im-
2 Indeed, Altavilla et al. (2017) and Popov and Van Horen (2015) find that during the European sovereign
 debt crisis banks with higher exposure to stressed sovereigns cut their lending to the domestic real economy
 significantly more than banks with low exposure.


                                                     4
plemented the feedback mechanism in full-blown quantitative macro models to evaluate
the dynamic effects of banking regulation. In particular, Abad (2019) and Boz et al. (2014)
conclude that higher capital requirements in the form of non-zero risk-weights for sovereign
exposure (as stipulated by the Basel III framework) would improve welfare.
    Gaballo and Zetlin-Jones (2016) and Thaler (2018) provide an interesting and novel per-
spective of the doom loop problem that is related to our model. They observe that higher
domestic sovereign exposure of banks decreases the government's bailout capacity because
the doom loop mechanism makes bailouts more costly. Interestingly, they even interpret
high sovereign exposure as a commitment device that deters bank bailouts and thus allevi-
ates moral hazard problems arising from bank behavior. Our benchmark results regarding
complete bailouts can be interpreted similarly. However, our network approach allows us to
go one step further and investigate what happens if some, but not all, banks may be bailed
out. We show that in this scenario banks' incentives may be reversed: High sovereign expo-
sure can increase an individual bank's chance of being bailed out, depending on its position
in the interbank network.
    Finally, our paper indirectly relates to a strand of literature that empirically tests different
hypotheses of why euro area banks exhibited increasing sovereign debt "home bias" during
and after the crisis. Altavilla et al. (2017) and Crosignani (2017) all find that the observed
increase in domestic sovereign debt holdings during the crisis was stronger for poorly capi-
talized banks. This finding is worrisome if viewed in the context of our results on complete
bailouts. As we show in the paper, bailouts are socially more costly if domestic sovereign
debt is largely held by fragile banks.


3      Model
Our model has three periods t = 0, 1, 2 and features a set of banks N = {1, . . . , n} and
a benevolent government that minimizes welfare losses after an exogenous shock has ren-
dered a subset of banks insolvent.3 The sequence of events in our model is illustrated in
Figure 2. In the initial period t = 0, an exogenous negative shock hits a subset of the banks
and lowers the value of their assets below that of their liabilities. Without a public bailout in
t = 1 a cascade of bank defaults with associated bankruptcy deadweight costs may unfold.
However, the government can decide to issue new debt in t = 1 and transfer funds to the
insolvent banks to prevent the default cascade. In period t = 2 all sovereign debt matures
and the government can either repay or not. We describe all relevant model components
and the government's tradeoff in the following paragraphs.
3 In
   that sense our model is closer to an Ireland-type doom loop than to the Greece-type, but we could just as
 well model the latter by initially shocking the government's fiscal position instead.


                                                     5
             0                                                 1                                     2
                                                                                                                  t
Shock hits subset of banks                                                                Gov't repays/defaults
                                            Government's bailout decision
                                            Bank liabilities are due



                                              Figure 2: Timeline



3.1    Banks
The banks are connected through an exogenous network of unsecured interbank liabilities
described by the matrix L = ( Lij ) for i, j  N , where Lij  0 represents the gross value
of bank j's liability to bank i and Lii = 0 i  N . We denote the total interbank liabilities
                       n
of bank j by L j = i        ij
                        =1 L and use L to denote the corresponding n × 1 vector. Moreover,
it will be useful to define the relative liability matrix  with entries  ij = Lij / L j if L j = 0
and  ij = 0 otherwise. In words,  ij  [0, 1] is the share of bank j's interbank liabilities
that it owes to bank i. Hence, the n × 1 vector ( L) contains the book values of each bank's
interbank assets. For instance, ( L)i = n           ij j
                                               j=1  L is the book value of bank i's interbank
assets.
    In addition to interbank assets and liabilities bank i's balance sheet contains (a) outside
assets ci  0 (including cash and loans to the non-financial sector), (b) senior liabilities di > 0
(e.g. deposits), and (c) exogenous domestic sovereign bond holdings bi  0 evaluated at the
endogenous price qt .4 The value of equity at t = 0, defined as assets minus liabilities, is
denoted by
                                        n
                                                                           +
                          i
                         V0   =   c +   L + q0 b - d - L
                                   i           ij j        i       i   i
                                                                               i  N ,
                                       j =1

where we denote by x + = max( x, 0) the positive part of x. To simplify notation, we define
n × 1 vectors d = (di )i
                       n , c = ( ci )n , b = ( bi )n and V = (V i )n . A stylized balance sheet
                         =1          i =1          i =1   0    0 i =1
at time t = 0 is shown in Figure 3.
    A negative shock (e.g. a natural disaster) has reduced the value of banks' outside assets
to c and thus rendered some of them insolvent, i.e., their equity is wiped out and they face
a shortfall of 0  ( L + d - c - q0 b - ( L))+ . Since all bank liabilities are due at t = 1
the insolvent banks will have to default on their obligations if they are not bailed out. We
4 In practice, whether or not securities are "marked to market" (MTM) depends on whether they are categorized

as "held to maturity" (HTM, evaluated at amortized cost) or "available for sale/trading" (evaluated at current
market prices). In our model banks may have to sell sovereign debt to settle their liabilities in t = 1, so MTM
is the appropriate concept.




                                                       6
                                               Assets           Liabilities

                                                  ci                di
                                                (  L )i
                                                                    Li
                                                 q0 b i
                                                                     i
                                                                    V0


                               Figure 3: A solvent bank i's balance sheet at t=0


                                                                 i > 0} and maintain the
denote the set of these fundamentally defaulting banks by F  {i |0
assumption that F is non-empty throughout the paper.


Default Cascades

Since banks are interlinked through credit contracts, the default of one or more fundamen-
tally defaulting banks can lead to further defaults elsewhere in the system. If bank j defaults,
it has to liquidate all its (interbank and other) assets and repay its creditors according to their
seniority. The financial commitments d j have seniority over interbank liabilities L j . Among
interbank creditors, the total repayment p j < L j is distributed pro rata, i.e. the creditor bank
i of a defaulting bank j is repaid according to its share  ij in bank j's interbank liabilities.
    As in Glasserman and Young (2015) we assume that the bankruptcy of bank j comes at a
                           j         j
deadweight loss of 1 where 1  ( L j + d j - c j - q1 b j - n            jk k +
                                                                 k=1  p ) is bank j's shortfall
in period t = 1 and  > 0 a scaling parameter. The deadweight loss is increasing in the
bank's shortfall and can be interpreted as legal costs or losses due to an inefficient allocation
of resources during the bankruptcy procedure.5 Of course, the deadweight loss caused by a
defaulting bank is bounded from above by the total value of its assets. To make comparative
statics tractable, we focus on settings where this upper bound is not binding, i.e., the initial
shortfalls 0 i and the scaling parameter  are small enough to ensure that no bank's assets

are completely wiped out in bankruptcy.
    We assume that interbank liabilities are cleared simultaneously at t = 1, as in Eisenberg
and Noe (2001). This leads to the following definition:

5 See   Bernstein et al. (2019) for a recent empirical study.




                                                            7
Definition 1. A clearing payment vector p = ( p1 , . . . , pn ) for a financial system ( L, , c, d, b) is
a fixed point of
              
              L
                i                                              if   c i + q1 b i +  n    ij j i
                                                                                    j =1  p  L + d
                                                                                                   i
                                                       +
       pi =                    n
                i      i   ij j  i  i
               c + q1 b +   p - d - 1                          otherwise
              
                              j =1


   The existence of multiple, Pareto ranked clearing payment vectors in this setting follows
directly from Proposition 3 in Glasserman and Young (2015). Following the standard con-
vention in this literature, we focus on the Pareto dominant clearing payment p ¯ , i.e., the "best
case" scenario with the highest repayments. We would, however, like to emphasize that this
represents only a lower bound on losses suffered by banks in a default cascade. In reality
the uncertainty about which clearing payment vector will realize can be a great concern for
policymakers and tilt the government's decision towards a bailout.
   If the recovery value of bank i's assets is lower than its senior obligations di , the junior
creditors receive nothing ( p¯ i = 0) and senior creditors suffer a loss of
                                                                                  +
                                                           n
                                                                              +
                           ¯ ) =  di -
                       i ( p              ci + q1 bi +   ij p
                                                            ¯ j - 1
                                                                  i                .                   (1)
                                                       j =1


We define the set of defaulting banks under a clearing payment vector p   ¯ as D ( p         ¯i <
                                                                                   ¯ )  {i | p
Li }. Clearly, D ( p
                   ¯ )  F because D ( p
                                      ¯ ) can also include banks that default due to contagion
effects triggered by fundamentally defaulting banks.


3.2    Government
The government in our model faces a tradeoff in minimizing expected welfare losses at t = 1.
On the one hand, it wants to avoid bank defaults and the associated deadweight losses. On
the other hand, rescuing banks with debt-financed bailouts is also costly because liabilities
are effectively moved from private to the public balance sheet, resulting in higher sovereign
spreads and a higher probability of a costly sovereign default.
    We assume that all sovereign debt matures in the final period t = 2 and is held either
by domestic banks or risk-neutral investors (external to the network), so the (exogenous)
                                                         n    i   Inv          Inv
total initial stock of sovereign debt is given by B0 = i  =1 b + b0 , where b0 denotes the
holdings of risk-neutral investors.
    At t = 1, after observing the fundamental shocks to the banking system, the government
can choose to prevent a default cascade by issuing additional debt, i.e., by increasing the
outstanding debt level to B1 > B0 to finance bank bailout transfers ti (q1 )  0 for i  N .

                                                   8
    In the first part of the paper we focus on complete bailouts, i.e., we restrict the govern-
ment's set of possible bailouts to those where all banks receive exactly the amount required
to cover their shortfall:
                                                                            +
                          t i ( q1 ) = L i + d i - c i - q1 b i - (  L )i       i  N .                       (2)

This form of bailout is extreme (saving either all banks or none), but constitutes a useful
benchmark for comparing our model with standard representative bank models in which
the bailout decision is often binary. What is more, in reality discriminating among banks
might lead to litigation that governments seek to avoid. Later in the paper, however, we
extend the analysis to the more general case where the government can optimally choose the
set of surviving banks. Notice that the set of banks receiving a positive bailout transfer is not
necessarily limited to F . It is evident from equation (2) that if the price of sovereign debt falls
in period 1 (q1 < q0 ), even banks which do not belong to the set F may have to be rescued
to avoid a default cascade. To raise the total amount of required bailout T (q1 )  i N ti (q1 ),
public borrowing needs to satisfy the following budget constraint:

                                            q1 ( B1 - B0 ) = T (q1 )                                         (3)

Clearly, the amount of debt that the government can raise by issuing ( B1 - B0 ) new bonds
in period 1 depends on q1 , i.e., the (endogenous) market price of debt prevailing in period 1.
In the remainder of this section, we first explain how sovereign bonds are priced and then
how the doom loop emerges in our model.
    In the final period t = 2 the government raises taxes to repay its obligations B1 . We
assume that the government's tax capacity (i.e., the maximum revenue it can raise)         ~ is a
random variable that follows a continuous and strictly monotonic cumulative distribution
function (CDF) F ( ).6 If   B1 , the government raises exactly enough to repay all debt in
full. If, however,  < B1 , we assume the government collects nothing and fully defaults on
all its obligations, i.e. bondholders do not receive any repayment at all.7 This is consistent
with the fact that in the aftermath of a sovereign default and the ensuing crisis, the ability of
the government to function is greatly circumscribed. It then follows that the probability of
                                                                    T (q )
a sovereign default is given by P( De f ault) = F ( B1 ) = F B0 + q11 . Because the cumu-

6 One interpretation would be that the government can raise any revenue it desires, but only at a stochastic
 cost. In this alternative scenario the government would optimally default whenever the realization of this
 cost exceeds some threshold.
7 This assumption buys us tractability and leads to a simple analytical expression for q1 . If one were to assume
 partial repayment, the numerator in equation (4) would also include the integral over all possible realizations
 of ~ and the corresponding pro rata repayments. The economic mechanism we want to capture is qualitatively
 unaffected by this "all-or-nothing" assumption on tax collection.



                                                         9
lative distribution function is increasing, it follows immediately that the default probability
increases with the required bailout expenditures T (q1 ), but decreases with respect to the
bond price q1 . In words, a higher bond price in period t = 1 will make a sovereign default
less likely. At the same time, however, the bond price depends on the government's default
probability in the following way: The marginal buyers of sovereign bonds are investors who
discount future cash flows at the risk-free gross interest rate R  1. Because we assume that
these investors are risk-neutral and have deep pockets, the market-clearing sovereign debt
price is given by
                                                                          T (q )
                                1 - P( De f ault)   1 - F B0 + q11
                          q1 =                    =                     .                      (4)
                                       R                     R
At this price q1 risk-neutral investors are indifferent between buying the bond with expected
payoff 1 - P( De f ault) and the risk-free asset that guarantees the return R.
    Equation (4) is a nonlinear equation which generally admits multiple solutions. As a
result, there may exist multiple equilibrium sovereign debt prices, just like in the canonical
models of self-fulfilling debt crises such as Calvo (1988) or Cole and Kehoe (2000). This mul-
tiplicity arises from the fact that both sides of equation (4) are increasing in q1 . In economic
terms, if investors expect a low default probability they are willing to pay a high price q1 for
sovereign bonds. According to the right-hand side of equation (4), this confirms the expec-
tation of a low default probability. The reverse argument holds when investors believe in a
high default probability.8
    How many equilibrium prices exist depends on the exogenous parameters R and B0 ,
the bailout transfer in (2) and, importantly, the shape and domain of F ( ). We make the
following assumption:

Assumption 1. For a given network ( L, , c, d, b) and parameters ( B0 , R), the tax capacity ~ fol-
lows a Pareto distribution with a heavy tail, i.e.,
                                                                  
                                                             B0
                                            F ( ) = 1 -
                                                             

with   B0 and  < 1.

   This assumption has several implications. First of all, it imposes a lower bound on the
space of possible realizations of ~ and implies F ( B0 ) = 0, so it ensures that without an
increase in debt the government can always repay its debt with certainty. As a consequence,
8 Fora similar analysis of the effect of nominal interest rates on the price of private bonds, see Greenwald and
 Stiglitz (1993).




                                                      10
without bailouts the equilibrium price in the sovereign debt market is pinned down at q1   NB =

R-1 , i.e., the government pays no spread relative to the risk-free rate R.9
    Second, because F ( B0 + ) > 0  > 0, if public debt increases (e.g. due to a positive
bailout at t = 1) the government will default at t = 2 with a non-zero probability. In other
words, even a small bailout always comes at the cost of increasing sovereign spreads.
    Finally, the parameter  < 1 guarantees that the right-hand side of equation (4), when
viewed as a function of q1 , has the graph depicted in Figure 4. In particular, the curve starts
above the 45 line and is strictly concave. Assumption 1 thus implies a unique equilibrium
price with bailouts q1 B  (0, R-1 ) which is decreasing in the level of bailout expenditures, i.e.,

a higher price q1 B can only be achieved through lower bailout expenditures and vice versa.10


Lemma 1. Equilibrium aggregate bailout transfers T (q1 ) and the equilibrium price of sovereign debt
 B are inversely related.
q1

Proof. See Appendix B.

    Note that we chose the Pareto distribution for analytical tractability, but any other power
law distribution with sufficiently slow decay would also yield a unique equilibrium price
under mild extra conditions. Even with more general distributions that would generate
multiple (stable or unstable) equilibrium prices, our results would still survive locally for
the doom loop equilibria with q1 < R-1 . For an extensive discussion, see Appendix A.
    In economic terms the Pareto assumption means that there is a high probability of being
able to raise small extra tax revenues (beyond a guaranteed minimum B0 ), but that higher
revenues become less and less likely. The heavy tail of the Pareto distribution implies that
even very high tax revenues are not completely unlikely, so the government might be able
to honor extremely large debt obligations.


Graphical Illustration of the Doom Loop

Figure 4 illustrates the equilibrium in the sovereign debt market and the result from the
lemma graphically for different bailout amounts. For positive bailout T ~ (solid line), a locally
stable equilibrium price q1 B = q~1 < 1/ R emerges. Most importantly, note that higher bailout
expenditures T ^ > T ~ shift the curve downwards (dashed line) and reduce the equilibrium

9 Thisnormalization is without loss of generality. When the government considers a bailout it is concerned
 with the implied change in its default probability, not with the level. A positive default probability without
 bailouts (e.g. because bank failures lead to a macroeconomic contraction with lower tax revenues and higher
 government expenditure) would simply add a level shift to the welfare losses without bailout which will be
 defined in (6).
10 Strictlyspeaking, a "market breakdown" equilibrium in which q1B = 0 (the government defaults with cer-

  tainty) always exists for T > 0 as lim  F ( ) = 1 because F (·) is a CDF. In our analysis we deliberately
  ignore this extreme coordination failure.


                                                      11
             Figure 4: Larger bailout expenditures reduce sovereign debt price


debt price to q  ^1 < q~1 . Because from equation (2) the required bailout amount is inversely
related to q1 , the figure illustrates how the doom loop operates in the model: Bailouts lead to
higher spreads (q1 ) which in turn increases the required bailout expenditures. This pushes
down q1 further and so forth.
    What remains to be defined is the initial sovereign debt price q0 . We assume that the
shock to the banking sector (and thus a potential bank bailout) is totally unexpected, so it
is not reflected in the pre-shock price of sovereign debt. Therefore, the initial bond price is
given by
                                             1 - F ( B0 )  1
                                        q0 =              = .                                (5)
                                                 R         R
As a consequence, whenever T (q1 ) > 0, the sovereign spread jumps up in t = 1. In contrast,
whenever T (q1 ) = 0, we have q1     NB = q = 1/ R.
                                           0


Welfare Losses

The government chooses the bailout strategy in period t = 1 to minimize welfare losses. In
the absence of intervention, welfare losses are given by

                                                           n
                  ¯) = 
               w( p                  Li + di - ci - q1 bi -   ij p
                                                                 ¯j   =              i
                                                                                     1 ,     (6)
                          i D ( p
                                ¯)                        j =1            i D ( p
                                                                                ¯)




                                                 12
the part of defaulting banks' assets that is lost in bankruptcy. Note that we could also allow
bank failures to affect the public balance sheet, e.g. through a macroeconomic contraction
and an increase in automatic stabilizer expenditures. This would increase w( p     ¯ ) and thus tilt
the government's incentives further toward a bailout.
   If the government does bail out all banks, liabilities are effectively shifted from the bank-
ing sector to the public, there are no bankruptcies and (expected) welfare losses are instead
given by
                                                           B)
                                                      T ( q1                B)
                                                                       T ( q1
                 w B =  B1 P( De f ault) =  B0 +          B
                                                              F   B0 +     B
                                                                                ,               (7)
                                                        q1               q1
where the parameter  > 0 measures deadweight losses per unit of defaulted sovereign
debt and is a proxy for litigation costs and the penalty of losing access to debt markets.11
Therefore, according to (7) high spreads (low q1   B ) are costly in our model not because they

constrain government expenditures, but because they (a) make a sovereign default more
likely and (b) increase the cost of a sovereign default (since the government will have had
to issue more bonds to finance the bailout). The government internalizes the impact of its
bailout choice on the default probability and finances a bailout if and only if w B < w( p
                                                                                         ¯ ).
    An alternative version could feature an additional "deposit insurance" -term in equation
(6), namely if depositor losses from (1) automatically triggered public transfers that raise
public debt beyond B0 . Qualitatively, the only difference would be that in such an alternative
specification the government would focus its bailout efforts more strongly on banks with
otherwise large depositor losses.
    Similarly, one could introduce loans to the real economy as an additional bank asset that
the government seeks to sustain in a crisis. In that case, banks that are crucial for credit
provision would likely receive a bailout.12
    A third alternative would highlight the fact that a sovereign default might come with
additional benefits: There is a reduction in the need to raise taxes to service the debt. Our
parameter  can be interpreted as the net deadweight loss associated with a sovereign de-
fault, after taking into account the benefit of reduced taxation.


3.3        Equilibrium with Complete Bailouts
We start by analyzing the situation where the government is restricted to choose between
no bailout or a complete bailout. The corresponding definition of equilibrium is given next.
11 It
    is reasonable to assume that the cost of a sovereign default increases with the level of defaulted debt, but
  the linear functional form in (7) is not crucial. Our results would also hold for any non-decreasing default
  cost function ( B1 ).
12 Sincelarge corporations can access capital markets more easily or benefit from central bank support for the
  commercial paper segment, such a specification would put greater emphasis on small and regional banks
  that supply loans to small and medium enterprises.


                                                      13
             Table 1: How does the bailout space  depend on model parameters?

                                                                                                R
            -                           -                           +                          +/-

Note: The signs denote whether the bailout space increases (+) or decreases (-) with the respective parameter.
Parentheses indicate weak monotonicity. Ambiguous effects are denoted by +/-. Whenever we say that 
increases with a parameter  it means that for  >  we have    and vice versa.


Definition 2. For a given network ( L, , c, d, b), bankruptcy cost parameter , risk-free in-
terest rate R, and fiscal parameters ( B0 , , ), an equilibrium with complete bailouts is a set of
bailout transfers ti (q1 )  0 for i  N and sovereign debt prices q0 and q1 such that

   1. Bailouts ti (q1 )   i N
                                satisfy equation (2) if w B < w( p
                                                                 ¯ ) and ti = 0 i  N otherwise;

   2. Sovereign debt prices are determined by equations (4) and (5).

    Before we turn to the analysis of how the sovereign debt distribution affects the strength
of the doom loop and thus the government's bailout decision, it is helpful to define the
bailout space, i.e. the set of initial shocks for which the government will bail out the banks
in equilibrium. We define the bailout space as a subset of the space of vectors c (i.e., "cash"
assets) for a given network structure and parameters. Everything else equal, a (component-
wise) weakly smaller vector c corresponds to a larger initial shock.

Definition 3. For given ( L, , b, d), bankruptcy cost parameter , risk-free interest rate R,
and fiscal parameters ( B0 , , ), the bailout space is defined as

                                        c  Rn : w B < w ( p
                                                          ¯)

    Note that the topological properties of the bailout space are not obvious. Specifically, a
stronger initial shock c < c   is ambiguous: On the one hand, it will create (weakly)
more damage in a default cascade (w( p     ¯ ) ) which suggests that c might still belong to
the bailout space. On the other hand, it also (weakly) increases the fiscal cost of a bailout,
suggesting the opposite (w B  and c        / ). Nevertheless, the bailout space depends on
some model parameters in a straightforward way. We summarize these comparative statics
results in Table 1, but relegate the corresponding proofs to Appendix B.
    An increase in the Pareto shape parameter  induces a first-order stochastic dominated
shift of the tax capacity distribution F ( ), i.e., higher taxation capacities become less likely.
As a consequence, the probability of sovereign default and hence w B increase, so bailouts
become less attractive and  decreases.
    A higher  makes an eventual sovereign default more costly (w B ), so again  shrinks
as  increases. In contrast, a higher bankruptcy cost parameter  means that a potential

                                                     14
default cascade results in higher welfare losses (w( p    ¯ ) ) which makes bailouts relatively
more attractive and increases . The European Union's recent efforts to create a banking
union with a robust resolution framework can partially be understood as an attempt to bring
down  and thereby to discourage public bailouts in the first place.
    Finally, the effect of R on the bailout space is ambiguous. A higher risk-free gross interest
rate R increases both w( p  ¯ ) (because it lowers the value of banks' sovereign debt holdings)
and w B (because of a higher default probability and larger deadweight losses in case of
default).


The Doom Loop with Complete Bailouts

Our main research question is how the interbank network topology and the distribution of
sovereign debt jointly affect the government's bailout choice. In the context of complete
bailouts, answering this question boils down to evaluating the relative effects of sovereign
debt distribution and network structure on w( p    ¯ ) and w B .
    First note that in the case of complete bailouts all interbank liabilities are paid in full, so
the network structure only matters for w( p  ¯ ), as the required bailout that determines w B is
independent of the network structure. In contrast, the presence and distribution of sovereign
debt only affects w B as without a bailout there is no doom loop and we have q1        NB = 1/ R

in equilibrium. Specifically, what matters for w B is (a) how much debt the banking sector
holds, and (b) which banks hold the debt. We address both points in the following two
propositions.

Proposition 1 (Sovereign exposure and the bailout space). For a constant initial level of public
debt B0 , let ( L, , c     ~ ) and ( L, , c
                     ~, d, b                    ^ ) be two financial systems such that
                                          ^, d, b

     ^i  b
  1. b   ~i    i  N with at least one inequality strict

     ^i = c
  2. c    ~i - (b    ~ i )/ R > 0
                ^i - b                     ^i > b
                                    i  N : b    ~ i.

                                ~ B and 
                            ^B  w
Then with complete bailouts w           ^ ~.

Proof. See Appendix B

    Conditions 1 and 2 ensure that if we move from the tilde-system to the hat-system, every
bank that now holds more sovereign debt holds less cash in return so that the overall initial
equity or shortfall positions remain unchanged (    ^0 = ~ 0 ). In other words, these banks only
differ in their asset composition across the two scenarios, but not in their total asset size or
leverage. The idea of the proposition is that increasing the amount of sovereign debt held by
domestic banks amplifies the feedback loop between a falling debt price q1 and ever higher
transfers T (q1 ). Therefore, complete bailouts become more costly and as a result  becomes

                                                15
smaller.13 Note however that w     ^ B is only weakly larger than w~ B because it is possible that the
banks with increased sovereign exposure are well capitalized and do not require a bailout in
the first place. In that case, even though their shareholders suffer higher book value losses
than in the tilde-system, these do not translate into outright bankruptcies and hence do not
affect the bailout space.
    Clearly, if the banks with sovereign exposure are relatively well capitalized, they can bet-
ter absorb a drop in q1 than weak banks. This higher loss-absorbing capacity mitigates the
"doom loop"-related cost of a bailout because fewer banks need to be bailed out (see equa-
tion (2)). Even if bailing out the fundamentally defaulting banks makes additional bailouts
necessary (i.e. ti (q1 ) > 0 for some i   / F due to q1 ), this bailout will still be less costly than
if the sovereign debt was held entirely by the F -banks. We present an example to illustrate
the economic forces at play.

Example 1. Let B  {i : bi > 0} denote the set of banks that hold sovereign debt and consider the
following scenario: Suppose there was only one fundamentally defaulting bank i while all sovereign
debt in the banking sector was held by another bank j = i, so F and B would be disjoint singletons.
Suppose further that the government chooses to bail out bank i, thereby causing a drop in the bond
price that would render bank j insolvent. Then, according to our definition of complete bailouts, the
government also has to transfer bailout funds to bank j  B . However, as long as bank j initially had
a positive equity buffer, the total required bailout (ti + t j ) will be smaller than if only bank i had held
the sovereign debt stock (i.e. if F = B = {i }) and the doom loop had hit bank i with its full force.

    The insight from this stylized example carries over to more dispersed distributions of
sovereign debt among banks. We formally state this intuitive result in the following propo-
sition:

Proposition 2 (Sovereign exposure and capital buffers). Let ( L, , c     ~ ) and ( L, , c
                                                                   ~, d, b                    ^ ) be
                                                                                        ^, d, b
two financial systems such that

      ^i < b
   1. b    ~ i i : V i < b
                         ~ i ( R -1 - q
                                      ~1max )
                    0

          ^ i = i  N b
   2. i N b          ~i

      ^i = c
   3. c    ~i - (b    ~ i )/ R > 0
                 ^i - b                       ^i < b
                                       i  N : b    ~ i,
                                                                         i
        max is the unique positive solution of R q max = 1 - F     iF 0
      ~1
where q                                          ~1                q max
                                                                    ~1       . Then with complete bailouts
     ~ B and 
^B < w
w            ^ ~.

Proof. See Appendix B
13 This
      relationship perfectly resonates with the argument in Gaballo and Zetlin-Jones (2016) that stronger
  "home bias" in banks' sovereign debt portfolios reduces the government's bailout capacity.


                                                     16
    The two financial systems described in the proposition only differ in the distribution
of domestic sovereign debt, with aggregate sovereign exposure in the banking system and
initial shortfalls held constant (conditions 2 and 3 imply      ^0 =  ~ 0  0 ). More precisely, the
                                i
banks with capital buffers V0 below an exogenous threshold hold less sovereign debt in the
hat-system than in the tilde-system (condition 1), which requires that banks with V0         i above

the threshold hold more.14 Then, the proposition says that redistributing domestic sovereign
debt from weakly capitalized banks to more healthy banks makes a complete bailout socially
less costly. The intuition behind this result is that if banks with sovereign exposure have larger
capital buffers they can absorb any drop in the value of sovereign debt more easily without becoming
insolvent themselves (and thus requiring a bailout). Therefore, aggregate bailouts and welfare
losses are smaller. Proposition 2 can be thought of in terms of the correlation between V0         i

and bi : Everything else equal, higher correlation leads to less costly bailouts.
    We conclude our discussion of the benchmark case with complete bailouts by briefly
touching upon the policy dimension of our findings. Since we consider an ex post scenario
with a given distribution of sovereign debt, the correlation between the elements of V0 and
b is just a primitive of our model. However, proposition 2 suggests that from an ex ante per-
spective (with uncertainty about idiosyncratic fundamental shocks) it is socially preferable
that domestic sovereign debt be held by the "safest" banks, i.e. those that are the least likely
to default fundamentally. Against this backdrop, the findings in Acharya and Steffen (2015),
Altavilla et al. (2017), and Crosignani (2017) that in the recent European sovereign debt crisis
the most fragile banks increased their domestic sovereign exposure disproportionally be-
comes even more worrisome; rather than "too big to fail" they might have become "too debt-
loaded to be saved". Our results therefore provide an immediate rationale for bank capital
requirements that increase with domestic sovereign debt exposure. We refer to Véron (2017)
for a detailed proposal and a comprehensive survey of the policy debate.


3.4       Optimal (Partial) Bailouts
In the previous section we have only considered binary outcomes: The government either
chooses to rescue all banks or none. As the global financial crisis of 2007-2008 has shown
in several countries, reality may lie somewhere between those two extremes. In some situa-
tions, complete bailouts can be unrealistically costly in our model, so they often do not occur
in equilibrium. Therefore, in this section we expand the set of feasible bailout strategies be-
14 Thisthreshold depends on q  max , i.e., the upper bound on the bond price in case of a bailout. This is the price
                              ~1
  that would prevail if only the initial shortfall had to be covered because none of the banks in F held any
  sovereign debt. Hence, the banks referred to in condition 1 are those whose capital buffers could not even
  absorb the lowest possible drop in the sovereign bond price.




                                                        17
yond complete bailouts and allow the government to pick the optimal subset of "surviving"
banks S  N .
   As in the case of complete bailouts, welfare is maximized by the smallest public transfer
that makes the surviving banks solvent. Hence, the formula for bailout transfers takes a form
similar to equation (2). However, note that in contrast to the complete bailouts benchmark
there may now be defaulting banks (i.e. the complement of S which we denote by D ( p      ¯ (S )))
that do not pay their interbank liabilities in full. Partial bailout transfers account for these
losses on interbank assets:

                                                                                   +
                     ti ( p
                          ¯ ( S ), q1 ) = L i + d i - c i - q1 b i - (  p
                                                                        ¯ (S ))i       i  S                 (8)

Even though partial bailouts defined in this way are a generalization of complete bailouts
(obtained by setting S = N ), the government cannot choose the size and distribution of
bailout transfers arbitrarily. In particular, we do not allow transfers to banks outside of the
set S , i.e., the government can only provide bailout funds to banks that become solvent after
these transfers.15 This modeling choice can be interpreted as a political economy constraint:
Voters would not allow their elected officials to acquire a stake in a bank that is certain to
fail anyway.
    The government will choose the set S (and equivalently its complement S c = N \
S ) to minimize the expected welfare losses w( p   ¯ (S )) arising from bank bankruptcies and
sovereign default. Formally, the government problem becomes

                                                               n
               min
               S N
                           c     Li + di - ci - q1 bi -   ij p
                                                             ¯ j (S )         +  B1 P( De f ault)
                           i S                                j =1                                          (9)
                 s.t.          ¯ (S ))c ,
                        S = D( p
where the constraint needs to be imposed for the sake of technical consistency because not
every subset of N can solely survive.16 We are now in a position to define equilibria with
optimal bailouts:

Definition 4. For a given network ( L, , c, d, b), bankruptcy cost parameter , risk-free in-
terest rate R, and fiscal parameters ( B0 , , ), an equilibrium with optimal bailouts is a set of
surviving banks S  , associated bailout transfers ti ( p
                                                       ¯ (S  ), q1 )  0 for i  S  , and sovereign
debt prices q0 and q1 such that

   1. S  solves the government's problem (9);
15 Atthe optimal S  , if the marginal benefit of bailout funds in an insolvent bank exceeds the marginal cost of
  raising these funds, removing the constraint would actually allow for a welfare improvement. However, it
  would also make the problem much less tractable.
16 Some banks may never fail (so they automatically have to be included in each candidate S ) or some always
  survive together so that it is impossible for one to be in S while the other is not.


                                                         18
                    ¯ ( S  ), q1 )
   2. Bailouts ti ( p                 i S 
                                             satisfy equation (8);

   3. Sovereign debt prices are determined by equations (4) and (5).


Local Analysis of Bailout Determinants

The optimization problem in (9) is a highly complex minimization over sets that involves
several nonlinearities and fixed points. Hence, it is generally difficult to make general ana-
lytical statements about the determinants of S  .17
    In particular, it is hard to pin down whether or not a given bank will be bailed out in
equilibrium. Therefore, to develop a better understanding of the economic forces that deter-
mine the government's bailout decision, from now on we ignore the "global" solution of (9)
and focus instead on "local" analysis in the following sense: Suppose that instead of choos-
ing the optimal subset among all feasible subsets of surviving banks, the government could
only bail out one bank at a time. Starting from the hypothetical laissez faire outcome with
defaulting banks D ( p  ¯ ), the government computes for every troubled bank the net welfare
gain that would result from bailing it out. As long as a reduction in welfare losses is possi-
ble in this way, the government adds the bank with the highest net welfare gain to the set of
surviving banks. The procedure stops once there is no troubled bank left that can be bailed
out without increasing welfare losses.
    There is no guarantee that the set thus constructed coincides with the "globally" optimal
set S  which solves (9).18 However, the fictional sequential procedure allows us to at least
analyze "local" optima, i.e., we can pin down bank-specific properties that determine which
bank will be bailed out at any given step of the procedure.
    To make this analysis meaningful, in the following we only consider situations where
partial bailouts are optimal, i.e., some banks are bailed out in equilibrium while others are
not. It is easy to see from (9) that high values of  relative to  make complete bailouts
attractive whereas low values will prevent bailouts altogether. Figure 5 plots the regions of
 and  for which the equilibrium outcome is a complete bailout, a partial bailout, or no
bailout, for a numerical example. We will focus on the intermediate region in the -  plane,
that is the light grey area in the figure.
    We begin the analysis with a useful decomposition of the net welfare effect of bailing out
bank i which we call i w.19 On the one hand, the bailout brings a benefit by not only avoid-
ing direct bankruptcy deadweight losses 1      i , but also by increasing bank i's interbank re-


17 Of   course, it is possible to solve (9) numerically. For details about the algorithm we use, see Appendix D.
18 Borgatti(2006) calls this the "ensemble problem": The optimal set of nodes for a given optimization problem
  is not necessarily the set of optimal banks when considered individually.
19 Even though we are concerned with minimizing welfare losses, we define the net welfare effect such that
  i w is positive if bailing out bank i is beneficial.


                                                         19
             Figure 5: How does the bailout choice depend on cost parameters?


payments from p   ¯ i to Li , thus reducing the shortfalls and deadweight losses of i's creditors,
their creditors, and so forth. Some troubled banks may even become solvent as a result.
On the other hand, the bailout comes at a cost: First, the increase in sovereign debt implies
a lower sovereign debt price q1 and a higher probability of sovereign default; second, the
drop in q1 increases the shortfalls and deadweight losses in other banks that are still insol-
vent after bailing out bank i. We refer to these two sources of welfare losses, respectively, as
-component and -component, named after their respective coefficients in the social wel-
fare function (9). In what follows we first elaborate on all components individually before
we state the decomposition in a lemma.
    We start with an observation about the benefit of bailing out bank i: For a given set of sur-
viving banks S , by bailing out bank i  S c the government avoids bankruptcy deadweight
losses of


  1 + ( L j - p               kj + (1 + )    lk  kj + (1 + )2     ml  lk  kj + . . .
        j
              ¯ j (S ))                                                                                 ,
 jI                          k                 k    l                    k   l   m
                                                                                                 (10)
where I denotes the set of banks that become solvent through the bailout (with i  I )
and all summations except the first are over the default set S c \ I . The expression in (10)
                                                                                      j
captures (a) the direct impact of avoiding bankruptcy deadweight losses 1 for banks in
I , and (b) the indirect impact of their increased interbank repayments. The idea is that the
increase in repayments from p  ¯ j (S ) to L j not only increases j's creditors' assets available for


                                                   20
repayment, but also reduces their shortfall and hence their deadweight losses. For example,
if bank j fully repays, its creditor k's shortfall decreases by  kj ( L j - p ¯ j (S )) and its repayment
p¯ k even increases by (1 + ) kj ( L j - p  ¯ j (S )), and so on. In other words, the positive effect
of the bailout travels through the subnetwork of defaulting banks and is amplified by the
bankruptcy cost coefficient  at each node.
     The expression in (10) can be further simplified. Observe that the increase in interbank re-
payments is bounded from above by L j , namely if bank j originally could not even partially
                                  ¯ j (S ) = 0). Otherwise, that is if p
repay its interbank liabilities ( p                                    ¯ j (S ) > 0  j  I : L j > 0, we
                                                                  j
can use Definition 1 to show that L j - p       ¯ j (S ) = (1 + )1 . For ease of notation we restrict
our subsequent analysis to the latter case, so that the expression in (10) becomes


                        1        1 + (1 + )   kj + (1 + )2    lk  kj + . . .
                             j
                                                                                                    (11)
                        jI                      k                   k   l

                                                            Cj

We remark, however, that our results would qualitatively also hold in the general case where
j's depositors incur losses, i.e., if there exists some bank j with positive interbank liabilities
L j > 0 which makes zero payments to its creditors in the network.
    Borrowing from Glasserman and Young (2015), we refer to the term in parentheses as
the "node depth" of bank j and denote it by C j which stands for "centrality". Node depth
measures the extent to which any loss originating at bank j gets spread and amplified in the
subnetwork of defaulting banks. Therefore, it is naturally increasing in the set of defaulting
banks, i.e., for a given network , node depth of any individual bank is weakly higher if
more banks default. Let D be a set of defaulted nodes, and D be the |D| × |D| matrix
obtained by restricting the relative liabilities matrix  to D . Moreover, denote by ID be the
|D| × |D| identity matrix, and let  denote the transpose of matrix . Conditional on D , the
vector of node depths of banks in D is given by [ ID - (1 + )D ]-1 · 1D if the spectral radius
of (1 + )D is less than one. This technical condition has a clear economic interpretation:
For node depth to be well defined, the entries of the relative liability matrix of the defaulting
banks D have to be sufficiently small, i.e., the defaulting banks need to owe a sufficient
fraction of their liabilities to solvent banks outside of D . The higher the bankruptcy cost
parameter , the lower the relative exposures within the defaulting set must be.20
    Another interpretation is that solvent banks are required to act as a valve to absorb some
of the losses in the interbank market. Otherwise there would be too much amplification of
welfare losses within D and the series in (10) and (11) would not converge. For example, if
the set of defaulting banks had a ring structure with  ij = 1 if j = i + 1, modulo n, node
20 We   derive formal conditions for two- and three-dimensional default sets in Appendix C.



                                                       21
depth could not be computed using the matrix inversion formula given above. Rather than
fading out, any dollar of shortfall at a given bank would be fully transmitted and amplified
at every node as it travels through the ring until all assets are wiped out. In contrast, if the
                                                                 1
interbank network is complete and symmetric with  ij = n-          1 i, j  N , node depth can be
computed as long as the total number of banks n exceeds the number of defaulting banks
by a sufficient amount. The critical number of banks increases with the bankruptcy cost
parameter .
     There is an interesting analogy between the concept of node depth and other, more stan-
dard network metrics such as eigenvector or Katz-Bonacich centrality. First, just like eigen-
vector centrality, a bank's node depth is a weighted sum of the node depths of its creditors,
with weights given by the relative liability matrix  (recall that  kj measures the share of
k's claim in j's total interbank liabilities). Intuitively, a bank's node depth is higher if it has
higher liabilities to defaulting banks that have themselves high liabilities to other defaulting
banks. And second, similarly to the attenuation coefficient in Katz-Bonacich centrality, the
factor (1 + ) controls the effect of path length on the relationship between different nodes'
centralities. We refer to section 9.3 of Glasserman and Young (2016) for more details.
     From an economic perspective, the expression in (11) indicates that the benefit of a
bailout is the largest if targeted at banks with (a) large shortfalls, (b) high potential to avoid
contagious defaults (i.e., a large set I ), and (c) high centrality in the sense of node depth.
However, a comprehensive analysis of the government's tradeoff also requires to analyze
the cost of a bailout.
     We begin by considering the -component, i.e., the part of the cost that is directly related
to the pecuniary expenditure the bailout of bank i requires. The increase in the level of
public debt (and thus in the sovereign default probability) depends on four items: First of all,
from equation (8) we can see that, ceteris paribus, a larger shortfall 1  i clearly requires higher

bailout expenditures and thus leads to a sharper increase in the sovereign default probability
and a sharper drop in the bond price q1 . Second, there is a doom loop multiplier effect: a
higher sovereign exposure bi also leads to higher bailout expenditures because every dollar
raised for the bailout of bank i increases its effective shortfall by an amount proportional to
bi . Therefore, even for identical shortfalls, bailing out banks with more sovereign debt on
their balance sheets comes with a higher -component than bailing out low-exposure banks.
Third, depending on the sovereign exposure of banks in S , it may happen that the drop in q1
makes additional bailout transfers to other banks necessary to prevent their insolvency. The
cost of raising these funds will also be reflected in the -component. Fourth and finally, it
matters whether or not bank i is part of a cycle in the subnetwork of defaulting banks S c . If
so, then bailing out i eventually also increases the interbank repayments it receives, thereby
reducing the effective shortfall the government needs to cover according to (8). Summing


                                                22
up, to minimize the -component of the bailout cost, the government would ideally bail
out banks that have only a low shortfall to begin with, hold little sovereign debt, and have
interbank claims on other defaulting banks that have themselves (direct or indirect) claims
on the bailout candidate.
    To complete the picture, we turn to the -component which describes the additional
bankruptcy deadweight losses in defaulting banks that are triggered by the drop in the
sovereign bond price which we denote by i q1 < 0. The bailout of bank i causes dead-
weight losses in the amount of | i q1 b j | for each defaulting bank j  S c \ I which will then
be amplified in proportion to their centrality C j . This means that the side effects of a bailout
can become very costly if the remaining defaulters are highly exposed to their government and very
central in the subnetwork of defaulting banks. It is exactly this key observation that will give
rise to our main result further below. The following lemma summarizes our discussion of
the government's bailout incentives so far.

Lemma 2 (Decomposition of net welfare effect). For a given set of surviving banks S , the net
welfare effect i w of bailing out bank i  S c can be written as

                  i w =   1 × C j +             
                                  j
                                                        i q1 b j × C j -i ( B1 P( De f ault)),
                            jI                jS c \I
                                                                           -component
                              Benefit            -component

                                                                   Cost


where i q1 < 0 and i ( B1 P( De f ault)) > 0 denote changes implied by the bailout of i.

      The lemma allows us to make a number of statements about which banks deliver the
highest welfare improvements if bailed out. For example, note that in an economy without
bank-held domestic sovereign debt (b = 0), the -component would disappear and banks
could be ranked in terms of network spillovers only. More precisely, among two banks i and
j with the same shortfall (i.e., 1 i =  j ) and the same set of contagious defaults (I \ i = J \ j)
                                         1
the -component would be identical for both banks. The government would then prefer to
bail out the bank with higher node depth C.21 Our model thus supports the claim that banks
with high liabilities to other weakly capitalized banks can be "too interconnected to fail".
      Another thought experiment (again with b = 0) helps to emphasize the role of node
depth and hence network structure: Consider two banks with the same node depth (Ci =
                                                                    i >  j . Depending on model
C j ), but such that has a larger shortfall without a bailout, e.g. 1    1
parameters (in particular for sufficiently high ) it is possible that the government prefers
to bail out bank j if both banks' centrality is low, but it prefers bank i if their centrality
21 Thisinsight echos a number of results from the more general literature about intervention in networks. For
  instance, Galeotti et al. (2019) show that in network games of strategic complements, the optimal intervention
  allocated to a given node is proportional to its eigenvector centrality.


                                                        23
is sufficiently high. The reason is that the benefit of a bailout is proportional to the bank's
centrality while the fiscal cost (-component) is not. Therefore, if centrality is low, the higher
-component of bailing out i can dominate the government's decision, but with sufficiently
high centrality the higher benefit overcompensates the increased sovereign default risk.
    In what follows we often compare two banks or two entire financial systems that are
identical in all but one dimension. This allows us to isolate specific channels and derive
precise analytical results.


Sovereign Debt Distribution and Network Centrality

The insights discussed in the previous paragraphs could, in principle, also be derived in a
conventional model of financial contagion without the doom loop. In contrast, this section
analyzes how network centrality interacts with the distribution of sovereign debt and hence
with the doom loop.
   Before we study non-degenerate, dispersed distributions of sovereign debt we consider
the simple benchmark case in which every bank has the same exposure to the government.

Proposition 3 (Uniform sovereign debt distribution). Let ( L, , c     ~ ) and ( L, , c
                                                                ~, d, b                    ^ ) be
                                                                                     ^, d, b
two financial systems such that

      ~=0
   1. b

      ^ k = b > 0 k  N
   2. b

          ^ / R (which implies 
        ~-b
      ^=c
   3. c                        ^1 = ~ 1  1 ).

Moreover, let i, j  S c be two banks that differ only in their node depth, with Ci > C j . In particular,
they have identical shortfalls 1i =  j and cause the same set of contagious defaults I \ i = J \ j.
                                      1
Then we have

                  ~ iw > ~ j w,   ^ iw > 
                                         ^ j w,    and   ^ iw - ^ jw > ~ iw - ~ j w.

Proof. See Appendix B.

   In the proposition, the tilde-system captures the setting described above without any
sovereign exposure (condition 1), so there is no -component to consider. For two banks
with identical shortfalls and identical contagious defaults, the difference in node depth
Ci > C j breaks the tie, so the government prefers to bail out bank i. The hat-system, in
contrast, features a uniform sovereign debt distribution across banks (conditions 2 and 3).
The proposition states that the presence of domestic sovereign exposure on banks' balance
sheets - even if it is uniformly distributed - strenghtens the role of centrality as a driver of


                                                   24
the government's optimal decision. If bailing out bank i is preferred to bailing out j in the
scenario without the doom loop, it is also preferred with the doom loop, but not vice versa.
The reason is that now, on top of a higher benefit, bailing out bank i is associated with a
lower -component than bailing out bank j (remember that the -component is increasing
in defaulting banks' centrality). Put differently, even a highly symmetric sovereign debt
distribution amplifies the "too interconnected to fail" problem.
    Equipped with this general result on the interaction of centrality and sovereign exposure,
we next consider asymmetric distributions of domestic sovereign debt. Does the government
prefer to bail out banks with more or less domestic sovereign debt? From Lemma 2 we know that
domestic sovereign bonds on a bank's balance sheet have two counteracting effects: On the
one hand, high sovereign exposure bi makes it financially costly to bail out bank i because
every bailout dollar transferred to bank i lowers q1 and hence further increases i's shortfall.
This "doom loop multiplier" effect (which translates into a high -component) is stronger for
larger bi . On the other hand, high sovereign exposure also generates welfare losses through
the -component if bank i is not bailed out, especially if i is very central in terms of node
depth. In other words, a higher bi increases the effective shortfall of bank i and hence the
required bailout expenditures, but it can also make it extremely socially costly not to save
bank i in a partial bailout.
    Therefore, whether a given bank i  B will optimally be bailed out depends on the
relative strength of these two forces. Crucially, whereas the first effect applies to each bank
equally, the second effect is proportional to a bank's network centrality. In particular, a bank
with high centrality and sovereign exposure may be more likely to be bailed out than an
identical bank with little or no exposure. In contrast, peripheral banks (for which the second
effect is negligible) are unambiguously less likely to be saved the more sovereign bonds they
hold. We formalize this main result in the following proposition.

Proposition 4 (Sovereign debt distribution within networks). Let i, j  S c be two banks that
differ only in their asset composition (bi > b j and ci < c j ). In particular, they have identical
shortfalls 1i =  j   and centrality C i = C j  C and cause the same set of contagious defaults
                  1      1
I \ i = J \ j. Then C  such that

                                             i w >  j w    iff   C  C

             bi        i q1
as long as   bj
                  >    j q1
                              > 1. The threshold C  is increasing in  and decreasing in .

Proof. See Appendix B.

   If the government has to choose between two otherwise identical banks, whether it will
pick the one with more or less domestic sovereign exposure depends on the banks' centrality


                                                          25
                     Table 2: Balance sheet structure of banks in the network
                             1          2         3          4         5          6          7
           ci                8.22      10.8      19.4      22.0       22.0      31.0        31.0
           bi                5.33      2.67      5.33      2.67       2.67      2.67        2.67
           (  L )i           20.2      20.2      8.96      8.96       8.96        0           0
           Total assets      33.6      33.6      33.6      33.6       33.6      33.6        33.6
           di                30.3      30.3      16.8      16.8       16.8      16.8        16.8
           Li                 0         0        13.4      13.4       13.4      13.4        13.4
           Total liabilities 30.3      30.3      30.3      30.3       30.3      30.3        30.3
           Equity            3.36      3.36      3.36      3.36       3.36      3.36        3.36
                    Note: Banks 1 and 3 hold more sovereign debt than their counterparts.


C. The reason is that the welfare losses due to the -component (which are higher if bank j
with the smaller sovereign exposure is saved) are proportional to centrality C, as shown in
Lemma 2. Hence, for large C the difference in -components dominates the difference in the
-components so that bailing out bank i becomes more attractive. In contrast, for peripheral
banks (low C) the -component carries only little weight in the welfare comparison and the
lower -component leads the government to bail out bank j.
    We illustrate the result through a stylized numerical example with n = 7 banks: Suppose
the government initially owes a debt stock of B0 = 120 (which may be interpreted as 120% of
GDP), of which 20% is held by the domestic banking sector, so i N bi = 24. The gross risk-
free interest rate is R = 1.02, hence the initial sovereign bond price is given by q0 = R-1 =
0.9804. Moreover, we pick the shape parameter of the (Pareto) tax capacity distribution to
be  = 0.9 which delivers quantitatively reasonable movements in sovereign spreads.
    Table 2 summarizes banks' initial balance sheets (i.e. before the unexpected fundamental
shock happens). Total balance sheet size is chosen such that the average bank holds 10% of
its balance sheet in domestic sovereign debt, just like Italy in Figure 1. To maintain trans-
parency and simplicity, we initially let every bank have the same balance sheet size and
leverage (equity buffer = 10% of total assets). Note, however, that banks 1 and 3 each hold
twice as much sovereign debt as the remaining banks.
    The interbank network is visualized in Figure 6. Banks 1 and 2 have no interbank lia-
bilities, but are lending to three intermediaries (3,4,5) who further lend to banks 6 and 7.
The squares mark the set of fundamentally defaulting banks F = {1, 2, 3, 5} whose "cash"
assets are reduced by the shock such that their total assets drop by 20%, leaving them with a
shortfall of 10% each.22 There is no default contagion because none of the fundamentally de-
faulting banks have any liabilities to banks outside of F . Summing up, this is the simplest
possible setup to demonstrate the content of the proposition; we have two sets of almost
identical failing banks (1 vs. 2 and 3 vs. 5) that only differ in terms of sovereign exposure
22 Tomake the local analysis interesting, we picked the deadweight loss parameters  = 0.8 and  = 0.7 such
  that the optimal bailout is a partial bailout of banks 3 and 5, i.e. banks 1 and 2 default in equilibrium.


                                                      26
     Figure 6: Banks 3-5 borrow from 1 and 2 and lend to 6 and 7 (squares represent F )


within pairs. In particular, banks 1 and 2 have a trivial node depth of C1 = C2 = 1 (because
they do not have any interbank liabilities) whereas banks 3 and 5 have C3 = C5 = 2.8. Just
like the proposition states, among the peripheral banks the government prefers bailing out
the low-b bank 2 (2 w = -0.82) to the high-b bank 1 (1 w = -0.86), but among the more
central banks it prefers the high-b bank 3 (3 w = 4.89) to the low-b bank 5 (5 w = 4.79).
    Finally, note that our proposition requires that the difference in sovereign exposures must
overcompensate the difference in absolute price changes, i.e. bi and b j must be sufficiently
different. Otherwise the fact that saving bank i has a stronger price impact (|q1    i | > |  q j |)
                                                                                               1
dominates the -component so that the government unambiguously prefers to save bank
j, regardless of centrality. This caveat suggests that our result cannot be interpreted as the
marginal effect of higher sovereign exposure on the bailout outcome.
    One interpretation of the result in Proposition 4 is that the doom loop alters the govern-
ment's ranking of banks to be rescued. Whereas in a world without the doom loop (e.g.
with b = 0), the government would be indifferent between two banks with the same short-
fall 1 and node depth C, the different exposures to the doom loop now break the tie. In
other words, network centrality alone is not sufficient anymore to pin down the optimal
set of bailed-out banks. This highlights the doom loop as a new channel of contagion that
conventional centrality measures cannot capture.
    Another way of looking at the effect of holding more domestic sovereign debt is across
networks (whereas Proposition 4 is based on a within-network comparison). To this end
we consider two financial systems that are identical in every regard, except that an arbitrary

                                                27
defaulting bank i holds more sovereign debt in one system that in the other (conditions 1 and
2). To keep the overall surplus of the system unchanged, suppose that this bank holds less
cash in return so that its overall shortfall remains unchanged (condition 3). The following
proposition shows that whether the higher bi in the second system increases or decreases
bank i's position in the government's "bailout ranking" depends on its centrality.

Proposition 5 (Sovereign debt distribution across networks). For a fixed B0 , let ( L, , c     ~)
                                                                                         ~, d, b
and ( L, , c     ^ ) be two financial systems such that
           ^, d, b
                ^i > b
   1. !i  S c : b    ~i

      ^j = b
   2. b    ~ j and c
                   ^j = c
                        ~j  j = i

      ^i = c
   3. c          ^i - b
           ~i - (b    ~ i )/ R.

Then  j = i C  ( j) such that

                            ^ iw - 
                                   ^ jw > ~ iw - ~ jw      iff   C i  C  ( j ).

The threshold is increasing in  and decreasing in , |              ^i - b
                                                     ^ j q1 | and (b    ~ i ).

Proof. See Appendix B.

     The above proposition can be easily explained thanks to the decomposition in Lemma
2. In the hat-network bailing out bank i results in a larger -component and a larger -
component than in the tilde-network because of the doom loop multiplier and the corre-
sponding larger price impact. Meanwhile, the benefit component is the same in both net-
works. As a consequence, the absolute net benefit of bailing out i is clearly lower in the
hat-network, i.e.   ^ iw <  ~ i w. However, all other bailout candidates j see their -component
increase (and thus their  j w fall) because the defaulting i now holds more sovereign debt.
Moreover, this increase in the -component is an increasing function of i's centrality. Hence,
if i is central enough it can even end up higher in the government's ranking than before.
     Summing up, our results show that a higher bi does not make a bailout of i more at-
tractive in absolute terms, nor does it increase the government's propensity to engage in a
bailout in the first place. However, it can make bailing out other banks even less attractive,
namely if i is sufficiently central in the interbank network.


3.5    Sovereign Debt Exposure: A Strategic Tool?
Even though we do not model banks' optimal behavior explicitly, the results outlined in the
previous section have important implications for banks' strategic portfolio choice ex ante.
We have shown that, depending on a bank's centrality, higher sovereign exposure can make

                                                   28
a bailout of that bank more likely ex post. Hence, if banks value the prospect of a bailout
and anticipate the government's best response, they can use their sovereign debt portfolio
to affect the odds of being bailed out.
    One way to illustrate this in the context of Proposition 4 is the following: Suppose that
banks wake up in t = -1, knowing their position in the interbank network (and hence their
node depth for each shock realization), but having not yet chosen their domestic sovereign
exposure. In terms of Proposition 4, a given bank can choose to be either bank i or bank
j. Then, banks with high centrality can increase the chance to be bailed out by purchasing
more sovereign debt than otherwise identical banks. Moreover, the fact that the threshold C 
is decreasing in  implies that this result applies to more banks in financial systems where
bankruptcy costs are higher.
    Put differently, our results suggest that systemically important banks may have an in-
centive to load up on domestic sovereign debt to drive up the cost of not bailing them out
when the chips are down.23


4       Conclusion
In this paper we study the government's optimal bailout strategy in a banking crisis if (a)
financing a bailout depresses the value of domestic sovereign debt on bank balance sheets
(the "doom loop") and (b) banks are connected to each other through a network of liabilities.
    We construct a stylized banking network model in which banks hold domestic sovereign
debt on their balance sheets. An adverse shock renders a subset of banks insolvent. Without
government intervention, these bank failures can spread to (direct or indirect) creditor banks
and cause deadweight losses in the banking sector. To reduce these deadweight losses, the
government can borrow funds in the sovereign debt market and distribute them optimally
to failing banks. However, an increase in the stock of public debt makes it more risky and
leads to a higher discount on sovereign bonds. This weakens banks' balance sheets further,
adding to the cost of the bailout.
    We find, not surprisingly, that the doom loop is weaker (and bailouts therefore less
costly) if banks hold less domestic sovereign debt or if banks with large domestic sovereign
exposure are well capitalized. This result is directly related to the current debate about
higher regulatory capital charges for sovereign exposure in the eurozone (see Véron (2017)).
23 Of course, this is just one possible explanation. In fact, there are many more factors driving banks' sovereign
  home bias, from rather obvious ones like capital and liquidity regulation to more subtle motives such as
  the "risk-shifting" argument in Crosignani (2017). Which explanation is relevant in any particular country
  is ultimately an empirical question. Unfortunately, due to their highly confidential nature, robust data on
  bilateral interbank exposures are notoriously hard to obtain.




                                                       29
    Moreover, we show that the government can rank otherwise identical banks according
to their "node depth", a centrality measure introduced by Glasserman and Young (2015).
Compared to a situation without sovereign debt on banks' balance sheets, even a uniform
distribution of sovereign debt across banks strengthens the role of centrality as a tiebreaker
and thus exacerbates the "too-interconnected to fail" problem.
    Our main result is that the optimal subset of banks to bail out depends jointly on their
position in the interbank network and their domestic sovereign exposure. In particular,
if banks with high amounts of sovereign bonds are systemically important (e.g. because
they have lots of fragile creditors), the government may prefer to save them rather than
banks with low domestic sovereign exposure, even though this requires a larger bailout.
Equivalently, if there is a bailout, highly central banks are more likely to be part of it if they
hold more sovereign debt since that increases the cost of letting them fail. While higher
sovereign exposure unambiguously makes a bailout of a given bank more expensive, it can
make bailing out other banks instead even more costly.
    Extrapolating from this finding, we argue that a bank's position in the network may
have strategic implications for its individually optimal domestic sovereign exposure. Sys-
temically important banks might be able to use domestic sovereign debt as a "strategic tool"
to increase the likelihood of being bailed out. Our model therefore provides a new, network-
based perspective on the question of why banks in stressed European countries increased
their domestic sovereign bond holdings during the European sovereign debt crisis.
    Our results contribute to the understanding of (a) the government's tradeoff in the face
of a banking crisis and (b) banks' incentives to exploit the government's willingness to bail
them out. On a more general level, our study is part of a broader research agenda that
shows where conventional models with representative banks understate or even miss im-
portant effects altogether. Moreover, our model can be used as an augmented stress testing
framework with endogenous sovereign risk that feeds back to the banking system. Hence,
it can support the policy making process of regulatory and supervisory agencies such as the
European Banking Authority (EBA) or the ECB.
    Finally, our model results point to an interesting political economy interpretation. On
the one hand, to the extent that governments rely on domestic banks as a cheap and reli-
able source of financing, policymakers may want to refrain from limiting their systemically
important banks' domestic sovereign bond holdings. On the other hand, if a banking crisis
were to occur in the future, these systemically important banks are precisely the institutions
that would require expensive bailouts. As a consequence, there is a tension between the
incentives of current and future governments. Our paper only considers the second effect
and hence the regulatory objective of minimizing future risks. In other words, our model




                                               30
only captures the long-term benefits of limiting domestic sovereign exposure, but not the
potential short-term cost.
    Our framework may be extended along several interesting dimensions. In one possible
variation, bank failures would prompt fire sales of sovereign debt to risk-averse investors
that lead to an increase in sovereign spreads. As a consequence, the government would
now have a clear incentive to rescue the banks with large stocks of domestic sovereign debt,
regardless of their network centrality.
    A second, more ambitious extension is to develop a fully fledged game theoretical model,
in which banks strategically choose their sovereign bond holdings by maximizing an exoge-
nously specified objective function. Banks would thus endogenously construct their balance
sheet in anticipation of government intervention to maximize their bailout option. In the
present paper, we focus on ex post optimal bailouts and do not allow for strategic interac-
tions, so our model ignores the role of fiscal commitment. If the government in our model
was committed to a strict no-bailout policy, the doom loop (and hence the "strategic tool"
interpretation of bank purchases of sovereign bonds) would disappear. In a richer model,
a credible no-bailout policy would affect banks' risk-taking and sovereign debt choice ex
ante as in Cooper and Nikolov (2018) and could lead to an overall improvement in welfare.
However, it is hard to conceive of a credible no-bailout commitment that would remain
intact even under the most catastrophic circumstances.24
    Third and finally, our model deliberately abstracts from the "real economy loop" in Brun-
nermeier et al. (2016) which is already well understood. That means we do not consider
the fact that bank failures could also affect the sovereign's creditworthiness without bailouts
through a reduction in lending, an investment slump, and reduced tax capacity. Incorpo-
rating this channel in our model would increase the direct macroeconomic social benefits of
a bailout ceteris paribus. A similar channel would work in the opposite direction and make
bailouts less attractive: Rising sovereign spreads (e.g. triggered by a bailout) tend to be
passed through to corporate spreads and household borrowing rates. This "crowding out"
effect, documented for example in Demirci et al. (2019), might eventually lead to lower tax
revenue and thus even higher spreads.
    In general, whether for any particular economy our model over- or understates the ef-
fects of the doom loop vis-à-vis representative bank models such as Brunnermeier et al.
(2016) depends on the empirical size of interbank lending relative to domestic sovereign
bond portfolios. If interbank lending is relatively insignificant, our model overstates the
doom loop effect and representative bank models suffice. In the opposite case, however, our
paper adds an important perspective that goes unnoticed in one-bank models.
24 Note,
      for example, that in the face of the Covid-19 pandemic many governments (including in the US and
 EU) have rolled back no-bailout commitments that were enacted in the aftermath of the 2008 crisis.



                                                 31
References
A BAD , J. (2019). Breaking the Sovereign-Bank Nexus. Mimeo.

A CEMOGLU , D., O ZDAGLAR , A. and TAHBAZ -S ALEHI , A. (2015). Systemic Risk and Stabil-
  ity in Financial Networks. The American Economic Review, 105 (2), 564­608.

A CHARYA , V., D RECHSLER , I. and S CHNABL , P. (2014). A Pyrrhic Victory? Bank Bailouts
  and Sovereign Credit Risk. The Journal of Finance, 69 (6), 2689­2739.

A CHARYA , V. V. and S TEFFEN , S. (2015). The "Greatest" Carry Trade Ever? Understanding
  Eurozone Bank Risks. Journal of Financial Economics, 115 (2), 215­236.

A DRIAN , T. and S HIN , H. (2010). Liquidity and Leverage. Journal of Financial Intermediation,
  19 (3), 418­437.

A LLEN , F. and G ALE , D. (2000). Financial Contagion. Journal of Political Economy, 108 (1),
  1­33.

A LTAVILLA , C., PAGANO , M. and S IMONELLI , S. (2017). Bank Exposures and Sovereign
  Stress Transmission. Review of Finance, 21 (6), 2103­2139.

A LTINOGLU , L. and S TIGLITZ , J. E. (2019). Collective Moral Hazard and the Interbank Mar-
  ket. Mimeo.

B ERNARD , B., C APPONI , A. and S TIGLITZ , J. E. (2018). Bail-Ins and Bail-Outs: Incentives,
   Connectivity, and Systemic Stability. NBER Working Paper No. 23747.

B ERNSTEIN , S., C OLONNELLI , E. and I VERSON , B. C. (2019). Asset Allocation in
   Bankruptcy. The Journal of Finance, 74 (1), 5­53.

B ORGATTI , S. P. (2006). Identifying Sets of Key Players in a Social Network. Computational &
  Mathematical Organization Theory, 12 (1), 21­34.

B OZ , E., D'E RASMO , P. and D URDU , C. B. (2014). Sovereign Risk and Bank Balance Sheets:
  The Role of Macroprudential Policies. Manuscript, International Monetary Fund.

B RUNNERMEIER , M. K., G ARICANO , L., L ANE , P. R., PAGANO , M., R EIS , R., S ANTOS ,
   T., T HESMAR , D., VAN N IEUWERBURGH , S. and VAYANOS , D. (2016). Breaking the
   Sovereign-Bank Diabolic Loop: A Case for ESBies. In American Economic Review Papers
   and Proceedings.

C ABRALES , A., G ALE , D. and G OTTARDI , P. (2016). Financial Contagion in Networks. In The
  Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Networks.

                                              32
--, G OTTARDI , P. and V EGA -R EDONDO , F. (2017). Risk Sharing and Contagion in Networks.
  The Review of Financial Studies, 30 (9), 3086­3127.

C ALVO , G. A. (1988). Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations. The American
  Economic Review, pp. 647­661.

C OLE , H. L. and K EHOE , T. J. (2000). Self-fulfilling Debt Crises. The Review of Economic
  Studies, 67 (1), 91­116.

C OOPER , R. and N IKOLOV, K. (2018). Government Debt and Banking Fragility: The Spread-
  ing of Strategic Uncertainty. International Economic Review, 59 (4), 1905­1925.

C ROSIGNANI , M. (2017). Why are Banks not Recapitalized During Crises? FEDS Working
  Paper 2017-084.

D EMIRCI , I., H UANG , J. and S IALM , C. (2019). Government Debt and Corporate Leverage:
  International Evidence. Journal of Financial Economics, 133 (2), 337­356.

E ISENBERG , L. and N OE , T. H. (2001). Systemic Risk in Financial Systems. Management Sci-
   ence, 47 (2), 236­249.

E LLIOTT, M., G OLUB , B. and J ACKSON , M. O. (2014). Financial Networks and Contagion.
   The American Economic Review, 104 (10), 3115­3153.

E ROL , S. (2019). Network Hazard and Bailouts. Mimeo.

FARHI , E. and T IROLE , J. (2018). Deadly Embrace: Sovereign and Financial Balance Sheets
  Doom Loops. The Review of Economic Studies, 85 (3), 1781­1823.

G ABALLO , G. and Z ETLIN -J ONES , A. (2016). Bailouts, Moral Hazard and Bank's Home Bias
  for Sovereign Debt. Journal of Monetary Economics, 81, 70­85.

G ALEOTTI , A., G OLUB , B. and G OYAL , S. (2019). Targeting Interventions in Networks.
  Mimeo.

G LASSERMAN , P. and Y OUNG , H. P. (2015). How Likely is Contagion in Financial Net-
  works? Journal of Banking & Finance, 50, 383­399.

-- and -- (2016). Contagion in Financial Networks. Journal of Economic Literature, 54 (3),
  779­831.

G REENWALD , B. C. and S TIGLITZ , J. E. (1993). Financial Market Imperfections and Business
  Cycles. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108 (1), 77­114.



                                            33
G REENWOOD , R., L ANDIER , A. and T HESMAR , D. (2015). Vulnerable Banks. Journal of Fi-
  nancial Economics, 115 (3), 471­485.

K IYOTAKI , N. and M OORE , J. (1997). Credit Chains. Mimeo.

P OPOV, A. and VAN H OREN , N. (2015). Exporting Sovereign Stress: Evidence from Syndi-
  cated Bank Lending during the Euro Area Sovereign Debt Crisis. Review of Finance, 19 (5),
  1825­1866.

T HALER , D. (2018). Sovereign Default, Domestic Banks and Exclusion from International
  Capital Markets. Banco de España Working Paper.

V ÉRON , N. (2017). Sovereign Concentration Charges: A New Regime for Banks' Sovereign
  Exposures. In Study for the European Parliament, Brussels. IDEAS FROM THE 'FUTURE
  EUROPE' FORUM, vol. 67.




Appendix
A     Assumptions about the Tax Capacity Function
We want the graph of the function on the right-hand side of equation (4) to (a) start above
the 45 line, and (b) to be strictly concave in q1 . Since the price is bounded in [0, R-1 ], these
two conditions guarantee a single intersection with the 45 line and hence a unique fixed
point of equation (4). In the following, we derive general conditions on the tax capacity
function F (·) that deliver these two results and we show that the Pareto distribution with
shape parameter  < 1 satisfies these conditions.
   Property (a) requires that
                                                          T ( q1 )
                                              1- F B0 +     q1
                                                    R
                                    lim                              >1                      (12)
                                    q1 0           q1
Taking the derivative with respect to q1 (ignoring the fact that T (q1 ) is piecewise linear and
therefore not differentiable everywhere) yields

                                                                          T ( q1 )
                              1                        f B0 +               q1
                        lim -   T ( q1 ) q1 - T ( q1 )                               > 1,
                       q1 0   R                             q2
                                                             1




                                                   34
where f (·) is the density associated with cdf F (·). This can be rewritten as

                                                                                          T ( q1 )
                    1                              f B0 +                                   q1
                   - lim T (q1 )q1 - T (q1 ) × lim                                                   > 1,
                    R q1 0                    q1 0      q2
                                                         1
                                      = - T (0)

where we are using the fact that the limit of a product is equal to the product of the limits if
one limit is non-zero and the other infinite or if both are finite. Since the first term converges
to a positive constant for q1  0, it is sufficient for the statement to be true if the second
limit is infinite, i.e. if

                                                 T ( q1 )
                              f B0 +               q1
                       lim                                  =   lim f ( x ) x2 =                            (13)
                       q1 0              q2
                                          1
                                                                         x 


In other words, for the tax capacity distribution to satisfy (12) it needs to follow a power law
with sufficiently slow polynomial decay.
                                                                                       
                                                                                      xm
    As an example, consider the standard Pareto function with the pdf f ( x ) = +         where
                                                                                    x 1
xm is the minimum value that x can take ( B0 in this paper) and  > 0 the so-called shape
parameter. The above requirement now reads

                                                               x2
                                                          
                                                    lim  B0           =
                                                   x          x  +1

Note that for  < 1, our sufficient condition in (13) holds whereas for  > 1 the limit is zero
which would violate (12). For  = 1 the limit is finite at B0 which also contradicts (13), but
T (0)
  R B0 > 1 is still possible, so (12) might still be satisfied. Hence,  < 1 is sufficient, but not
necessary for (12) to hold.
     For property (b), strict concavity, we need

                                      T ( q1 )                                      T ( q1 )
                          1- F B0 +     q1                              1- F B0 +     q1
                                R                                   2         R
                                                    > 0 and                                     < 0.        (14)
                               q1                                            q2
                                                                              1

The first expression is equal to

                                                                               T ( q1 )
                             1                        f B0 +                     q1
                           -   T ( q1 ) q1 - T ( q1 )                                          >0
                             R                             q2
                                                            1
                                                 >0
                                                                          >0

because f (·) is a probability density function (non-negative) and T (q1 ) is non-negative and
decreasing in q1 . In the following, we derive a sufficient condition on f (·) such that the

                                                              35
second derivative in (14) is negative. Differentiating the previous expression again with
respect to q1 yields the requirement that q1  [0, R-1 ]

                           1 T ( q1 ) q3
                                       1 - 2q1 ( T ( q1 ) q1 - T ( q1 ))                                T ( q1 )
                       -                                                 f                    B0 +
                           R                    q41
                                                                                                          q1
                                                                          2
                                             T ( q1 ) q1 - T ( q1 )                          T ( q1 )
                                   +                                          f       B0 +                   <0
                                                       q2
                                                        1
                                                                                               q1

Since from (2) T (q1 ) is a piecewise linear function of q1 , its second derivative is zero (we
ignore again the non-differentiable points), so the previous expression can be simplified to

                                                    T ( q1 )        ( T (q1 )q1 - T (q1 ))2                           T ( q1 )
    -2 T ( q1 ) q1 - T ( q1 ) f              B0 +               +                           f                B0 +                >0
                                                      q1                       q1                                       q1

Dividing by the term in brackets yields

                                     T ( q1 )           T ( q1 ) q1 - T ( q1 )                    T ( q1 )
                -2 f         B0 +                   +                          f          B0 +                     < 0,
                                       q1                         q1                                q1

where the inequality sign has changed because the divisor is negative. This is equivalent to

                                                1                T (q )
             2    T (q1 )q1 - T (q1 ) f B0 + q1                                                              T ( q1 )
                >                                                                 =       log f     B0 +                  ,
             q1           q2
                           1
                                            T (q )
                                      f B0 + q11                                       q1                      q1


which has to hold for all q1  [0, R-1 ]. Rearranging finally yields the necessary condition

                                  T ( q1 )
                   f       B0 +     q1                                   2q1
               -                               <  ( q1 )                                          q1  [0, R-1 ]
                   f B0 +
                                  T ( q1 )                      T ( q1 ) - T ( q1 ) q1
                                    q1
                                                                              >0

For q1 such that f (·) > 0 the condition clearly holds true because f (·) > 0. However, for
q1 such that f (·) < 0 (i.e., in particular for low q1 because limx f ( x ) = 0) we need the
fraction on the left-hand side to be small enough. In other words, the decay of the density
needs to be sufficiently slow whenever the density decreases (not just asymptotically).
    Again, let us verify condition (14) for the Pareto distribution. Recall that the pdf of a
                                                                   
                                                                  B0
Pareto distributed random variable x takes the form f ( x ) = +      in our case. We have to
                                                                 x 1
make sure that
                                          T ( q1 )   2
                            log f B0 +             <     q1  [0, R-1 ].
                         q1                 q1       q1



                                                                 36
For the Pareto distribution this condition becomes
                                                           - (  +1)
                                             T ( q1 )                         2
                             
                       log  B0       B0 +                                 <         q1  [0, R-1 ]
                    q1                         q1                             q1

which can be simplified to

                                                          T ( q1 )        2
                    - (  + 1)        log       B0 +                   <            q1  [0, R-1 ]
                                  q1                        q1            q1

Taking the derivative and simplifying yields

                                             T ( q1 )
                  T ( q1 ) - T ( q1 ) q1       q1       - T ( q1 )        2
                                         =                T ( q1 )
                                                                      <              q1  [0, R-1 ]
                    B0 q1 + T (q1 )             B0 +                      +1
                                                            q1


which, using (3), can be rewritten as

                           ( B1 - B0 ) - T (q1 )   2
                                                 <                        q1  [0, R-1 ]
                                    B1             +1

Finally, we simplify and get

                                                        -1
                              B0 + T (q1 ) >               B1         q1  [0, R-1 ]
                                                        +1
                                    >0


because the change in aggregate bailouts is equal to T (q1 ) = - iD ( p       i
                                                                         ¯ ) b which is strictly
smaller in absolute value than the overall initial level of outstanding sovereign debt B0 by
assumption. Therefore,  < 1 is a sufficient condition for the Pareto distribution to satisfy
(14).


B     Proofs

Proof of Comparative Static Results in Table 1
To show how the bailout space  depends on a specific model parameter  ceteris paribus (for
                                                                                           wB
a constant initial shortfall in the banking sector) we simply sign the partial derivatives 
        ¯)
     w( p                                  wB        ¯)
                                                    (p
and  . By definition of , whenever            > w   we have that the bailout space depends
negatively on  and vice versa.

    ·  = :
                                                                                    ¯ ), so how 
      First note that the shape of the tax capacity distribution does not affect w( p

                                                           37
     affects  depends entirely on its effect on w B . Suppose 1 >  > , so from Assumption
     1 we see that F ( )  F ( )  with strict inequality for  > B0 . In other words, F
     first-order stochastically dominates F . Then we have

                                              T ( q1 )                            T ( q1 )
                              1 - F    B0 +     q1              1 - F B0 +          q1
                                                           <                                  q1 .
                                       R                                      R
                                                                                   B,    B,
     Assumption 1 ensures that the fixed point solution of equation (4) satisfies q1  > q1
     in equilibrium, and equivalently P( De f ault) < P( De f ault) . Finally, this implies
     from equation (7) that wB < w B . It follows that an increase in  decreases the bailout
                                   
     space .

   ·  = :
                                                      ¯)
                                                   w( p
     First, note from equation (6) that                        = 0, so how  affects  depends entirely on
                         B)
                    T ( q1                   B)
                                        T ( q1
     w B                                                                w B              w( p)
           = B0 +     q1B      F B0 +     q1B       > 0. Hence,               >0=         .

   ·  = :
                                                  w B
     First, note from equation (7) that                  = 0. Hence, the dependence of  on  is through
        ¯)
     w( p
            only. From Definition 1 we know that a higher  causes larger deadweight losses
     in each defaulting bank, is associated with lower interbank payments p ¯ i and therefore
     with a weakly larger set of defaulting banks D ( p
                                                      ¯ ). Hence the expression in equation
                                  ¯)
                               w( p
     (6) is increasing in , so  > 0.

   ·  = R:
     Note that as we R increases, the right-hand side of the pricing equation (4) decreases
     for every q1 . In particular, this is also true for the equilibrium price (as the fixed point
                                          B
                                         q1                              B)
                                                                    T ( q1
     solution of (4)), so we have       R     < 0. Since             q1 B     < 0 and F (·) > 0, we know from
                          w B
     equation (7) that    R     > 0.
                                                                                             i
                                                          q0      R -1     -2 < 0. Because 0  0 i 
     At the same time, however, note that                R     =  R = - R                   q0             N
                                                                    i                             ¯)
                                                                                               w( p
     with strict inequality i  F it follows                    that  R0 > 0 i  F and hence  R >            0.
     Whether  increases or decreases with R is therefore ambiguous.


Proof of Lemma 1
Note that the equilibrium sovereign debt price q1 and the level of aggregate bailouts T (q1 )
are simultaneously determined by (4) and (2) with T (q1 ) =  ti (q1 ). Hence, combining these
equations yields
                                                   x - zq1
                              Rq1 = 1 - F B0 +                                            (15)
                                                      q1

                                                          38
as the defining equilibrium condition, where z  i bi and x  i Li + di - c+ - ( L)i and
both sums are over the set of banks that require positive bailouts according to (2). Using the
Pareto distribution for F (·), the equation becomes
                                                                       
                                                       B0
                                    Rq1 =                     x                                           (16)
                                                   B0 - z +   q1


In the following, we will show that the equilibrium price q1 must be decreasing in x, the
"autonomous" component of aggregate bailouts.
    From our assumptions about F (·) (in particular the Pareto assumption with  < 1) we
know that for any x  0 there is a unique q1  (0, R-1 ) solving the above equation. Note
also that the monotonicity of x  q1 is the same as that of q1  x. But the latter mapping
can be solved explicitly: From (16)

                                         B0    - 1- 
                                  x=         q
                                            1 1
                                                  
                                                       - ( B0 - z)q1
                                         R

   The mapping q1  x is continuous and decreasing in the interval (0, R-1 ). The continu-
                                                                          - 1- 
ity follows immediately from the fact that the functions q1                  
                                                                                    and q1 are continuous. The
                                                              - 1- 
fact that it is decreasing follows from the fact that      is decreasing in q1 because  < 1,
                                                             q1 
and the function -( B0 - z)q1 is decreasing in q1 because B0 > z by definition. Hence, x  q1
is strictly decreasing and continuous as well. This concludes the proof.
    We can even go one step further and derive an explicit expression for the derivative of
the sovereign debt price with respect to the "autonomous" component of aggregate bailouts.
This can be achieved by implicitly differentiating the pricing equation (15), treating q1 as a
function of x. Differentiating on both sides yields

                                                                                   q1 ( x )
                         q ( x )                       x               q1 - x
                        R 1      = -f         B0 - z +             ×                x
                          x                            q1                       q2
                                                                                 1

and, solving for the term of interest,

                                                                 x         1
                                              -f       B0 - z +            q1
                               q1 ( x )                          q1
                                        =
                                x                                  x        x
                                            R- f         B0 - z +           q2
                                                                  q1         1




                                                    39
                                                                    B0
Finally, using the Pareto functional form f ( ) =                       , we get
                                                                     +1
                                                           
                                                          B0                 1
                                                                          +1 q
                                                                   x           1
                                q1 ( x )          B0 - z +         q1
                                         =                                          < 0,
                                 x                       B0                x
                                                                        +1 q 2
                                                                               -R
                                                              x
                                             B0 - z +         q1
                                                                             1


where the inequality holds because we have shown above that q1 is decreasing in x.


Proof of Proposition 1
The proof proceeds by contradiction. Suppose that w^B < w~ B . Since the parameters (, , B0 )
are the same for both financial systems, from equation (7) and Lemma 1 this is true if and
only if
                              ^ (q B   ~ (q B         B     B
                              T  ^1  )<T  ~1  ) and q^1 >q ~1 .

Hence, we must have

                                     ^ (q)
                                     T                                   ~ (q)
                                                                         T
                     1 - F B0 +                  1 - F B0 +
                                       q                                   q
                                             >                                      q  (0, R-1 )
                              R                                    R

which is true iff
                                     n            n
                          ^ (q) =
                          T         t
                                    ^i (q) <     t
                                                 ~i (q) = T
                                                          ~ (q)               q  (0, R-1 ).
                                    i =1         i =1

      ^i (q) = t
Since t                    ^i = b
               ~i (q) qi : b    ~ i , we must have that

                                ^i > b
                            i : b    ~i  t        ~i (q) q  (0, R-1 ) .
                                         ^i (q) < t                                                           (17)

Using the bailout definition in equation (2) and the second part of the proposition, the sec-
ond part of (17) reads
                                             +
                 ^i - b
                 b    ~i                                                                      +
  L + di - c               ^ i - (  L )i  < Li + di - c     ~ i - (  L )i                          q  (0, R-1 ).
  i          i
                                                      ~i - qb
                                         
           ~   +         -qb
                    R                    
                     ^i
                    -c




                                                         40
Both quantities are bounded from below by zero, so the strict inequality requires that the
right-hand side is positive and we can drop the (·)+ operator. The statement thus simplifies
to
                                 ^i - b
                                 b    ~i
                                                  ~ i ) q  (0, R-1 ).
                                             ^i - b
                                         < q(b
                                    R
                ^i - b
Finally, since (b    ~ i ) > 0 from (17), we get

                                         q > R -1       q  (0, R-1 ),

                                         ^B  w
a contradiction. We have thus shown that w   ~ B . From (6) it is easy to see that w
                                                                                   ^ (p
                                                                                      ¯) =
w~ (p                 NB = R-1 ,
    ¯ ) because with q1

                                                                          +
                                       ^i - b
                                       b    ~i b
                                               ^i
                    i         i     i    i
                   ^1   =    L +d -c
                                   ~ +              ¯ )i
                                              - - ( p                         = i
                                                                               ~1    i  N
                                          R    R

Following Definition 3, w   ~ B and w
                        ^B  w       ^ (p
                                       ¯) = w  ¯ ) complete the proof of 
                                            ~ (p                         ^ ~.


Proof of Proposition 2
The proof proceeds in four steps: First, we argue that there exists a tighter upper bound on
the equilibrium sovereign debt price than R-1 and that for the financial system ( L,  , c               ~)
                                                                                                  ~, d, b
this bound is given by q           max used in the proposition. Second, we demonstrate that banks
                                  ~1
in ( L,  , c~, d, b~ ) which have a positive shortfall at q      max need a bailout at the equilibrium
                                                                ~1
q~1 . Third, we show that at the equilibrium q           ~1 the net effect of moving from ( L,  , c     ~)
                                                                                                  ~, d, b
to ( L,  , c      ^ ) on aggregate bailout expenditures is negative. Finally we prove that this
            ^, d, b
implies T  ^ (q^1 ) < T ~ (q~1 ) and thus q ^1 > q
                                                 ~1 which directly yields w^B < w
                                                                                ~ B.
     First note that because of the inverse relationship of the equilibrium price q1      B and equilib-

rium aggregate bailouts T (q1         B ) in Lemma 1, the upper bound on the equilibrium price qmax
                                                                                                      1
is associated with the lower bound on aggregate bailouts. Moreover, the assumption that
F is non-empty and Assumption 1 guarantee that q1                B < R-1 . In general, equation (2) thus

implies that for all i  N

                                                    +                                            +
    t i ( q1
           B
             ) = L i + d i - c i - q1 b - (  L )i
                                    B i
                                                         L i + d i - c i - b i R -1 - (  L ) i         i
                                                                                                     = 0 ,   (18)

                                                                       n    i
so the natural candidate for a lower bound on aggregate bailouts is i   =1 0 . Note that by
definition the right-hand side is positive if and only if i  F . Therefore, (18) holds with
equality for every i  N if and only if two conditions hold:

   1. bi = 0 i  F


                                                         41
                      max bi - (  L )i  0
   2. Li + di - ci - q1                           i  B

The first condition ensures that the equality holds for all i for which the two sides of (18)
are positive. The second part (already using the implicitly characterized q1   max ) ensures that

it holds for all banks with bi > 0 for which the right-hand side is zero.
    We have thus established the existence of an exogenous minimum level of aggregate
                                  n     i
equilibrium bailouts, namely i     =1 0 . From the pricing equation (4) it is now straightfor-
ward to characterize the corresponding maximum sovereign debt price in ( L,  , c         ~, d, b~ ) as
the fixed-point solution to
                                                            i
                                                   iF 0
                                           1-F         max
                                                     ~1
                                                     q
                                     max
                                   ~1 =
                                   q                          ,
                                                   R
as in the proposition. Note that even though q  max cannot be stated explicitly, it only depends
                                               ~1
on exogenous variables.
    Next, let us denote the set of banks from part 1. of the proposition by Y  {i : V0       i /b~i <
R -1 - q max }. Their defining property says that for all i  Y
        ~1

                                                                  +
                           c    ~ i R -1 + (  L ) i - L i - d i
                           ~i + b                                      ~ i R -1 - b
                                                                      <b          ~iq
                                                                                    ~1max



which, after rearranging and combining with (2), implies that

                                                                            +
                     ~i (q max                      max ~ i
                     t   ~1    ) = Li + di - c
                                             ~i - q
                                                  ~1    b - (  L )i             > 0 i  Y .

As we have shown, q        max is the maximum possible equilibrium price, so in equilibrium it
                          ~1
must be also true that t   ~i (q
                               ~1 ) > 0  i  Y .
      Next we will show that T      ^ (q
                                       ~1 ) < T  ~ (q
                                                    ~1 ) which is equivalent to i N t    ^i (q      ~i (q
                                                                                             ~1 ) - t   ~1 ) < 0.
First note from the definition of bailout transfers (2) that t         i
                                                                      ^ (q        i
                                                                                ~ (q
                                                                         ~1 ) = t   ~1 )  i  X  { i : b      ~i =
^ i }. In contrast, for banks with b
b                                       ^i < b
                                             ~ i (namely i  Y according to the proposition), we claim
that
                                                     ~i - b
                                                     b    ^i
      t   ~1 ) = L i + d i - (  L ) i - q
      ^i (q                                ^ i -c
                                        ~1 b    ~i -                               ~i - q
                                                             < Li + di - (  L )i - c       ~i = t
                                                                                        ~1 b    ~i (q
                                                                                                    ~1 ) ,
                                                        R
                                                   ^i
                                                  -c

where we can drop the (·)+ operators because we have shown above that the right-hand
side is positive. Equivalently, the claim can be written as

                               ^i (q
                               t          ~i (q
                                   ~1 ) - t            ~1 - R-1 )(b
                                              ~1 ) = ( q               ^i) < 0
                                                                  ~i - b




                                                        42
which is true because (b  ~i - b
                               ^ i ) > 0 i  Y and q   ~1 < R-1 . Finally, there are banks i  Z  {i :
                                   ^ i  ~ i
^i > b
b     ~ i } for which c
                      ^i = c~i - b -    b
                                       R because initial shortfalls 0 are identical in both systems.
For these i  Z we have
                                                                       +
                                                 ^i - b
                                                 b    ~i                                                                     +
^i (q                                ^                                                 ~i
            i     i          i         i     i
t   ~1 ) =  L + d   - (  L )   - ~
                                 q 1 b   - ~
                                           c   +                               ~i - q
                                                           Li + di - (  L )i - c    ~1 b                                          ~i (q
                                                                                                                                 =t   ~1 )
                                                    R 
                                                               ^i
                                                              -c
                                                                                                          (19)
since the argument of the (·)+ operator on the left-hand side is strictly larger than that of the
right-hand side. There are up to three disjoint subsets of banks to be distinguished: First,
for banks where both sides of (19) are zero (call the set Z1 ), t         ^i (q
                                                                              ~1 ) - t~i (q
                                                                                          ~1 ) = 0 is obvious.
Second, for banks where the right-hand side is zero and the left-hand side positive (Z2 ), we
have
                                                                             ^i - b
                                                                             b     ~i
                 ^i (q
                 t          ~i (q
                     ~1 ) - t   ~1 ) = L i + d i - (  L ) i - q  ^i - c
                                                              ~1 b    ~i +            > 0.
                                                                                R
And third, for banks where both sides are positive (Z3 ), we have

                                       ^i (q
                                       t   ~1 ) - t   ~1 ) = ( R - 1 - q
                                                  ~i (q                ~1 )(b    ~ i ) > 0,
                                                                            ^i - b

where the inequality follows because both terms are positive for i  Z3 . Now let i 
^i (q
t          ~i (q
    ~1 ) - t   ~1 ) and sum up over all banks:

 i =  i +  i +                                 i +             i +           i
i N        iX            i Y           i  Z1           i  Z2         i  Z3

       =         i
                     +            i
                                  +               i
           i Y           i  Z2         i  Z3

                  ~1 )  ( b
       = ( R -1 - q       ^i - b
                               ~i) +                           i + ( R -1 - q
                                                                            ~1 )          (b
                                                                                           ^i - b
                                                                                                ~i)
                             i Y                      i  Z2                              i  Z3
                                                                                                                                  ^i - b
                                                                                                                                  b    ~i
       = ( R -1 - q
                  ~1 )            (b
                                   ^i - b
                                        ~i) +             (b    ~i) +
                                                           ^i - b                          Li + di - (  L )i - q  ^i - c
                                                                                                               ~1 b    ~i +
                                                                                                                                     R
                                 i Y                    i  Z3                      i  Z2

       = ( R -1 - q
                  ~1 )            (b    ~ i ) +  (b
                                   ^i - b              ~i) + 
                                                  ^i - b                                 ^i +
                                                                                         b               Li + di - (  L )i - c
                                                                                                                             ~i - b
                                                                                                                                  ~ i R -1 ,
                                 i Y                    i  Z3                    i  Z2           i  Z2




                                                                      43
where we have substituted the expressions for i derived above for all subsets X , Y , Z. By
adding and subtracting ( R-1 - q        ~ i , this can be rewritten as
                               ~1 ) iZ2 b

                                                         <0                        0                       0

                                 ~1 )  ( b
                    i = ( R -1 - q            ~ i ) +  (b
                                         ^i - b              ~ i ) +  (b
                                                        ^i - b         ^i - b
                                                                            ~i)
                 i N                             i Y                       i  Z2                   i  Z3
                                                                                                               (20)
                             +            i      i
                                         L + d - ( L) - c
                                                        ~ -q  i
                                                           ~1 b        i           ~i
                                 i  Z2

                                                        0


Notice that part 2. of the proposition says that i N (b    ^i - b
                                                                ~ i ) = 0 which is equivalent to
          ^i - b
 i Y  Z ( b    ~ i ) = 0.25 Hence, if the set Z1 was empty and therefore N = X  Y  Z2  Z3 ,
the term in curly brackets would be zero and

                               i =                    Li + di - (  L )i - c
                                                                          ~i - q  ~ i  0,
                                                                               ~1 b
                              i N             i  Z2


where the inequality follows from the definition of the set Z2 and is strict except for the
knife-edge case in which every Z2 -bank was just solvent in the tilde-equilibrium (i.e., assets
exactly matched liabilities). If, in addition to Z1 , the set Z2 was also empty, the last term
in (20) would disappear and we would have i N i = 0, so there would be no change in
bailouts (T   ^ (q~1 ) = T ~ (q                                                  ^ (q
                              ~1 )) and the two equilibria would coincide, i.e., T         ~ (q
                                                                                    ^1 ) = T  ~1 ) and
q^1 = q~1 . However, as soon as there is at least one Z1 -bank (or a Z2 -bank with positive equity
in ( L,  , c      ~ )), equation (20) yields T
            ~, d, b                           ^ (q      ~ (q
                                                 ~1 ) < T  ~1 ), as desired.
    Finally, using the right-hand side of the pricing equation (4), notice that the previous
result implies
                                                  ^ (q
                                                  T   ~1 )                              ~ (q
                                                                                        T   ~1 )
                              1 - F ( B0 +          q~1 )         1 - F ( B0 +            q~1 )
                                                    >                       =q  ~1
                                         R                       R
As we show in Appendix A, under the Pareto assumption this expression increases mono-
tonically in q1 and is strictly concave everywhere, including at q              ~1 . Therefore, if q      ~1 is the
equilibrium price in ( L,  , c          ~ ), the unique fixed point q
                                  ~, d, b                              ^1 in ( L,  , c       ^ ) must be larger
                                                                                       ^, d, b
 ^1 > q
(q      ~1 ). As a consequence, since we have established above that T              ^ (q~1 ) < T ~ (q
                                                                                                    ~1 ) is true, a
         ^ (q
fortiori T          ~ (q
             ^1 ) < T  ~1 ) also holds because T   ^ (·) is a decreasing function.

25 Recallthat the premise of the proposition is that sovereign debt is redistributed from banks in Y to banks in
  Z, so that iY (b ^i - b
                        ~ i ) = - i  Z ( b
                                         ^i - b
                                              ~ i ).




                                                                  44
                                         ^B < w
   It now follows directly from (7) that w    ~ B . Moreover, as in Proposition 1 we have
^ (p
w  ¯) = w
        ~ (p                 NB = R-1 ,
           ¯ ) because with q1

                                                                          +
                                    ^i - b
                                    b    ~i b
                                            ^i
                  i        i      i       i
                 ^1   =   L +d -c
                                ~ +              ¯ )i
                                           - - ( p                              = i
                                                                                 ~1   i  N
                                       R    R

Following Definition 3, w    ~ B and w
                        ^B < w       ^ (p
                                        ¯) = w  ¯ ) complete the proof of 
                                             ~ (p                         ^ ~.


Proof of Proposition 3
The proof proceeds in three steps. In the first step we show that        ~ iw > ~ j w; in the second
that ^ iw > ^ j w; and in the last step that ^ iw - ^ jw > ~ iw - ~ j w.
   Using the full expression for the net welfare effect from Lemma 2, we want to show that

             1
             k
               × Ck - ~ i ( B1 P( De f ault)) >   l × C l - 
                                                  1
                                                            ~ j ( B1 P( De f ault))
            kI                                               l J

                        i =  j and hence 
Note that by assumption 1                 ~ i ( B1 P( De f ault)) = ~ j ( B1 P( De f ault)), so the
                            1
expression becomes
                              1   k
                                    × C k >   1        l
                                                         × Cl .
                                        kI                   l J

Since I \ i = J \ j by assumption, this simplifies to

                                               i i             j
                                               1 C > 1 C j

which is true because Ci > C j .
    We now turn to the second step. Using Lemma 2 and the same facts as above (i.e. iden-
tical gamma-components and I \ i = J \ j) the expression we want to prove becomes

                               i i
                               1 C + ^ i q1 b C j >  j C j + ^ j q1 b C i
                                                    1

                     i =  j together with identical sovereign exposure b
Identical shortfalls 1                                                 ^i = b
                                                                            ^j = b > 0
                           1
imply an identical price impact ^ i q1 = ^ j q1 , so we have

                                      i
                                      1 (C i - C j ) > ^ i q1 b ( C i - C j )

The left-hand side is clearly positive because Ci > C j whereas the right-hand side is negative
because  ^ i q1 < 0, so we have the desired result.




                                                        45
   Finally, it remains to be shown that ^ iw - ^ jw > ~ iw - ~ j w. Again, using Lemma 2,
identical gamma-components, and I \ i = J \ j the expression becomes

                         i
                         1 (C i - C j ) - ^ i q1 b (Ci - C j ) > i (Ci - C j ).
                                                                 1


That simplifies to
                                          ^ i q1 b ( C i - C j ) < 0
                                          

which is true because ^ i q1 < 0. That concludes the proof.


Proof of Proposition 4
To prove the proposition it is sufficient to show that i w -  j w is monotonically increasing
in C and that C~ such that i w =  j w.
    From Lemma 2 we can write i w -  j w as
                                                                                                 

              1 C - 
              h h                k k
                                 1 C      +                  i q1 b h C h -              j q1 b k C k  -  ,
             hI             kJ                    hS c \I                     kS c \J

where  = i ( B1 P( De f ault)) -  j ( B1 P( De f ault)) > 0 because bi > b j implies that ti > t j
due to doom loop multiplier and I and J denote the sets of banks that become solvent
through a bailout of bank i and j, respectively. Now note that because I \ i = J \ j, 1      i =
  j
1 = 1 and Ci = C j = C, the benefit components of i w and  j w are identical, so the first
term collapses to zero.
    The two sums in the second term in parentheses contain common terms, namely for
all banks that still default after saving i or j, excluding i and j themselves. Therefore, the
previous expression can be rewritten as
                                                                                          

                     i q1 b j C -  j q1 b i C + (  i q1 -  j q1 )                  b l C l  -  ,
                                                                    l S c \(IJ )


where the set S c \ (I  J ) consists of the banks (different from i and j) that still default after
saving either i or j. We can now isolate the term multiplying C, namely (i q1 b j -  j q1 bi ).
                                      bi     i q1
The premise of the proposition that b  j >  j q > 1 ensures that this coefficient is positive, so
                                                     1
we have established that i w -  j w is monotonically increasing in C.




                                                      46
   The existence of C~ such that i w =  j w can easily be shown by setting the previous
expression equal to zero. We get

                      ~ (  i q1 b j -  j q1 b i ) =   -  (  i q1 -  j q1 )
                      C                                                                               bl C l
                                                                                      l S c \(IJ )

and finally solve for the threshold level of centrality
                                                                                                          
              ~ = (  i q 1 b j -  j q 1 b i ) -1    - (  i q 1 -  j q 1 )
              C                                                                 bl C l  > 0
                                                                             c
                                                                          l S \(IJ )
                                >0                                    <0

That concludes the proof.


Proof of Proposition 5
To prove the proposition it is sufficient to show that (    ^ iw - ^ j w) - ( ~ iw - ~ j w) is mono-
tonically increasing in Ci and that there exists a C  ( j) such that   ^ iw - ^ jw = ~ iw -   ~ j w.
   From Lemma 2 we can rewrite the difference as

                         1 C -  1
                         k k    l l
                                  C                    +              ^ i q1 b
                                                                             ^ k Ck -               ^ j q1 b
                                                                                                           ^ l Cl
                       kI                l J                kS c \I                     l S c \J

                                               - ^ i ( B1 P( De f ault)) - ^ j ( B1 P( De f ault))

               -         1 C -  1
                         k k    l l
                                  C                    -              ~ i q1 b
                                                                             ~ k Ck -                      ~ l Cl
                                                                                                    ~ j q1 b
                       kI                l J                kS c \I                     l S c \J

                                               + ~ i ( B1 P( De f ault)) - ~ j ( B1 P( De f ault))

Now note that the benefit terms (the first and the fourth term) cancel each other out exactly.
Moreover, the -components of bailing out banks j = i is the same in both tilde- and hat-
                 ^j = b~ j and  j     j
system (because b              ^1 = ~ 1 ), so ^ j ( B1 P( De f ault)) = ~ j ( B1 P( De f ault)) and the
expression simplifies to
                                                                                                                         

                             ^ k Ck -
                      ^ i q1 b
                                                         ~ k Ck  - 
                                                  ~ i q1 b
                                                                                 ^ j q1 b
                                                                                        ^ l Cl -              ~ j q1 b
                                                                                                                     ~ l Cl 
            kS c \I                     kS c \I                       l S c \J                     l S c \J

                                                         - ^ i ( B1 P( De f ault)) - ~ i ( B1 P( De f ault))




                                                             47
For the sake of notation, denote         ^ i ( B1 P( De f ault)) - ~ i ( B1 P( De f ault)) > 0 because
^i > b
b    ~ i . We can then rewrite the previous expression as follows:
                                                                                                 

                          (       ^k - 
                           ^ i q1 b           ~ k ) × Ck -
                                       ~ i q1 b                         (       ^l - 
                                                                         ^ j q1 b           ~ l ) × Cl  - 
                                                                                     ~ j q1 b
                kS c \I                                      l S c \J


                                                           ^k = b
Now note that the proposition says that k  S c \ I we have b    ~ k (first term in round
brackets). Then we can simplify the expression to
                                                                                            

                               (^ i q1 -          ^ k Ck -
                                         ~ i q1 ) b                     ^ j q1 ( b
                                                                                      ~ l ) × Cl  - 
                                                                                 ^l - b
                     kS c \I                                 l S c \J


where we also use the fact that ^ l q1 =                              ^l = b
                                         ~ l q1 l = j. Finally, since b    ~ l l = i, the previous
expression reduces to
                                                                                        

                      (^ i q1 - ~ i q1 )                 ^ k Ck - 
                                                         b                      ~ i )C i  - 
                                                                           ^i - b
                                                                  ^ j q1 ( b
                                               kS c \I


Now it becomes clear that the expression is monotonically increasing in Ci , since          ^ j q1 < 0
    ^i > b
and b    ~ i . In a last step, we can solve for the threshold C  ( j) that sets the above expression
equal to zero and thereby prove its existence:
                                                                                               

              C  ( j) = (|                ~ i ) ) -1    - ( 
                                     ^i - b
                          ^ j q1 | ( b                      ^ i q1 - ~ i q1 )  b     ^ k Ck  > 0
                                                                             kS c \I
                                    >0                                   <0

That concludes the proof.


C     Spectral Radius Assumption
The spectral radius of the matrix (1 + )D is given by its largest eigenvalue (in absolute
value). In the following we compute the spectral radius first for |D| = 2 and then for |D| = 3
and derive conditions such that it is smaller than unity.
   If the default set consists of two banks (and hence D is a 2 × 2 matrix), to compute the
eigenvalues 1 , 2 we solve the equation

                                             ( 1 +  )  D -  I2 = 0



                                                             48
                        
and obtain 1/2 = ±(1 + )  12  21 .26 Hence, the spectral radius is less than unity if and
only if
                               12  21 < (1 + )-2

    If the default set consists of three banks (and hence D is a 3 × 3 matrix) we proceed
in the same way. We set the determinant of (1 + )D - I3 equal to zero and obtain the
characteristic polynomial

   3 - (1 + )2  13  31 +  23  32 +  21  12  - (1 + )3  13  32  21 +  12  23  31 = 0
                                p                                                      q
                                                                                        (21)
which is a depressed cubic. Therefore, one of the solutions is guaranteed to be real, can be
obtained by applying the Cardano formula and is given by


                                      3   q     q2   p3        3    q            q2   p3
                               1 =          +      -    +             -             -                    (22)
                                          2     4    27             2            4    27

The remaining two roots 2 , 3 are

                                                                                                    
                   3   q     q2   p3        1 i 3              3    q            q2   p3         1 i 3
            2 =          +      -    ×     - +             +          -             -    ×      - -
                       2     4    27        2  2                    2            4    27         2  2

and
                                                                                                    
                   3   q     q2   p3        1 i 3              3    q            q2   p3         1 i 3
            3 =          +      -    ×     - -             +          -             -    ×      - +
                       2     4    27        2  2                    2            4    27         2  2

These expressions can be rewritten as

                                                                                                     
                            1    i 33 q                 q2         p3        3   q     q2       p3
                       2 = - 1 +        +                    -          -          -        -        
                            2     2   2                 4          27            2     4        27

                                                                        ~2
                                                                        

and
                                                                                                     
                            1    i 33 q                 q2         p3        3   q     q2       p3
                       3 = - 1 +        -                    -          -          +        -        
                            2     2   2                 4          27            2     4        27

                                                                        ~3
                                                                        

26 Recall   that  ii = 0 i  N by construction of . The submatrix D inherits this property.



                                                      49
Here we can see that iff 4 p3 < 27q2 , the argument of the square roots is positive and hence
2 , 3 are complex numbers. To find out the largest eigenvalue, we thus have to compare
|1 | to the modulus of the two complex roots. First note that (~ 2 )2 = ( ~ 3 )2 and hence

                                          1         3 ~ 2
                                | 2 | =     ( 1 )2 + (  2 ) = | 3 |,
                                          4         4

so the two complex roots have the same absolute value. Now note that 1 > ~ 2 > 0 and
hence also (1 )2 > (~ 2 )2 , so we can write

                        1         3 ~ 2         1         3
             | 2 | =      ( 1 )2 + (  2) <        ( 1 )2 + ( 1 )2 =     ( 1 )2 = | 1 |,
                        4         4             4         4

so we have established that the real root |1 | is the spectral radius iff 4 p3 < 27q2 . In that case
the condition we are looking for reads


                           3   q     q2   p3     3    q     q2   p3
                                 +      -    +          -      -    < 1.
                               2     4    27          2     4    27


If instead 4 p3 > 27q2 , the argument of the square roots is negative and it can be shown that
all three roots 1 , 2 , 3 are real in this case.
    In the knife-edge case of 4 p3 = 27q2 , the square roots are equal to zero and we have

                                                   q
                                            1 = 2 3
                                                   2
                                                    
                                          2 = 3 = - 1 ,
                                                     2

so again |1 | is the largest eigenvalue and our condition |1 | < 1 becomes

                                                                        1
                          q = (1 + )3  13  32  21 +  12  23  31 <
                                                                        4

   We conclude this section with two stylized examples. First suppose that the interbank
network forms a ring of length n = 3 in which all three banks default, i.e.,  ij = 1 for
j = i + 1, modulo n, and  ij = 0 otherwise. In that case note from (21) that p = 0 and
q = (1 + )3 , so we are in the first case with 4 p3 < 27q2 and the spectral radius is given by
the unique real root in (22). The condition for node depth to be well defined reads

                                              
                                     | 1 | = | 3 q | = 1 +  < 1




                                                 50
which is a contradiction because  > 0 by assumption. Hence, if the network is a ring and
all three banks default, node depth cannot be computed using the matrix inversion formula.
    As a second example, suppose that the interbank network is complete, that is  ij =
 1
n-1 i, j, i = j. For ease of notation, let k = n - 1 so that from (21) we know that


                                                               3(1 +  )2
                          p = (1 +  )2 k -2 + k -2 + k -2 =
                                                                   k2
                                                            2(1 +  )3
                             q = (1 +  )3 k -3 + k -3     =
                                                                k3

It is easy to verify that in this case we get exactly 4 p3 = 27q2 , so the condition for C to be
                                1
well defined is given by q < 4    as shown above. Plugging in the expression for q yields

                                           k > 2(1 +  )

Hence, node depth in a default set of three banks is well defined iff the total number of banks
in the network n is larger than 1 + 2(1 + ). The critical number of banks is increasing in the
bankruptcy cost parameter .


D      Algorithm to Find Equilibria with Optimal Bailouts
First note that any chosen subset of surviving banks S induces unique transfers ti ( p
                                                                                     ¯ (S ), q1 ) iS
according to equation (8). To determine these transfers (and the associated sovereign debt
prices) we proceed as follows for each possible subset S  N :

    1. Starting with an initial guess of q1 = 1/ R, we find the Pareto dominant clearing pay-
       ment vector p   ¯ (S ) as per Definition 1, imposing that all surviving banks repay their
                                 ¯ i = Li i  S .
       liabilities in full, i.e. p

    2. Knowing the clearing payment vector p   ¯ (S ), we compute the required bailout transfers
       to S -banks from equation (8), as a function of the current guess for q1 .

    3. Aggregate bailouts T ( p¯ (S ), q1 ) = iS ti ( p
                                                      ¯ (S ), q1 ) pin down the sovereign debt price
       q1 < 1/ R via equation (4). We then repeat the procedure with the updated guess for
       q1 and iterate until convergence.

                                 ¯ (S )) using equation (9).
    4. Compute welfare losses w( p

The optimal set S  is the set with the lowest welfare losses.




                                                 51
