                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           ECONOMICS OF RESEARCH AND INNOVATION IN AGRICULTURE

                                               Petra Moser

                                         Working Paper 27080
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w27080


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2020




This is the introductory chapter to an NBER book by the same name. Early drafts of the chapters in
this book were presented and discussed at the NBER conference on the "Economics of Research and
Innovation in Agriculture," Washington, D.C., May 17, 2019 funded by the United States Department
of Agriculture. I am grateful for excellent comments on this chapter from Matt Clancy, James McDonald,
Paul Rhode, Michael Roberts, and Brian Wright. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Petra Moser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Economics of Research and Innovation in Agriculture
Petra Moser
NBER Working Paper No. 27080
May 2020
JEL No. N5,O3,O32,O33,Q16,Q18,Q24,Q25,Q54,Q55

                                              ABSTRACT

Feeding the world's growing population is one of the most critical policy challenges for the 21st century.
With tightening constraints on water, arable land, and other natural resources, agricultural innovation
is quickly becoming the most promising path meet the nutrient needs for future generations. At the
same time, the increasing variability in the world's climate intensifies the need for developing new
crops that can tolerate extreme weather. Despite the urgency of this task, there is an active discussion
on the returns to public and private spending in agricultural R&D, and many of the world's wealthier
countries have scaled back their share of GDP devoted to agricultural R&D. Dwindling public support
leaves universities, which, historically, have been a major source of agricultural innovation, increasingly
dependent on funding from industry, with uncertain effects on agricultural research. All of these factors
create an urgent need for systematic empirical evidence on the forces that drive research and innovation
in agriculture. This book aims to provides such evidence through economic analyses of the sources
of agricultural innovation, the challenges of measuring productivity, the role of universities and their
interactions with industry, and emerging mechanisms to fund agricultural R&D.


Petra Moser
Department of Economics
NYU Stern
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
pmoser@stern.nyu.edu
Over the last 50 years, mechanical, biological, and chemical innovations have more than
doubled agricultural output while scarcely changing input quantities (Alston et al. 2010). In
1957, Zvi Griliches estimated that the internal rate of return for research on new corn hybrids
was around 40 percent. A meta-analysis of R&D productivity estimates for 1965 to 2005
suggests even higher returns for those years, with a median estimate of 45 percent (Fuglie and
Heisey 2007).
        Yet, returns to agricultural R&D are exceedingly difficult to measure. Even when costs
and benefits are known, creating accurate summary statistics can be challenging. For example,
an analysis of 2,242 investment evaluations between 1958 and 2011 has found that calculating
a modified internal rate of return (MRR) instead of the standard internal rate of return (IRR) is
associated with an enormous decline in reported returns to agricultural R&D, reducing the
estimated median annual return from 39 percent to less than 10 percent (Hurley, Rao, and
Pardey 2014).1
        Moreover, many recent studies find that returns to agricultural research have been
declining of late. Anderson, Alston, Pardey and Smith (2018) document that US multifactor
farm productivity grew at an annual average rate of 1.16 percent per year during 1990­2007,
down from 1.42 percent per year 1910­2007. They also find that US yields of major crops grew
at an annual average rate of 1.17 percent for 1990­2009 compared with 1.81 percent for 1936­
1990. Similarly, an analysis of research inputs and total factor productivity (TFP) between
1970 and 2007 indicates that TFP growth declined slightly in agriculture, while effective
research investments rose by a factor of two (Bloom, Jones, Webb and van Reenen 2019),
suggesting that research productivity declined by a factor of nearly four, equivalent to an
average decline of 3.7 percent per year.
        Intensifying the potential threat of diminished productivity, the share of GDP to
agricultural R&D has declined in many wealthy countries. In 1995, total global spending on
agricultural R&D was around $33 billion. Roughly two thirds of this spending originated from



1
  Another potential issue is that some of the welfare benefits of agricultural innovation may accrue to
consumers in the form of lower prices for agricultural goods. Low price elasticities of demand for
agricultural products imply that productivity gains from freely accessible agricultural innovations
reduce the price of agricultural goods (Guttman 1978), making consumers the primary beneficiaries of
such innovations. With free trade and reasonable transport costs, these welfare gains diffuse across
domestic and foreign consumers, reducing domestic consumers' willingness to pay.


                                                                                                          1
governments, universities, and not-for-profits, while one third originated from profit-motivated
R&D (Pardey and Bientema 2001). Five years later, by 2000, total global spending was roughly
the same, but the share of public to profit-motivated R&D had changed to 60 and 40 percent
(Pardey et al 2006), highlighting a growing reliance on industry funding for agricultural R&D.
        The goal of this book is to provide new evidence on the potential impact of this shift
from public to private sector funding and, more generally, to further our understanding of the
returns to public and private spending R&D. Individual chapters examine the sources of
agricultural knowledge and investigate challenges for measuring the returns to the adoption of
new agricultural technologies, examine knowledge spillovers from universities to agricultural
innovation and explore interactions between university engagement and scientific productivity.
Analyses of agricultural venture capital point to that industry as an evolving source of funding
for agricultural R&D. Methodologically, the research in this book spans the spectrum from
archival research and text analysis to survey design and structural estimates. Discussions of
each chapter outline promising directions for future research.


Tracing Agricultural Productivity to Its Source
        In their chapter The Roots of Agricultural Innovation: Patent Evidence of
Knowledge Spillovers, Matt Clancy, Paul Heisey, Yongjie Ji, and GianCarlo Moschini
investigate knowledge spillovers from innovations outside of agriculture as a source
agricultural innovation. While many previous analyses have investigated knowledge spillovers,
nearly all of these studies have focused on spillover between different segments of agricultural
R&D (e.g., Evenson 1989), or across states or countries (Alston 2002). This chapter extends prior
studies in two major directions: 1) by examining spillovers from other industries into agriculture
and 2) by introducing a new method to measure knowledge spillovers through text analyses.
        Using the full text of US agricultural patents issued between 1976 and 2016, Clancy and
his co-authors construct three complementary measures of knowledge spillovers: 1) citations to
non-agricultural patents, 2) citations to scientific publications in non-agricultural journals and
3) a text-analysis algorithm that identifies "text-novel concepts" that are novel to agricultural
patents but not to other technology fields. The authors apply these three measures to patents in
subsectors of agriculture: animal health, biocides, fertilizer, machinery, plants, and agricultural
research inputs.



                                                                                                      2
       Analyses of all three measures indicate that more than half of all patents in agriculture
have benefitted from knowledge sources outside of agriculture. In three of the six subsectors--
animal health, fertilizer, and machinery-- more than half of all spillovers into agriculture
appear to have originated from other industries. In "animal health," the share of outside
knowledge among cited patents is extremely large, on the order of 90 percent. In only one
subsector-- plants--knowledge flows typically originate from agricultural R&D.
       Non-agricultural sources of knowledge flows into agriculture are, however, rarely
completely detached from agricultural research. For example, agricultural patents are more
likely to cite scientific publications in biology and chemistry compared with publications in
other journals. Agricultural patents are more likely to cite or share text-novel concepts with the
non-agricultural patents of firms that have at least one agricultural patent in their portfolio.
       The new text-analysis measure of spillovers is a major contribution of this chapter, and
it introduces a useful complement to citations as a measure of knowledge flows.
Methodologically, Clancy and his co-authors define "text-novel concepts" as words and
phrases (strings) that are new in agricultural patents in the second half of their data (for patents
with application years between 1996 and 2018). First, they identify roughly 100 text-novel
concepts in each of the six subsectors. Then, they search all US patents in other sectors (outside
of their six subsectors) for prior mentions of these concepts. For example, the string
"pyrimethamine" does not appear in any animal health patents before 1996 but is a common
term in animal health patents afterwards, making it a text-novel concept. When earlier patents
on human health mention pyrimethamine their measure records an incidence of knowledge
spillovers from human health to animal health.
       Using these measures, the authors identify several areas in which findings from citation-
based measures may be misleading. In biocides, for example, most patents cite non-agricultural
patents and journals, which suggests that most spillovers originate from other disciplines. Using
the measure of text-novel concepts, however, the authors show that these concepts are never
mentioned in earlier patents outside of biocides, which indicates that they may have originated
in biocides. More generally, they find that citations-based measure of knowledge spillovers,
which have been used as the standard measure of knowledge spillovers, may overstate the share
of knowledge spillovers within agriculture relative to text-based measures.




                                                                                                   3
       Their discussant Alberto Galasso emphasizes that these findings have important
implications for our understanding of how shocks propagate through the economy through
industry linkages (Barrot and Sauvagnat 2016). He also suggests a potential refinement for
estimates of knowledge spillovers, by controlling for the size of technology fields. A relatively
small field like animal health may appear to draw more knowledge from a large field, like
chemistry, simply because chemistry is a very large field; controlling for field size will address
this issue. Galasso further highlights the importance of distinguishing involuntary spillovers
from intentional knowledge transfer through licensing contracts between non-agricultural and
agricultural firms. This concept is picked up and extended in later chapters on knowledge flows
between universities and industry.


Selection as a Challenge for Measuring Returns to Biological Innovation
       A chapter by Jared Hutchins, Brent Hueth, and Guilherme Rosa on "Quantifying
Heterogeneous Returns to Adoption of Genetic Technology: The Case of the Dairy
Industry" uses individual (cow-) level micro data on milk production in a structural model to
estimate the impact of genetic selection. The dairy industry has experienced a 3-4 percent
increase in milk yields per year; half of this increase has been attributed to genetic
improvement in the quality of bulls. Yet, the match between the bull and the dame (the mother
of a new cow) may be just as important as the quality of the bull. Such selection is a common
problem in estimating returns to agricultural innovation. For hybrid corn, for example, a
substantive share of the increase in yields after the adoption of hybrid corn is due to the fit
between the hybrid seed and its most productive environment, as Griliches (1957) has shown
for the early 20th century United States and Suri (2011) for modern-day Kenya.
       Observing and identifying selection in the dairy industry, however, is difficult because
success takes several years to observe. For corn, the success of a new match can be observed
within the season. Cows, however, take three years to mature before they produce milk. This
delay between the matching of a dame and a bull and the breeder's ability to observe the milk
production of their offspring is simply too long to allow for experimental learning. As a result,
genetic improvements in dairy occur gradually through an endogenous process of selection that
is mediated by demand and supply.




                                                                                                  4
       Hutchins, Hueth, and Rosa estimate the contribution of this selection process using
detailed data on the "genetic merit" of individual bulls from the Dairy Herd Improvement
(DHI) program. Going back to 1908, this program of the US Department of Agriculture covers
roughly half of all dairy herds in the United States. Widely adopted since the early 1960s,
artificial insemination technologies have created unprecedented opportunities to observe the
performance of bulls, who can now produce thousands of offspring. Every daughter of a bull
contributes new data, improving estimates of milk production associated with his genes. The
authors exploit these data to estimate a structural model of genetic improvement and selection
in the form of assortative matching between a high-value cow and a bull.
       Estimates from a structural model of returns to high-yield genetics imply that 75 percent
of these returns are driven by selection, in the form of assortative matching. Exploiting animal-
level data the authors show that productivity gains are driven by matching at the level of
animals and not just at the farm. In other words, they show that productivity in dairy has
increased not only because better farmers choose better bulls, but also because farmers match
productive cows with productive bulls.
       These findings indicate that farmers are critical to determining the returns to biological
innovation today. This is similar to the role they played in US innovation historically when
farmers often discovered new varieties of food and feed crops. Olmstead and Rhode (2008), for
example, examine the challenges that informational problems and cross-fertilization created for
innovations by private farmers and breeders in cotton. According to Robert Evenson, until the
end of the 19th century, all crucial mechanical inventions in agriculture were the work of
farmers and local blacksmiths, rather than of large cooperation (cited in Wright 2012, p. 1718).
       Paul Scott's discussion places the findings of Hutchins, Hueth, and Rosa in the context
of the econometric literature on the correlation between producer's input decisions and
unobserved productivity (which reaches back to with Marshak and Andrews 1944). Scott first
outlines the properties of plausible instruments to assess the effect of selection on the measured
productivity of bulls. Specifically, he suggests using the change in a bull's ability to transmit
favorable genes to produce protein or butter fat (the Predicted Transmitting Ability, or PTA) as
an instrument for the bull's PTA. Using this instrument, the authors find that there is still
evidence of selection based on unobserved productivity differences. Scott points out that other
choice variables, such as herd size and the frequency with which farmers milk their cows may



                                                                                                    5
also be correlated with PTA values. In principle, all of these endogenous explanatory variables
need additional instruments. Even though these concerns may be partially addressed by
improved measures of genetic traits in the future, the selection problem raised by this chapter
remains relevant, due to unobservable characteristics and choices of individual farmers.


Innovation as a Response to Environmental Shocks
        Expanding on theme of farmers' role in selecting the most productive technologies, a
chapter by Keith Meyers and Paul W. Rhode examines farmers decisions to adopt heat-resistant
corn hybrids after a series of catastrophic droughts and harvest failures in the 1930s. In "Yield
Performance of Corn under Heat Stress: A Comparison of Hybrid and Open-Pollinated
Seeds during a Period of Technological Transformation, 1933-1955," Keith Meyers and
Paul W. Rhode use newly recovered data from the archives of Zvi Griliches to re-examine the
diffusion of hybrid corn seeds immediately following the Dust Bowl (1930-36).
        Hybridization, which creates a new variety by crossing two corn (so-called filial F1)
varieties, provided a new method of developing higher yielding and more resilient seeds.
Compared with the traditional open-pollinated seeds (which are simply allowed to propagate in
the fields), hybrids yield more corn and take less time to mature. They also have stronger roots
and thicker stalks which makes them less susceptible to breaking in wind or rain, they are more
resistant to disease, and they are more likely to survive a drought. Yet, hybrid seeds also cost
more than open-pollinated seeds (Olmstead and Rhode 2008), and farmers cannot save hybrid
seeds from their harvest to plant in the following year, because the offspring of saved seeds
return to the characteristics of the parental varieties (instead of exhibiting the desirable traits of
the purchases hybrid seed). As a result, farmers who switch to hybrid seeds must buy new seeds
from the breeder every year, instead of building their own supply. These tradeoffs led to an
uneven adoption of hybrid corn, which Meyers and Rhode re-examine in their chapter.
        Griliches' (1957) showed that expected improvements in hybrid yields drove the
adoption of hybrid corn in the Corn Belts and the Great Plains. Yet, Meyers and Rhode note,
Griliches may have overlooked a significant link between the adoption of hybrids and a period
of devastating droughts and crop failures during the Dust Bowl years of 1934 and 1936.
Narrative historical evidence suggests that corn farmers learned about the benefits of planting
drought resistant hybrids by observing neighbors' crops failing or surviving during these



                                                                                                     6
droughts. The late Richard Sutch (2011) argued that drought resistance became more salient to
farmers as a result of climate shocks, and he highlights the role of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture to promote hybrid seeds after the Dust Bowl.
       In fact, hybrid corn gained its most substantial foothold in US agriculture in 1937, just
one year after the catastrophic harvest failures of 1936 (Figure 1) and was planted on more than
40 percent of corn acreage in the most productive counties of Iowa and Illinois.


                            FIGURE 1 ­ U.S. CORN YIELDS 1888-2014




Notes: From Michael Robert's discussion of Meyers and Rhode (2020), using data on corn yields
from the USDA's National Agricultural Statistics Service (https://www.nass.usda.gov).


       To investigate whether hybrids did in fact mediate the effects of weather shocks ­ in the
form of extreme heat and drought - Meyers and Rhode have returned to Zvi Griliches' archives
to construct fine-grained geographic data on hybrid corn adoption and yields, matched with
historical data on droughts. While existing analyses rely on state-level data, this substantial
effort of data collection allows Meyers and Rhode to examine adoption patterns at the level of



                                                                                                   7
crop reporting districts (CRDS), roughly the size of 10 neighboring counties. This analysis
indicates corn breeding allowed the corn frontier to move further North, into Canada. Focusing
on heat tolerance as a measure for tolerance to droughts, Meyers and Rhode show that hybrid
corn grown in Iowa from 1928 to 1942 did exhibit heat tolerance relative to open-pollinated
varieties, consistent with the findings of Richard Sutch. These results, however, do not replicate
in other states, and reduced temperature sensitivity does not appear when comparing hybrid and
open-pollinated yields grown in other states. This latter finding supports Zvi Griliches' decision
to ignore drought-tolerance in his analysis of hybrid adoption.
        Their discussant Michael Roberts is even more skeptical than the authors of the view
that the adoption of hybrid corn was a response to the Dust Bowl and issues a stark warning
about the limits of technical change in agriculture as a response to climate change. Schlenker
and Roberts (2009), for example. have shown that the number of extreme heat days above 29
Celsius is the best predictor of corn yields. Modern data indicate that high-yielding GMO
varieties that are prevalent today are even more sensitive to extreme heat than the traditional
varieties (Lobell et al 2011).2
        In the 20th century, US agriculture was able to capitalize on vast productivity gains by
developing plants with immense yield potential (the maximum output given available sunlight
and light) and by creating varieties to match the available sunlight and water across the United
States, while also processing massive amounts of nitrogen from fertilizers. Today, nitrogen is
no longer a limiting factor, and the adoption of genetically modified crops (such as round-up
ready corn) has made it easier to control weeds (roundup, or glyphosate) and pests (through BT
strains). Yet, the large plants of today with their deep roots require more water, leaving modern
varieties vulnerable to droughts. The unusually hot summer of 2012 approached the
temperatures of the Dust Bowl. Current climate models predict many more summers like 2012,
with even hotter temperatures. Roberts warns that innovation in corn and other crops may be
unable to deal with extreme temperatures. Plants have reached the biological limits of
photosynthesis, requiring an entirely new approach for a second Green Revolution.


2
 Genetically engineered drought tolerance was introduced in corn hybrids in 2012 and became broadly
available the following year. By 2016, 22 percent of total US planted corn acreage was drought tolerant.
As the research of Richard Sutch as well as Myers and Rhode would suggest, adoption has been
concentrated in drought-prone regions (despite the hybrids' limited ability to protect against the most
extreme droughts, McFadden, Smith, Wechsler and Wallander 2019).


                                                                                                      8
        Recent advances in the emerging field of synthetic biology may offer a much-needed
novel approach, by targeting improvements in photosynthetic efficiency. For example, a survey
article by Batista-Silva et al (2020) discusses progress and challenges of engineering improved
photosynthesis through synthetic biology as a potential path towards improving the utilization
of solar energy and carbon sources to producer food, fiber, and fuel.


Universities as a Source of Agricultural Innovation and Productivity Gains
        Publicly funded research has been a major source of innovation and advances in
agricultural productivity throughout American history (e.g., Wright and Shih 2011, Olmstead
and Rhode 2008). Since their foundation under the Morrill Land Grant Acts of 1862 (7 U.S.C.
§301 et seq.) the original 52 land grant universities have been the key institution in creating and
dissemination agricultural innovations (Wright 2012), establishing vital links between
universities, farmers, and industry. With the 1862 act the United States government allotted
30,000 acres of federal land per state to finance the foundation of practically oriented research
and training universities.3 The 1887 Hatch act (7 U.S.C. § 361a et seq.) added research
capabilities through the State Agricultural Experiment Stations, supported by grants of
additional federal lands. In 1890, the second Morrill Act (7 U.S.C. §322 et seq.) increased the
funding of these new colleges to $25,000 per year and specified that African Americans could
receive education in existing land grant colleges and in new colleges designed for that purpose.
Finally, in 1914, the Smith-Lever act established the Cooperative Extension Service to inform
farmers about agricultural innovations and establish home instruction to help farmers learn
about new agricultural techniques.
        In its early decades of operation, the US land grant system supported agricultural
productivity by encouraging the diffusion of European innovations. Evenson (1980), for
example, documents that advances in agricultural productivity between 1870 and 1925 were
strongly correlated with total real public spending on agricultural research during the preceding
18 years, but largely based on the adoption of European inventions. It took several decades,
until the 1930s, for the system of land grant colleges and experiment stations to become an
efficient source of domestic agricultural innovation (Huffman and Evenson 2006). Kantor and


3
  Southern state had originally opposed the Morrill Act and it only passed after the South seceded from
the United States. As a result, none of the original 52 land-grant colleges operated in the South.


                                                                                                          9
Whalley (2019) find that the establishment of agricultural experiment stations at existing land
grant institutions through the Hatch Act of 1887 took between 20 and 30 years to increase land
productivity in neighboring counties. Olmstead and Rhode (2002, pp. 931-32) show that, with
the exception of early advances in corn, yields for field crops only began to increase after 1930.
US wheat yields increased only 1.75 bushel per acre between 1866 and 1939, but increased by
about 2.25 percent per year afterwards, doubling wheat yields by the 1970s.
       Rosenberg and Nelson (1994) reason that the land grant college system was uniquely
suited to resolve a fundamental tension created by industry funding for academic research.
University research is typically "basic" research, aimed at understanding fundamentals, with
payoffs that are often uncertain, distant, and exceedingly difficult to appropriate. By contrast,
industry research targets specific problems and challenges with payoffs that are substantially
more immediate and are expected to directly benefit the firm that funds the R&D. Due to this
tension, many academics view industry funding as a direct threat to their research and academic
integrity, as targeted problem-solving takes time from basic research, and sometimes even
threatens open communications that are critical to academic exchange. According to Rosenberg
and Nelson (1994) the institutional features of the land grant college, with a firm commitment
to knowledge diffusion and the implementation of feedback from local users, are uniquely
suited to easing the tension between basic and applied research, especially after the Smith
Lever Act of 1914 provided funding for agricultural extension.
       In "Local Effects of Land Grant Colleges on Agricultural Innovation and Output,"
Michael J. Andrews estimates the effect of establishing a land grant college on invention and
agricultural performance on surrounding locations. To make some progress towards identifying
the causal effect of establishing a land grant college on invention, Andrews compare locations
that receive a land grant college to "runner-up" counties that competed for establishing a land-
grant college but ultimately lost. Comparing changes in patenting in college and runner-up
counties after the establishment of a land grant college, Andrews shows that patenting
increased in winning countries (compared to runner-up counties) after the establishment of a
land grant college.
       Patents, however, are an extremely noisy and potentially biased measure of agricultural
innovations. Agricultural innovations of a chemical or mechanical nature were patentable
throughout this period, while seeds and other types of biological innovations had no intellectual



                                                                                                    10
property protection. Moreover, even among innovations that were patentable, there were large
differences in the share of innovations that inventors chose to patent across sectors and over
time. An analysis of innovations exhibited at world technology fairs between 1851 and 1915
shows that roughly half of all agricultural machinery was covered by patents throughout this
period (Moser 2012). By contrast, chemical innovations, were almost never patented at the
beginning of this period and experienced a dramatic shift towards patenting after improvements
in analytic methods reduced the effectiveness of secrecy, as an alternative to patents. Biological
innovations first became subject to intellectual property rights through the US Plant Patent Act
of 1930. Plant patents, however, are substantially narrower than utility patents, and they are
limited to asexually reproducing plants (plants, such as apples and roses, that reproduce by
roots, shoots, or buds), explicitly excluding plants that propagate through seeds, as well as
tubers (Moser and Rhode 2012).4
        To address these issues, Andrews uses historical data on the introduction of new wheat
varieties from Clark, Martin, and Ball (1922) as an alternative, non-patent measure of
innovation. This measure shows that land grant counties were about five times more likely to
introduce a new wheat variety compared with runner-up counties after the establishment of a
land grant college.
        These findings are consistent with earlier research by Olmstead and Rhode (2002) that
documents how the land-grant system helped to create and diffuse critical innovations in wheat,
through the type of regional adaptive research for which the system had been designed. As the
center of gravity of wheat production extended westward to less-favorable environments,
breeders in the land-grant system identified and selected varieties that could tolerate drought,
cold, insect pests, rusts, and other fungal diseases in these newly established growing regions.




4
  Using new varieties of roses as a non-patent measure of innovation, Moser and Rhode (2012)
investigate whether the creation of plant patents in 1930 led to a significant increase in agricultural
innovation. (Notably, most plant patents until the 1960s covered roses._ Data on registrations of newly-
created roses indicates no increase in innovation after 1930: Less than 20 percent of new roses were
patented, European breeders continued to create most new roses, and there was no increase in the
number of new varieties per year after 1931. Instead, influential new varieties appear to have been a by-
product of publicly funded research.



                                                                                                        11
       Investigating funding as a mechanism for encouraging innovation, Andrews shows that
the effects of land grant colleges on local innovations was largest following the passage of
legislation, such as the Hatch Act of 1887, which increased funding for agricultural research.
       Turning to agricultural productivity, however, Andrews finds that, compared with
runner-up counties, college counties experienced only small (and often negligible)
improvements in agricultural productivity, measured by improvements in yields, crop output, or
the production of livestock. Andrews explains that the productivity benefits of land grant
research may have diffused beyond the borders of the college county, through a combination of
outreach and university engagement (as described by Barham, Foltz, and Melo in this book).
       Placing Andrew's results in the broader context of productivity spillovers suggests that
the geographic diffusion of spillovers ­ beyond the county level ­ is a likely explanation for the
weakness of county-level productivity effects. In a state-level analyses of productivity
spillovers Alston et al (2010) show that over half the measured within-state productivity gains
result from public research investments made elsewhere. Alston et al. (2010) estimate that the
average marginal internal rate of return of public research accruing within the source state is
18.9 percent, significantly less than the estimated overall internal rate of return of 22.7 for the
entire nation. Thus, the "failure" of the land grant system may lie in their focus on state-level
agricultural priorities and a lack of specificity of their research to local (county-level)
conditions, rather than in low productivity gains overall.
       In his discussion, Bhaven Sampat highlights the usefulness of this chapter for the
broader literature on returns from publicly funded research, which has held up the land grant
system as a model of technology transfer that was more successful than the current, post Bayh-
Dole system of patent licensing (Mowery et al 2004). Sampat also reminds us Brian Wright's
(2012) positive assessment of the land grant system. Citing the findings of Olmstead and Rhode
(2002), Wright (2012, p. 1719) reports that by 1919, more than three quarters of US wheat
acreage used new varieties that had not been developed before the Morrill Act.
       Sampat also points out that a strict focus on the diffusion of specific varieties may miss
the contributions of universities, if academic research contributes research techniques and tools
rather than new products. In the words of Griliches (1957) "hybrid corn was the invention of a
method of inventing." Citing primarily Stackman et al (1967), Wright (2002, 1720-25)
documents how research methods developed within the land grant system facilitated the



                                                                                                      12
development of new wheat varieties in Mexico after 1943 and supported research to improve
rice in India and the Philippines. More recently, an analysis of drug development between 1985
and 2005 has shown that public sector labs enable two-thirds of marketed drugs, even though
they only directly create one tenth of these new drugs (Sampat and Lichtenberg 2011).


Industry Engagement and Scientific Productivity
        In their research on "Academic Engagement, Commercialization, and Scholarship:
Empirical Evidence from Agricultural and Life Scientists at US Land Grant
Universities," Bradford Barham, Jeremy Foltz, and Ana Paula Melo examine links between
industry funding and the activities, attitudes, and research choices of agricultural and life
sciences faculty at land grant colleges. Their analysis focuses on two major questions: 1) what
types of interactions are most likely to increase industry funding for faculty research, and 2)
how does funding from industry influence the research of scientists? To answer the first
question, the authors analyze two waves, conducted in in 2005 and 2015, of a survey of faculty
at all 52 original land grant colleges. To analyze interactions between faculty and industry, the
authors distinguish academic engagement (in the form of sponsored research, collaborations,
and presentations) from commercialization (which includes patenting, licensing, and startups).5
        Survey responses from faculty at land grant colleges reveal that academic engagement
has generated between 15 and 20 times more research funding than academic
commercialization. Engagement dates back to the land-grant universities' emphasis ­ since
their inception in the 19th century ­ on practical agricultural and engineering sciences, formal
extension appointments for faculty, and ongoing outreach with farms and firms to improve their
performance. Dispelling the fear that engagement with industry crowds out research, the
authors also find that faculty who are more engaged with industry publish more.
        Notably, their surveys uncover important differences in the faculty-industry relations
across universities (Figure 2), which suggests that institutional characteristics of universities
play an important role in shaping links between academia and industry.




5
 This distinction is adopted to match recent papers on university-industry relations in Europe, such as
Perkmann et al., (2013), Tartari et al., (2014); Tartari and Salter (2015), Sengupta and Ray (2017).


                                                                                                          13
   FIGURE 2 ­ UNIVERSITY-LEVEL PROBABILITIES OF FACULTY ENGAGEMENT WITH INDUSTRY




Notes: From Barham, Foltz, and Melo (2020). OLS estimates and 95 percent confidence for 52
university fixed effects (with the University of Wisconsin at Madison as the excluded
category). The dependent variable is an indicator that equals 1 if a faculty member is engaged
in any type of university-industry relations (UIR). Estimates control for gender, being a
professor, and for having received a PhD from a land grant university. Standard errors are
clustered at the university level.

As universities have been affected by dwindling state and federal support (e.g., Ehrenberg
2012) understanding sources of funding becomes critical. In principle, the passage of the Bayh-
Dole Act in 1981 has created a new framework to commercialize innovations and discoveries
associated with federally sponsored research (Sampat 2006, Thursby and Thursby 2011). Yet,
the creation of stronger incentives at publicly funded institutions through Bayh-Dole appears to
have failed its intended effects to encourage innovation. The findings of Barham, Foltz, and
Melo suggest that, at least for the agricultural sector, the key institutions for university-industry




                                                                                                   14
relations had already been established in the 19th century through the US system of land-grant
colleges.
       Their discussant Nicola Bianchi emphasizes that this chapter is one of the most
thorough analysis of university-industry relations to date, but also proposes promising
directions for future research. For example, Bianchi points out that there is room to investigate
the links between declining government grants and faculty involvement in university-industry
relations. Follow-on research could also take advantage of publicly available sources on
research output, including patents and publications to complement the chapter's rich existing
data from faculty surveys.


Financing Future Innovations through Venture Capital
       A final chapter on Venture Capital and the Transformation of Private R&D for
Agriculture and Food presents a forward-looking analysis of recent trends in the financing of
innovations. In this chapter, Gregory D. Graff, Felipe de Figueiredo Silva, and David
Zilberman document the dramatic expansion of venture capital (VC) investments in agriculture
startups, especially in the wake of the financial crisis of 2008. Between the early 2000s and
2018, VC investments in startups focusing on agricultural R&D increased from just tens of
millions to more than seven billion. Notably, VC investment in agriculture startups increased
not only in absolute terms but also relative to the overall supply of capital invested by the
public sector and by public firms. To perform their analysis, the authors combine data from
three proprietary data sources (Crunchbase, PitchBook, and VentureSource) to construct a new
data set consisting of 4,500 startups in agriculture, with more than 10,000 financial
transactions, including information on investments and exits.
       Although, historically, private investment in agricultural R&D in emerging economies
has been low (Pardey & Beintema 2001; Pardey et al, 2006), the authors report robust startup
activities in in the larger emerging economies like India, China, and Brazil. In regression
analyses, they examine potential causes for this shift, using data on 4,500 startups across 124
countries. Although the largest share of the startups in their sample operate in the United States
(33 percent) and the European Union (23 percent), a significant share of the remaining 44
percent of startups are in emerging economies. Their regressions indicate that investments are
strongly correlated with past liquidity events, suggesting that the expansion of VC investment



                                                                                                  15
in agriculture startups reflects a response to new investment opportunities in agriculture.
       For a subset of these startups, their data also include information on investment and exit
deals between 1981 to 2018. These data indicate that successful exits, in the form of Initial
Public Offering (IPO) and Merger & Acquisition (M&A) led to higher investments by VC.
Comparing different types of exits, the authors find that prior IPOs are associated with a
stronger increase in investments than prior M&As. These findings are important for researchers
and policy makers who aim to support agricultural innovation and R&D. Overall, the authors
conclude that venture capitalists' willingness to invest may have been affected by an increase in
the ratio of agricultural prices to non-agricultural commodity prices, highly visible exits of
major players in the agriculture technology space, changes in agricultural labor markets, and
advances in enabling (general purpose) technologies, such as cheaper genome sequencing,
genome editing, or increasing data capacity of sensors and networks.
       A discussion by Michael Ewens suggests promising directions for future research. First,
Ewens suggests extending the existing results with an in-depth analysis of a single source. Such
an analysis would address empirical challenges that result from variation in the coverage of
agricultural VCs across the merged sources. Some of these analyses may require hand-
collecting additional data, especially to expand the coverage of agriculture startups in emerging
economies. Second, Ewens recommends additional analyses within agriculture to identify areas
that grew differentially after 2008, using data on agricultural prices. For example, a potential
extension would apply an empirical strategy implemented by Ewens, Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf
(2018), which examines the effects of the cloud on VC in information technology. An
extension to agriculture could exploit the effects of the same technology shock across different
sectors within agriculture. Third, Ewens recommends examining the identity of investors,
possibly by tracking the work histories of VC partners that choose to finance startups in
agriculture. This question is particularly interesting and important because agriculture is a non-
traditional investment for both VC and private equity.


Summing up
       Importantly, the economics of agricultural innovation is even broader than the research
included in this volume. While this book is focused primarily on agricultural innovation in the
United States, a rich literature in development economics examines forces that drive the



                                                                                                   16
adoption of agricultural innovations (e.g., Foster and Rosenzweig 1995, Conley and Udry 2010,
Suri 2011)
       Other recent research has examined the effects of restrictions on the supply of farm
labor on agricultural innovation, using historical restrictions on immigration as a source of
exogenous variation (Clemens, Lewis, and Postel 2018, San 2020). These papers build on a
long tradition of economic research on endogenous technical change reaching back to Hicks
(1932). In fact, much of what we know about endogenous technical change has been learned in
the context of labor-saving innovations in agriculture (e.g. Hayami and Ruttan 1970). These
analyses range from the adoption of tractors in the first half of the 20th century to co-robots
(machines that work alongside humans) that weed crops today and grafting robots that replace
humans in the labor-intensive task of grafting herbaceous seedlings of fruits and vegetable
crops (Gallardo and Sauer 2018).
       Despite these omissions, the chapters in this book outline a diverse research that
improves our understanding of agricultural innovation. This agenda spans several fields within
economics, reaching from agricultural economics and economic history to finance and
industrial organization. Authors of chapters, and their discussants, suggest promising
opportunities for future research on the economics of agricultural innovation.


                                           REFERENCES
Alston, Julian M., 2002. "Spillovers." Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource
Economics, 46(3), pp. 315-346.

Alston, Julian M., Matthew A. Andersen, Jennifer S. James, and Philip G. Pardey, 2010.
Persistence Pays: U.S. Agricultural Productivity Growth and the Benefits from Public R&D
Spending, New York: Springer.

Barrot, J. and Sauvagnat, J, 2016, "Input specificity and the propagation of idiosyncratic shocks
in production networks," Quarterly Journal of Economics 131: 1543-1592.

Batista-Silva, Willian, Paula da Fonseca-Pereira, Auxiliadora Oliveira Martins, AgustínZsögön,
AdrianoNunes-Nesi, Wagner L.Araújo, 2020. "Engineering Improved Photosynthesis in the
Era of Sy nthetic Biology" Plant Communications. Volume 1, Issue 2, March 9

Bloom, Nicholas A., Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, Michael Webb, 2019. "Are Ideas
Getting Harder to Find? Working paper.




                                                                                                  17
Clemens, Michael A. Ethan G. Lewis, and Hannah Postel. 2018. "Immigration Restrictions as
Active Labor Market Policy: Evidence from the Mexican Bracero Exclusion." American
Economic Review 108 (6), pp. 1468-87.

Conley, Timothy G. and Chris Udry. "Learning about a New Technology: Pineapple in
Ghana." American Economic Review, Vol. 100, No. 1 March 2010.

Ehrenberg, R., 2012. "American Higher Education in Transition." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 26, 193-216.

Evenson, R.E., 1980. "A Century of agricultural research and productivity change research,
invention, extension, and productivity change in U.S. agriculture: an historical decomposition
analysis." In: Araji, A.A. (Ed.), Research and Extension Productivity in Agriculture.
Department of Agricultural Economics, University of Idaho, Moscow.

Evenson, R.E. 1989. "Spillover Benefits of Agricultural Research: Evidence from U.S.
Experience." American Journal of Agricultural Economics 71(2): 447-452.

Ewens, Michael and Nanda, Ramana and Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew 2018. "Cost of
Experimentation and the Evolution of Venture Capital." NBER Working Paper No. w24523.

Foster, Andrew D. and Mark R. Rosenzweig.1995. "Learning by Doing and Learning from
Others: Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture." Journal of Political Economy
103, No. 6, December, pp. 1176-1209.

Gallardo, R. Karina and Johannes Sauer. 2018. "Adoption of Labor-Saving Technologies in
Agriculture." Annual Reviews of Resource Economics. Vol. 10, pp. 185-206.

Grimaldi, R, Hughes, A, Krabel, S, Kitson, M, Llerena, P, Lissoni, F, Salter, A, Sobrero, M.,
2013. Academic engagement and commercialisation: a review of the literature on university-
industry relations. Research Policy 42, 423-42.

Guttman, J., 1978. "Interest groups and the demand for agricultural research." Journal
of Political Economy 86, 467­484.

Hicks, J. 1032. The Theory or Wages. London. Macmillan.

Hayami Y, and Ruttan VW. 1970. Factor prices and technical change in agricultural
development: The United States and Japan, 1880-1960. Journal of Political Economy 18, pp.
1115-41.

Huffman, W.E., Evenson, R.E., 2006. "Do formula or competitive grant funds have greater
impacts on state agricultural productivity?" American Journal of Agricultural Economics 88,
783­798.

Kantor, Shawn, and Alexander Whalley. 2019. "Research Proximity and Productivity: Long



                                                                                                 18
Term Evidence from Agriculture." Journal of Politically Economy, 127 (2), pp. 819-854.

Lobell, D. B, Roberts M.J, Schlenker, W. Braun N., Little B. B, Rejsesu R.M, and Hammer
G.L. (2014). "Greater Sensitivity do Drought Accompanies Maize Yields Increase in the U.S.
Midwest." Science 344 (6193): 515-19.

Marshak, Jacob and William Andrews Jr. "Random Simultaneous Equations and the Theory of
Production," Econometrica 12 (34), pp. 143-205.

McFadden, Jonathan, David Smith, Seth Wechsler, and Steven Wallander. "Development,
Adoption, and Management of Drought-Tolerant Corn in the United States." Economic
Research Service, Economic Information Bulletin Number 204, January 2019.

Moser, Petra. 2012. "Innovation without Patents ­ Evidence from World's Fairs" The Journal
of Law and Economics, Volume 55, No. 1, February, pp. 43-74.

Moser, Petra and Paul W. Rhode. "Did Plant Patents Create the American Rose?" in Joshua
Lerner and Scott Stern (eds). The Rate and Direction of Technological Change, Chicago
University of Chicago Press, 2012, pp. 413-41.

Mowery, D. C., Nelson, R. R., Sampat, B. N., and Ziedonis, A. A. (2004). Ivory tower and
industrial innovation: University-industry technology transfer before and after the Bayh-Dole
Act. Stanford University Press.

Olmstead, Alan L. and Paul W. Rhode. 2002. "The Red Queen and the Hard Reds: Productivity
Growth in American Wheat, 1800-1940 Journal of Economic History, Vol. 62, No. 2, pp.929-
966.

Olmstead, Alan L. and Paul W. Rhode 2008). Creating Abundance: Biological Innovation and
American Agricultural Development. Cambridge University Press.

Pardey, Philip G., and Nienke M. Beintema. 2001. Slow Magic: Agricultural R&D a Century
After Mendel. Agricultural Science and Technology Indicators Initiative (ASTI), International
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington,D.C.

Pardey, Philip G., Nienke M. Beintema, Steven Dehmer, and Steven Wood. 2006. Agricultural
Research: A Growing Global Divide? Agricultural Science and Technology Indicators
Initiative (ASTI), International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington, D.C.

Perkmann, Markus, Valentina Tartari, Maureen McKelvey, Erkko Autio, Anders Broström,
D'Este, Pablo, Riccardo Fini, Aldo Geuna, Rosa Grimaldi, Alan Hughes, Stefan Krabel,
Michael Kitson, Patrick Llerena, Francesco Lissoni, Ammon Salter and Maurizio Sobrer. 2013.
"Academic engagement and commercialisation: A review of the literature on university­
industry relations." Research Policy, vol. 42, issue 2, pp. 423-442

Roberts, Michael J. and Wolfgang Schlenker (2014). The Evolution of Heat Tolerance of Corn:



                                                                                                19
Implications for Climate Change. In Chavas, J-P, Hummels, D. and Brian D. Wright (editors).
The Economics of Food Volatility, chapter 2, pp. 81-90, University of Chicago Press.

Sampat, B., 2006. Patenting and US academic research in the 20th century: The world before
and after Bayh-Dole. Research Policy 35, pp. 772-789.

San, Shmuel. "Labor Supply and Directed Technical Change: Evidence from the Abrogation of
the Bracero Program in 1964." NYU Working Paper, 2020.

Shih, Tiffany M. and Brian D. Wright. 2011. "Agricultural Innovation." Tiffany Shih, Brian
Wright in Henderson and Newell (editors) Accelerating Energy Innovation: Insights from
Multiple Sectors.

Stackman E.C. et al. 1967. Campaigns against Hunger. Belknap Press of Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Massachussets.

Suri, Tavneet. 2011. Selection and comparative advantage in technology adoption.
Econometrica 79(1), 159­209.

Sutch, Richard. 2011. "The Impact of the 1936 Corn Belt Drought on American Farmers'
Adoption of Hybrid Corn." In The Economics of Climate Change" Adaptations Past and
Present, pp. 195-223.

Thursby, J and Thursby, M., 2011. "Has the Bayh-Dole Act Compromised Basic Research?
Research Policy 40,1077-83.

Wright, Brian D. 2012. "Grand Missions of Agricultural Innovation. Research Policy 41(10),
1716­1728.




                                                                                              20
