                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     STEERING INCENTIVES OF PLATFORMS:
              EVIDENCE FROM THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY

                                         Brian McManus
                                           Aviv Nevo
                                         Zachary Nolan
                                      Jonathan W. Williams

                                       Working Paper 27083
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27083


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We are grateful for the the North American ISP that provided the data used in this paper. We
thank John Asker, Shane Greenstein, Robin Lee, and Jeff Prince for comments, as well as
audiences at Indiana-Kelly, Penn State, Yale, FCC, and the NBER's IT and Digitization
workshop. Zach Nolan and Jonathan Williams thank Cable Television Laboratories, Inc., and its
member organizations, for their support of this work. Brian McManus and Jonathan Williams
acknowledge support from the NSF (grant #1824293). The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27083.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Brian McManus, Aviv Nevo, Zachary Nolan, and Jonathan W. Williams. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Steering Incentives of Platforms: Evidence from the Telecommunications Industry
Brian McManus, Aviv Nevo, Zachary Nolan, and Jonathan W. Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 27083
May 2020
JEL No. L11,L13,L96

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the trade-offs faced by Internet Service Providers (ISPs) that serve as platforms through
which consumers access both television and internet services. As online streaming video
improves, these providers may respond by attempting to steer consumers away from streaming
video toward their own TV services, or by attempting to capture surplus from this improved
internet content. We augment the standard mixed bundling model to demonstrate the trade-offs
the ISP faces when dealing with streaming video, and we show how these trade-offs change with
the pricing options available to the ISP. Next, we use unique household-level panel data and the
introduction of usage-based pricing (UBP) in a subset of markets to measure consumers'
responses and to evaluate quantitatively the ISP's trade-offs. We find that the introduction of UBP
led consumers to upgrade their internet service plans and lower overall internet usage. Our
findings suggest that while steering consumers towards TV services is possible, it is likely costly
for the ISP and therefore unlikely to be profitable. This is especially true if the ISP can offer rich
pricing menus that allow it to capture some of the surplus generated by a better internet service.
The results suggest that policies like UBP can increase ISPs' incentive to maintain open access to
new internet content.

Brian McManus                                     Zachary Nolan
Department of Economics CB 3305                   Department of Economics
University of North Carolina                      419 Chapel Drive, Box 90097
Chapel Hill, NC 27599                             Durham, NC 27708-0097
mcmanusb@unc.edu                                  zach.nolan@duke.edu

Aviv Nevo                                         Jonathan W. Williams
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania                        107 Gardner Hall, CB 3305
439 McNeil Building                               University of North Carolina
3718 Locust Walk                                  Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3305
Philadelphia, PA 19104                            jonwms@unc.edu
and NBER
anevo@wharton.upenn.edu
1         Introduction

In a variety of industries, consumers access products or services through a platform, or
gatekeeper. When a platform has market power, it faces a trade-off between steering
consumers' choices within the platform versus capturing surplus from allowing con-
sumers free choice among the platform's products. On one hand, steering may allow
the gatekeeper to direct consumers' choices toward high-margin options, which give it
a greater share of the surplus generated on the platform. On the other hand, allow-
ing consumers to have more or better choices may increase the value of the platform,
which could allow the gatekeeper to charge more for access. The platform's prices,
in addition to directly affecting consumers' welfare, affect the third-party firms that
depend on the platform for access to consumers.1
        In this paper, we analyze the steering incentives of an Internet Service Provider
(ISP) that sells TV services as well as internet access, and therefore serves as a gate-
keeper to online content, some of which is an alternative to the TV service the ISP sells.
As streaming services gain popularity and the value of over-the-top-video (OTTV) in-
creases, the ISP faces a trade-off: OTTV directly competes with the TV service but
also increases the value of the internet service. The ISP, therefore, needs to choose
between trying to steer consumers away from OTTV towards its own video service,
or supporting the growth of OTTV in order to improve its internet offering. The
ISP's choice of which strategy to follow directly impacts third-party video streaming
    1
     Examples of industries where gatekeepers are important and might have incentives to steer in-
clude the following. In health care markets, consumers enroll in an insurance plan and then access
health care providers mostly through the insurer's network. The network's structure and the plan's
prices will reflect the insurance company's incentive to steer consumers towards certain providers
and reduce moral hazard in health care consumption, while also providing a broad set of care op-
tions so that enrollment is attractive for a variety of individuals (Ho and Lee (2019)). Similarly,
consumers might reach online shopping sites through a search platform that could have incentives to
steer consumers to its own sites or sites that pay a higher fee. Steering activity, however, might turn
off some consumers who prefer different products, and therefore reduce total visits to the platform.
Indeed, such steering incentives are the basis for the fine imposed on Google in June 2017 by the
European Commission. Similarly, in March 2018, Spotify filed a complaint with the European Com-
mission saying that Apple, the gatekeeper of the App Store, "has introduced rules to the App Store
that purposely limit choice and stifle innovation at the expense of the user experience ­ essentially
acting as both a player and referee to deliberately disadvantage other app developers." (Spotify
CEO public statement March 13, 2019, https://newsroom.spotify.com/2019-03-13/consumers-and-
innovators-win-on-a-level-playing-field/.)


                                                  2
services, which may lose subscribers, and directly relates to the net neutrality debate.
We specifically aim to answer the following questions. What are the forces that drive
the trade-off faced by the ISP? How does the trade-off change with the availability
of pricing strategies which vary in how the ISP captures value generated by OTTV?
And, how are these trade-offs balanced in practice?
      To answer these questions we proceed in three steps. First, we utilize a unique
household-level panel data set from a North American ISP to document some relevant
facts. The data include information on internet usage and TV subscription choices of
a large number of households over nearly one year. A unique feature of the data is that
we observe which OTTV services a household uses and the volume of traffic generated
by these services. Using these data, we show that in our sample, OTTV services (e.g.,
Netflix, Hulu) account for almost 60% of all data usage on the internet. In addition,
we show that households with subscriptions to the ISP's TV service use less data and
engage less frequently with OTTV. We document that when a household drops TV
service (so called "cord cutting"), it increases its internet usage by nearly one-quarter.
      The improvement in OTTV and the cord cutting that follows from it have two
implications for the ISP's bottom line. First, a reduction in revenue from TV services,
and a loss of positive margins from this service. Second, increased internet traffic that
will eventually generate substantial network costs.2 This implies that improvements
in OTTV quality and access can create an incentive to steer customers towards TV
services or even foreclose some OTTV services. These steering and foreclosure incen-
tives are a central concern in discussions of net neutrality and upstream relationships
between ISPs and content providers. We show that some of the same impacts can
occur through downstream interventions when the ISP steers consumers' choices.
      In the second step of the analysis we aim to understand the forces driving the trade-
off the ISP faces. To do so, we develop a model of mixed bundling that includes TV
and internet subscriptions. We add two elements to the standard bundling framework:
  2
    The increase in network costs is related to OTTV's "unicast" nature, which can have a unique
transmission for each consumer



                                               3
quantity choices by consumers for the services they receive, and a parameter that
describes internet subscribers' access to OTTV services. We show that an increase in
streaming video access, all else fixed, leads to increased cord-cutting, which creates
incentives for the ISP to at least partly foreclose OTTV. However, as we give the ISP
the ability to offer internet service tiers that vary by usage allowance, we find that
the ISP has less incentive to foreclose and instead it prefers to promote OTTV. The
intuition is simple: when the ISP adds internet tiers which associate greater allowances
with higher prices, it can extract more revenue from high-demand consumers. Contrary
to concerns that usage-related prices or constraints are at odds with net neutrality's
goal of robust third-party content creation, we show that ISPs may have an incentive
to improve OTTV quality when these pricing tools are available.
   In the final step of the analysis, we study the introduction of usage-based pricing
(UBP) in a subset of markets. The UBP takes the form of a menu of three-part
tariffs, each of which includes an access fee, an internet usage allowance, and an
overage charge. The policy's introduction offers an opportunity to measure consumers'
responses to steering strategies in this industry and the implications it has for the ISP
incentives.
   We find the following. First, we find that UBP caused consumers, especially heavy
users, to upgrade their internet tiers. This suggests that the ISP can use UBP and a
menu of internet plans to separate users according to their internet usage and collect
additional revenue from heavy internet users, who value the internet service the most.
Second, we find no statistically significant effect on either cord cutting or adding TV
service. The relatively muted movement in either direction for TV subscriptions reveals
the potential difficulty in influencing consumers along this margin, which implies that
ISPs may have broader success with other aspects of steering and surplus capture.
Third, we find that UBP caused an 11% reduction in usage, on average, during the
treatment period. In both the treated and control markets, usage increased relative
to the pre-policy period, however the increase among treated households was smaller.
The households that reduced usage by the most, relative to the control markets, had

                                           4
relatively heavy pre-UBP usage and did not choose to purchase an increased usage
allowance. Treated households that upgraded their internet tier, by contrast, used
approximately the same amount of data as households not exposed to UBP. Both
these empirical findings suggest that the ISP's introduction of tiers, holding internet
content constant, may not lead to pressure for an expanded network and higher ISP
investment costs. Finally, our point estimates indicate that UBP led to consumers
increasing the video share of their internet usage. This suggests that households favor
streaming video over other types of internet content, and therefore reductions in OTTV
quality or its foreclosure would not be viewed favorably by consumers.
   These outcomes ­ upgraded internet tiers and reduced overall usage ­ represent an
effective reallocation of OTTV surplus from households to the ISP. This reallocation
confirms one of the main channels for incentives in our theoretical model: The ISP's
incentives to encourage new content and expand their networks may be stronger when
ISPs capture a greater share of total surplus from OTTV. Overall, these results suggest
that while steering consumers towards TV services is possible, it does not seem to be
profitable as long as the ISP has the ability to offer different tiers and UBP.
   We find that the introduction of UBP did not harm OTTV streaming services and
indeed some appear to have to have benefited. We find that Netflix subscriptions
increased when UBP was introduced. Similarly, we find an increase in subscriptions
for "linear" OTTV services such as Hulu and SlingTV. We also find that the share of
consumption devoted to video increases, although the effect is not statistically signifi-
cant. Overall, our findings suggest that UBP can simultaneously increase ISP revenue
through increased internet usage prices, while also stimulating the OTTV access and
usage that are necessary to increase overall surplus from OTTV. Of course, UBP's
impact to reduce overall usage implies that it must negatively affect some internet
content, but these effects do not fall on the video sites we highlight in this paper.


Related literature Our analysis relates to previous research on video programming
that has focused on traditional TV (Crawford et al. (2017), Crawford and Yurukoglu


                                           5
(2012), Crawford and Shum (2007), and Crawford and Shum (2015)). Relative to this
work, we look at the interaction between TV subscriptions and internet use in general,
and OTTV usage specifically.
       We follow Nevo et al. (2016), Malone et al. (2016), and Malone et al. (2014), who use
high-frequency data to study subscriber behavior on residential broadband networks.
These studies cannot separate streaming video activity from other internet usage,
and therefore cannot consider ISPs' steering incentives due to OTTV's role in the
interaction between internet and television services. Other studies of the demand for
and consumers' value from broadband services include Prince and Greenstein (2017),
Goetz (2016), Tudon (2018), Goolsbee and Klenow (2006), Dutz et al. (2009), Rosston
et al. (2013), Greenstein and McDevitt (2011), Goolsbee and Klenow (2006), Edell and
Varaiya (2002), Varian (2002), and Hitte and Tambe (2007).
       Relationships between ISPs and internet content providers are an active area for
public policy, especially concerning merger approval and net neutrality.3 These policy
issues converge with the issue of vertical mergers between ISPs and media companies,
which can affect ISPs' profits from various content sources and therefore induce steering
activity. The literature on these issues largely began with Wu (2003), who introduced
the term "net neutrality" and provides a summary of the issues. Lee and Wu (2009)
and Greenstein et al. (2016) discuss and review the literature on the topic. However,
most of the existing economic analysis of the topic is theoretical: Economides and
Hermalin (2012), Armstrong (2006), Bourreau et al. (2015), Choi et al. (2015), Choi
and Kim (2010), Economides and Tag (2012), Gans (2015), Economides and Tag
(2016), Reggiani and Valletti (2016), and Sidak (2006). Our empirical analysis on
steering incentives complements these theoretical studies by providing insight into
relevant elasticities for the debate.
       More generally, our model and empirical analysis also contribute to literatures
   3
    The FCC's 2015 Open Internet Order prevented ISPs from discriminating among various online
applications. This order limited ISPs' ability to reduce usage of video services from some third-party
providers. The FCC voted in 2017 to roll back the order, and future policy in this area continues to
be debated.



                                                  6
on firms' strategic efforts to steer and sort heterogeneous consumers across product
menus. Ho and Lee (2019), Liebman (2017), and Raval and Rosenbaum (2017) study
how insurers influence patients' choices across medical providers. Barwick et al. (2017)
examine conflicts of interest and steering by residential real-estate brokers. Crawford
et al. (2017) consider similar incentives in cable TV markets and estimate the value
to cable distributors of including vertically integrated versus non-integrated sports
networks in their channel bundles.
    The incentive to degrade product quality for discriminatory or steering purposes,
as is present in our model, is related to the classic work of Mussa and Rosen (1978),
which Crawford and Shum (2007) apply in the context of the telecommunications in-
dustry. In the bundling literature, Armstrong (2013) and Gentzkow (2007) study how
the consumption of one product in a bundle affects utility from other products, which
is similar to the relationship between OTTV and TV that we study. Chu et al. (2011)
and Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012) empirically explore how variations on bundling
and other pricing strategies can affect firms' profit and consumer welfare. Nonlinear-
pricing strategies similar to those we examine have been studied in broadband markets
(Economides and Hermalin (2015), and Lambrecht et al. (2007)), phone service con-
tracts (Miravete (2003), Grubb (2015), and Grubb and Osborne (2015)), and other
markets (Hagemann (2017), and McManus (2007)).



2     Data and Industry Background

Internet usage has grown steadily during recent years, largely driven by an increase in
streaming video. About 60M U.S. households (46%) used a streaming video service in
2018, up from 44M in 2016 (comScore (2018)). Cisco, a major telecommunications and
IT firm, estimates that 81% of North American internet usage was video during 2017,
and this share will grow to 85% by 2022 (Cisco (2018)). The emergence and popularity
of OTTV services coincides with a trend in consumers dropping their TV service and
instead consuming video through the internet, also known as"cord cutting." Between


                                           7
2014 and 2017 in the U.S., the number of consumers who cut the cord grew from 3.1M
to 14.1M (MarketWatch (2018)). We show that households that drop their TV service
increase their internet usage (and similarly households that add TV service decrease
their internet usage). We demonstrate the revenue implications of this cord-cutting
behavior to motivate the model we present in the next section, which allows us to
study ISPs' incentives when faced with this consumer behavior.


2.1       Data

The data we use come from a North American ISP.4 Our sample is drawn from a
handful of markets during a recent period about a year long, and it is nationally rep-
resentative in terms of demographics, service offerings, and usage patterns. During
our sample period, we observe roughly 350,000 consumers' billing information, sub-
scriptions, and internet usage. To preserve customer anonymity, we do not observe
demographic information for individual households.
       Like most North American ISPs, this ISP offers internet and TV services via mixed
bundling, giving discounts off stand-alone prices when consumers subscribe to both
services.5 Like other ISPs at the time, the average price difference (across internet
tiers) between the bundle and internet-only subscriptions is about $100. 30% of the
ISP customers have internet-only subscriptions, and the remaining 70% subscribe to an
internet-TV bundle; no ISP customers in our data subscribe to TV alone. The ISP also
offers tiers of internet service differentiated by speed and, as we discuss below, usage
allowance in some cases. The typical price difference between adjacent internet tiers
is about $15. In each market we observe, the ISP is the sole provider of high-speed,
high-capacity internet service.6
   4
     Our agreement with the ISP prevents us from identifying the firm or any details that could be
used to infer its identity. This includes the specific markets served, the exact dates and details of the
implementation of UBP, as well as detailed characteristics of the ISP's product offerings.
   5
     The ISP also offers telephone service, which about 40% of its customers subscribe to. We do not
use the telephone service information in this paper.
   6
     Despite the rapid usage growth within our sample, we see little evidence that congestion affected
internet use. Packet loss, which is a quality disruption often caused by congestion, averaged less
than 0.01% during peak hours in our sample. See Malone et al. (2016) for a study of the impact of



                                                   8
   An important feature of our data is the introduction of UBP in a subset of markets
partway through the sample period. We observe data from one treated market and
five control markets. The UBP is implemented through a menu of service tiers that
consumers can choose from, where each tier is a three-part tariff. Tiers vary in their
monthly usage allowance in gigabytes (GBs). Usage up to this allowance is fully
covered by the monthly subscription charge, but if a household exceeds its allowance,
it is charged a fee which is less than the monthly price difference to move to a higher
tier. During UBP, we observe 8% of households across all markets exceed the usage
allowance associated with their tier, as it is applied under UBP.
   For each household in the sample, we observe download and upload volume for
each hour, although for much of the analysis we aggregate usage to the daily level.
Households in the sample use a mean (median) of 4.7GB (1.4GB) of internet data
per day. Internet usage differs substantially across households. Average usage in
the highest-priced (and highest-speed) tier is nearly seven times as in the lowest-
priced tier. Within-tier usage dispersion is also substantial; coefficients of variation
range from 1.67 to 2.05 across tiers. Across combinations of TV and internet service,
internet-only subscribers have mean (median) internet usage 61% (137%) greater than
bundle subscribers. Overall, internet usage increased at a 44% annualized rate during
our sample period. The growth rates were largest, on average, among consumers who
began the sample at lower usage levels, but the increase in total usage volume is driven
more by initially high-usage households.
   Within a household's total usage, we observe the application (e.g., Netflix) or
protocol (e.g., File Transfer Protocol or FTP) generating each byte used by a consumer,
but not the specific content (e.g., particular movie title or website).


2.2    OTTV Usage

During 2017, per-household U.S. average daily use of online video was 1 hour and
40 minutes (comScore (2017)). Globally, online video usage grew by 32% per year
congestion on broadband networks.

                                            9
from 2013-2018 (Zenith (2019)). This growth coincides with the emergence and rapid
growth of several prominent firms that offer OTTV services. In 2014 about 40% of
US households subscribed to a streaming service such as Netflix (40M subscribers),
Amazon Prime (14.5M), or Hulu (7M) (Nielsen (2015)). By 2018, Netflix grew to 60M
U.S. subscribers, Amazon to 26M, and Hulu to 27M (eMarketer (2019)).
   These trends are reflected in our data. To see this, we divide usage into five major
categories: Browsing, Gaming, Music, Video, and Other. Video accounts for 58.5% of
all usage, and browsing accounts for another 30.5%. Some browsing activity includes
watching videos within web pages, as is possible on Facebook and other popular web
sites. The remaining share is divided approximately equally across the other categories.
In Table 1, we provide a breakdown of OTTV streaming across specific streaming video
applications (HBO, Hulu, Neflix, SlingTV, and YouTube), separately for households
who purchase only internet access (top panel) and those who purchase an internet-TV
bundle (bottom panel). We classify households as active users of an application at the
monthly level, based on whether their application usage is 3GB or greater. Internet-
only households are more likely to use each application, and usage intensity of each
application is greater as well.
   YouTube's free content is the most widely-accessed video application by households
in our sample. Netflix, which offers a variety of original programming along with a
library of previously distributed movies and television programs, is the most popular
subscription service. HBO Go has a content structure similar to Netflix, while Hulu
emphasizes opportunities to stream-on-demand TV shows currently airing on network
TV. Other streaming services like SlingTV offer live TV over the internet.
   [TABLE 1 HERE]


2.3    Cord Cutting

The emergence and popularity of OTTV services coincides with a trend in cord cutting.
In this sub-section we provide a detailed description of cord cutters' changes in internet



                                           10
usage.
       In Figure 1 Panel (a) we plot the shift in average internet usage by cord-cutting
households, and, for comparison, we also plot the average usage of consumers who
hold on to their TV subscriptions. The line labeled as "Cord-cutters" is the average
per-household usage on each day of the 16-week window centered around the date of
subscription change. For comparison, we construct a similar average for all households
that did not cut the cord. To construct this average, we calculate the average for each
calendar date and then average across the dates to match the windows presented for the
cord cutters. We supplement the smooth curves with dashed lines that represent the
average levels of internet usage in the weeks before and after cord cutting. Together,
these numbers show that the average (eventual) cord cutter's internet usage begins
approximately 31% higher than other subscribers, and increases by 23% after cutting
the cord (5.2 GB/day to 6.3 GB/day).7 Thus, the individuals who drop TV in our
sample tend to be heavier internet users.
       [FIGURE 1 HERE]
       We explore the nature of cord cutters' changing internet usage by decomposing the
23% increase in traffic across types of applications. In Figure 1 Panel (b) we provide
the change in usage across Browsing, Gaming, Music, Video Streaming, and Other
applications. The online activities that increase the most (online video and webpage
browsing) provide a fairly similar experience to watching TV. (Some online video
delivered through websites, e.g. video on Facebook, appears in our data as browsing
rather than video streaming.) Other entertainment applications (Gaming and Music)
have increases in usage after cord cutting, as do cloud-based backup services (e.g.
Dropbox).
       Some changes in Figure 1 Panel (b) are due to increased subscriptions and increased
usage of third-party OTTV services. Netflix, Hulu, and SlingTV usage increase by
   7
    Our 23% estimate of cord cutting's impact is likely to be conservative. The data suggest that
many consumers "prepare" to drop their TV subscriptions by adding and experimenting with online
video services during the weeks before cutting the cord. Cord cutters' increased usage begins prior
to the subscription change date, and consumers who do not alter their subscriptions do not have a
corresponding usage change.


                                                11
36%, 90%, and 538% among households who cut the cord.
    [FIGURE 2 HERE]
    Consumers who cut the cord sacrifice a portion of their available video entertain-
ment, and in exchange they pay less for the video services they receive. We demon-
strate this change in payments by focusing on consumers who begin the sample with
a bundle subscription and, at some point, drop TV but remain internet customers.
Average payments from these consumers to the ISP fall by about 50%, from about
$130 to roughly $70. We also calculate estimated total out-of-pocket spending by
consumers to the ISP plus all subscription services using 2015 prices. In Figure 2
we plot the densities of consumers' total payments before and after cutting the cord.
Average total spending per customer drops by half when the consumer drops a TV
subscription. The variation around each distribution's mode is due to differences in
consumers' subscription details (i.e., channel packages and internet tiers) and third-
party OTTV subscriptions. The revenue reduction is accompanied by an increase in
average internet usage, which requires greater data transmission and therefore greater
network costs.
    The usage, revenue, and cost impacts of cord cutting may be reversed, of course, if
the ISP can induce an internet-only subscriber to switch to the bundle. In Appendix
Figure A1 we show that households who add TV subscriptions (i.e., "attach the cord")
reduce their internet usage by about 12% within two weeks. This reduction is approx-
imately half the magnitude and opposite in sign of cord cutting's impact on usage.
We also document in Appendix Figure A1 that OTTV usage falls substantially after
a household subscribes to TV.



3     A Simple Model

In this section we introduce a model that allows us to study the trade-offs faced by
the ISP in pricing (and offering) internet and TV services. To do so, we augment the
standard bundling model in a few ways. First, we allow consumers to make a usage


                                          12
decision in addition to the subscription decision, so that we capture both intensive and
extensive margin choices. Second, we allow consumers with internet subscriptions to
access some video content as OTTV. These extensions allow us to explore a range of
pricing strategies for the ISP, from simple bundle pricing over subscriptions to more
sophisticated nonlinear prices that address consumers' extensive-margin choices.
   We use our model to demonstrate that improvements in OTTV increase the value
of the ISP's internet product, but also increase the ISP's usage-related costs while re-
ducing demand for the ISP's TV service, both as a standalone product and in bundles.
We use a simple framework and numerical simulations to show that, with bundle pric-
ing only, the ISP steers consumers away from OTTV usage because the firm is hurt by
improvements in streaming video. By contrast, when the firm is able to cap internet
usage or offer a variety of internet usage tiers, the ISP can benefit from OTTV's avail-
ability. The impact of OTTV on the ISP creates incentives for the firm to expand or
restrict third-party firms' video content, which is central to the net neutrality debate.


3.1    The Setup

Consider a market in which an ISP offers consumers access to two services: non-video
internet (1) and video entertainment (2). An individual consumer's taste for "units"
(e.g. hours) of services 1 and 2, relative to the outside option, is given by v = (v1 , v2 ).
We normalize the consumer population to one and assume that consumers' tastes are
distributed independently and uniformly on [0, 1] × [0, 1].
   To access the services, the ISP offers consumers subscription plans. We begin by
assuming that the ISP offers three plans: broadband internet access (i), TV (t), and
a bundle (b) that includes both i and t. The firm's mixed bundling pricing strategy
includes prices for the stand-alone plans (pi and pt ) and a price for the bundle (pb ).
A consumer can subscribe to one of the firm's three plans, {i, t, b}, or an outside
option denoted by 0 that provides utility normalized to zero. To capture the presence
of OTTV, we assume that consumers can access some fraction,   [0, 1), of the



                                             13
video content (service 2) through an internet-only plan (i). We assume that OTTV
is available at no additional expense to the consumer. We initially treat  as a given,
but then explore the ISP's incentives to impact it. The restriction  < 1 has several
possible interpretations, including limited available OTTV content and diminished
video quality, which could be due to transmission (e.g. congestion and buffering) or
hardware limitations.


Utility
       An individual consumer receives utility from consuming q1 units of service 1 and
q2 units of service 2. The consumer decides on consumption based on his tastes (v )
and subscription plan. The quantity choice for video services, q2 , can include both
                 t              i              i    t
traditional TV, q2 , and OTTV, q2 , with q2 = q2 + q2 . For simplicity, we assume that
a consumer has marginal utility equal to one for a service's units up to a satiation
level equal to the taste parameter v , and then marginal utility is zero for any greater
quantity.8 For example, a consumer with taste v2 and a TV-only subscription consumes
       t
q 2 = q2 = v2 units of video entertainment through his TV and receives surplus of v2
from this activity. When the consumer uses streaming video, his marginal utility
from video hours remains equal to one up to v2 , where it falls to zero. This can
be viewed as a scenario where a consumer enjoys v2 distinct shows available on TV,
but only the fraction  of the shows are available through OTTV. To simplify the
consumption choices of bundle subscribers, we assume that TV subscribers receive all
                                      t           i
video entertainment through TV, with q2 = v2 and q2 = 0.9
       Putting this all together, subscribers in internet-only plans receive utility of Ui =
v1 + v2 - pi , where the first and second terms capture utility (and quantities) from
consuming non-video internet and OTTV applications, respectively. A subscription
                                                       t
to the TV service, t, results in video consumption of q2 = v2 , zero non-video internet
   8
      This structure may arise if conventional TV carries v2 shows that each yield utility of one, while
all other shows yield a utility of zero.
    9
      This assumption represents the best-case/least-cost outcome for the ISP and strengthens incen-
tives to steer consumers to the bundle, but the assumption does not qualitatively change any of the
model's predictions.



                                                  14
usage given the lack of access, and net utility equal to Ut = v2 - pt . Bundle subscribers
consume quantities of video and non-video internet up to their satiation levels and
receive utility equal to Ub = v1 + v2 - pb . Finally, if the consumer selects the outside
option, 0, quantities are zero for both services and utility is zero.


The ISP Profits and Costs
       The ISP's profit from serving the market depends on the number of subscribers to
each plan, the quantities they select, and the costs of providing these services. For
simplicity, we assume that the ISP's costs depend only on the quantity of internet
content it transmits; all other costs are zero. This means that we abstract-away from
costs such as affiliate or retransmission fees paid to content firms for individual TV
subscribers, or the fixed costs of operating the ISP's network.10
       The ISP's internet-related costs increase with the bytes transmitted through its
network and therefore are increasing in total usage, which is a function of the number
of users and usage (and usage type) by each user. These costs capture the ISP's need
to maintain a network that must grow with total usage to avoid congestion, content
interruptions, or slowdowns during times of high total usage. We assume that the
firm's transmission costs are given by a parameter,  , times the gigabytes, g , required
                                   i
to transmit the quantities q1 and q2 . We assume that one unit of non-video internet
content requires the transmission of one gigabyte, so q1 = g . We further assume that
                              i
consumption of video content q2 requires g gigabytes, with  > 1. This captures the
greater bandwidth and immediacy needs to transmit video. Consumers' preferences
and their choices, given the firm's prices, imply a mapping from tastes to quantities
of internet usage, so we write a consumer's internet usage as a function of v . Without
restrictions on usage, an internet-only subscriber uses gi (v ) = v1 + v2 internet units,
while a bundle subscriber uses gb (v ) = v1 .
       Combining consumers' choices with the firm's cost structure, the ISP's profit func-
tion is:
  10
    Our model's qualitative results would not change if we were to include positive per-subscriber
costs for TV service. See additional discussion below.


                                               15
              =            pt dv +      [pi - gi (v )] dv +      [pb - gb (v )] dv.
                    v St         v Si                     v Sb


The terms St , Si , and Sb are the sets of consumers who choose internet, TV, and the
bundle, respectively.


3.2    Consumer Choice

We now turn to the choices consumers make in this setup. In Panel (a) of Figure 3
we present choices different consumers make for a fixed set of prices. When video can
be consumed only through TV (i.e.,  = 0), consumers in the areas labeled `0' and `I'
select the outside option, and those in areas `b' and `II' select the bundle. Consumers
in areas i and t select the stand-alone internet and TV subscription plans. The split is
intuitive: consumers with low valuations of both products choose the outside option.
Consumers with high valuations for both products choose the bundle, and consumers
with high valuation for one service and not the other choose the plan with just one
service. The exact boundaries between the different choices depend on the prices of
the various options.
   [FIGURE 3 HERE]
   We next consider the effect of OTTV becoming more attractive (i.e., the effect of
an increase in  ) on choices. In Panel (a) we show the effect of  increasing to 0.7,
holding prices fixed at the optimal level for  = 0 and  = 0.2. Two types of consumers
change their choices. First, some consumers (in area I) who did not purchase, despite
moderately high valuation for internet or video, will now subscribe to i because it
became more attractive. These new consumers can increase the ISP's profit and are
one reason the ISP has an incentive to encourage OTTV. Second, some consumers (in
area II) decide to "cut the cord." These consumers initially choose a bundle, but have
relatively low video entertainment tastes among bundle subscribers. As  increases,
they prefer stand-alone internet service because they can consume video over-the-top
using the internet service. The cord cutting by these consumers diminishes the ISP's


                                               16
revenue, since the bundle price is higher than the internet-only price, and increases
the ISP's costs, since supplying video over the internet is costly to the ISP.11
       These two groups of consumers have opposite effects on the ISP profits, and repre-
sent the basic trade-off the ISP faces: stronger OTTV makes the internet service more
valuable but also competes with the TV service. In principle, which effect dominates
depends on, among other things, the distribution of tastes. In Panel (b) of Figure
3 we show the effect when tastes are uniformly distributed. We plot market shares
for each plan at different values of  , holding prices fixed. The share of internet-only
plans, i, grows monotonically in  , and this largely comes from a reduction in the
bundle market share, which is completely eliminated around  = 0.85. When OTTV
is sufficiently beneficial, some consumers even convert their t subscriptions to i, as i
offers services very similar to the original bundle.
       Under our distributional and cost assumptions, ISP profits fall when OTTV im-
proves, holding prices fixed. Many consumers "cut the cord" and trade a more ex-
pensive subscription for one with a lower price. This reduces the ISP revenue and
increases its costs from video usage previously delivered at no marginal cost. The
modest increase in total subscriptions is not enough to make up for the decrease in
profit from reduced bundle subscriptions.


3.3       ISP Pricing Strategies

In the previous section we showed that an improvement in OTTV can lead to "cord
cutting" and a loss in ISP profits, holding prices fixed. Of course, in equilibrium the
ISP can and will respond. In this section we study some possible responses, including
changing the relative prices of products, limits on internet usage, and tiered pricing
of internet usage. Our discussion in this section takes  as fixed, but in the following
section we consider the ISP's incentive to increase or decrease  , which it could do by
promoting or restricting access to OTTV.
  11
    The ISP will lose profit on these consumers even with a positive cost per TV subscriber, as long
there is a positive margin on the TV part of the bundle (specifically, the difference between the bundle
price and the internet-only price is greater than the per-TV subscriber cost).

                                                  17
Subscription Prices and Bundle Discounts
       In Figure 4 we illustrate the effects of allowing the ISP to set profit-maximizing
bundling prices for different values of  . In Panel (a) we display the prices, while in
Panel (b) we present the market shares of t, i, and b given these prices. By comparing
Figures 3 and 4, we can see clearly the steering effect prices can have. Greater values
of  drive the ISP to set greater values of pi and greater bundle discounts, i.e. the
difference between pb and pi + pt . By increasing the price of the internet-only product,
the ISP can push back and reverse the effect of an increase in  on cord cutting. As
we show in Panel (b) of Figure 4, with optimal mixed bundling prices the share of
the internet-only plan actually decreases. The steering effects are especially strong for
 > 0.8, when the optimal pricing sets pb = pi , and therefore the share of internet-only
subscriptions goes to zero.12 With the pricing instruments available in this case, the
cost impact of  is greater than ISP's opportunity to profit from the increased value
of internet-only subscription plans, so it effectively shuts down this plan.
       [FIGURE 4 HERE]
       In the particular setting we evaluate above, we find that optimizing prices mitigates
the decline in profits but does not eliminate it completely. We discuss below the impact
of this pricing strategy and others on ISP profit.


Usage Limits
       As we showed in the discussion above, firms may find it optimal to set prices such
that the internet-only product is basically eliminated. However, if firms are permitted
to use more sophisticated strategies, their incentives to steer consumers into the bundle
may be reduced. One possible strategy is to charge consumers an access or subscription
fee in return for a usage allowance which puts a strict cap on internet usage. This is a
simplified version of the three-part tariff we see in our data, where the consumer pays
an overage charge when he exceeds the allowance. With our assumption of marginal
  12
    Under our assumption that bundle subscribers receive all of their video entertainment via the
TV subscription, the elimination of i also eliminates OTTV usage. In a more realistic model, bundle
subscribers would consume video through both TV and the internet, and OTTV consumption would
not be eliminated.


                                                18
utility equal to either one or zero, depending on the quantity consumed, an optimally-
set overage charge is equal to one, and ISP's only interesting strategic choice is the
usage allowance.
   Let  denote the usage allowance in GBs. The effect of the allowance is straight-
forward: as long as it is set low enough, the allowance will truncate the usage of any
consumer with v1 > , regardless of whether they purchase a bundle or the internet-
only plan. This allows the ISP to keep cost down even as  increases; namely, the
ISP can limit how much consumers can increase their use of streaming video when 
improves.
   In Figure 5 we illustrate the consequences of allowing the ISP to set . In Panel
(a) we illustrate optimal prices and allowances for a range of  values, and in Panel (b)
we present the resulting market shares. The allowance has a significant impact on the
ISP's choices of subscription plan prices and therefore market shares. The internet and
bundle prices both increase gradually with  , and internet-only subscriptions eventually
overtake the bundle as the most popular option. Overall, the ISP serves a greater share
of the full consumer population as  rises. The usage cap, which is just above pi for
low values of  , increases more quickly with  than pi , which effectively loosens the
ISP's restrictions on internet usage as streaming video improves. (Some i subscribers
with large v1 and small v2 use no OTTV, while others consume both internet services
and streaming video.) Thus, introducing the allowance can permit the ISP to balance
providing access to more consumers while also steering customers with greater video
demand toward the bundle, where they can receive video at lower cost to the ISP. A
usage cap can actually lead the ISP to permit more internet and OTTV usage than it
would if usage caps were prohibited, because the cap allows the ISP to influence usage
more selectively.
   [FIGURE 5 HERE]


Usage Tiers
   In addition to using base prices (pt , pi , pb ) and allowances () to steer consumers


                                          19
among packages, ISPs also often separate their internet services into tiers that vary in
allowances, overage prices, or connectivity speeds. We consider the effect of the ISP
introducing a "low-usage" internet tier with a usage allowance  and a "high-usage"
tier with no usage limit. Consumers can select one of these internet tiers alone or as
part of a bundle with conventional TV. For simplicity, and consistent with industry
practice, we assume that the difference (i.e. discount) between the bundle price and
the sum of TV and internet prices is the same regardless of which tier a consumer
chooses.
   When the ISP introduces tiers and allowances to a setting which had neither, sev-
eral types of consumers are affected in distinct ways. First, some consumers who had
internet-only subscriptions will stay with this type of plan, with consumers separating
between capped and uncapped tiers based on their valuations of internet content (in-
cluding OTTV). Second, some internet-only consumers with strong video tastes will
switch to a bundle plan, with the internet tier depending on their value of v1 . Finally
among initial i subscribers, some will cancel their subscriptions completely because
their relatively strong taste for video entertainment and weak taste for non-video in-
ternet means that capped internet and bundle subscriptions are worth less than the
outside option. Turning to consumers who previously choose a bundle, some with
strong internet tastes will opt for the unlimited usage option so that they can con-
sume more content. In the Appendix we provide additional discussion and graphical
illustration of these effects.
   [FIGURE 6 HERE]
   Next, we consider how the ISP would set prices and tiers for different values of  .
In Panel (a) of Figure 6, we provide the ISP's optimal prices and cap values, and in
Panel (b) of Figure 6, we show the resulting market shares. In this setting, the ISP
has several levers for steering consumers' choices, extracting rents, and reducing costs,
and as a consequence the ISP's strategy varies qualitatively with  . For  values less
than about 0.5, the ISP allows prices to increase with  so that it captures some of
the additional value available to consumers through OTTV. (The high-usage bundle's

                                           20
share falls in  because video usage opportunities remain constant for TV subscribers.)
For relatively high values of  , the ISP's strategy changes, and it raises the high-usage
internet price substantially to shrink this plan's market share. When  is large, the
cost of offering unlimited internet usage is too great relative to the premium the ISP
can charge consumers for the plan. As the ISP reduces the high-usage internet tier, it
raises the low-usage tier's allowance, which accommodates more OTTV usage within
this tier. The ISP benefits, on the whole, from steering consumers into the low-usage
internet tier where it can recover value from OTTV with an increased price, while
also limiting the usage of inframarginal consumers whose OTTV usage choices, if
unchecked, would be costly for the ISP.


3.4    ISP Incentives to Promote or Restrict OTTV

We now explore the ISP's direct incentives to either promote or restrict the quality of
OTTV by altering  . For example, the ISP Comcast's Xfinity X1 platform includes
one-touch access to Netflix through its remote control. In our analysis of the three
pricing strategies discussed above­bundle pricing, usage limits, and usage tiers­the
ISP's approach to OTTV varies substantially. With bundle pricing, OTTV usage
first grows with  and then falls as the ISP effectively eliminates its internet-only
subscriptions. With usage limits and tiers, by contrast, the ISP allows OTTV usage
to grow with  within significant internet-only market shares. This divergence in
OTTV usage occurs because the more sophisticated pricing strategies allow the ISP to
capture some of the value generated by OTTV while limiting its effects on the ISP's
costs and TV demand. The same logic holds in the results below.
   To demonstrate these effects, we plot in Figure 7 the ISP profits for different pricing
strategies and different values of  . These profits correspond to the prices and market
shares presented in Figures 4, 5 and 6. As expected, Figure 7 shows that the firm's
profit is weakly greater for any  when it has more instruments in designing a pricing
plan. More importantly, the strategies' profit levels vary in whether they increase or



                                           21
decrease in  . The variation in the slope across strategies comes from differences in
the ISP's ability to extract rents versus avoid additional costs when OTTV's quality
improves.
   [FIGURE 7 HERE]
   For the simplest pricing strategy (bundle pricing), Figure 7 shows that the ISP's
profits decrease mildly in  . If the firm can set a usage cap, by contrast, its profit
increases in . With the cap, the ISP receives the revenue benefits of increased prices
(due to increased value to consumers) from consumers who would use a low or moderate
amount of OTTV even without a cap, plus it can limit the OTTV-related costs of
internet-only consumers who would use larger quantities of streaming video without
a cap. Finally, when the ISP can combine a cap and tiers, its profit may not be
monotone in . In the example illustrated in Figure 7, the change in profit's slope
coincides with the ISP's qualitative change in pricing strategy. When  is zero, the
ISP benefits strongly from the opportunity to segment consumers by their taste for
non-video internet, but once  increases there are additional costs from uncapped
internet-only subscriptions. These costs reduce ISP profit until the firm (largely) turns
to steering its internet-only consumers into capped subscriptions, where the ISP's price
and profit rise as OTTV improves.
   The differences in profit slopes and levels across  values come from the firm's
opportunity to balance a complex set of trade-offs regarding consumer choices. Our
model shows that, even in a simple framework, an ISP's policies toward OTTV will
depend on the current quality of streaming video and what pricing tools ISPs may
use. ISPs restricted from setting overage charges or creating tiered service might
often benefit from stifling OTTV access, while ISPs with more pricing tools may
encourage OTTV usage. More generally, our model demonstrates that prices and plans
offered to consumers are a key component of the net neutrality debate; restrictions and
promotion of third-party internet content do not just happen at the level of ISP-to-firm
negotiations upstream.



                                           22
4     Lessons from the Introduction of UBP

The theoretical model in the previous section highlights the ISP's trade-offs when
faced with new streaming services and improvement in OTTV quality. If the ISP uses
prices to steer consumers toward its own TV services, it gives up the opportunity to
capture surplus from the improvement in OTTV. On the other hand, if the ISP allows
consumers to freely use OTTV, demand for internet subscriptions will increase but the
ISP's costs increase as well. Our theoretical model shows that the ISP's overall profits
from OTTV, and therefore whether it prefers to encourage or discourage streaming
video, depend on consumers' preferences and the ISP's ability to recover some of the
value generated by OTTV.
    In this section, we utilize a change in internet usage pricing to generate evidence
that informs the theoretical discussion. As we described in Section 2, we observe
data from one market where the ISP introduced UBP­a three-part tariff on internet
usage. We use this introduction of UBP to learn about the willingness of consumers
to substitute along various dimensions. This is informative about the ISP's ability to
steer consumers' choices and capture surplus from internet usage, and therefore the
ISP's incentives to restrict or promote OTTV.
    After introducing the UBP policy in section 4.1, we answer the following questions
in section 4.2: Do consumers upgrade their internet tiers? Do they add or drop TV
service? Do they reduce internet usage in general and OTTV specifically? Do these
responses vary between heavy and light users? In section 4.3 we consider the implica-
tions of the answers to these questions for ISPs and third-party OTTV providers.


4.1    The Introduction of UBP

We observe the introduction of UBP in a "treated" market plus contemporaneous
data from "control" markets where the introduction did not happen during the sample
period. The ISP's introduction of UBP came in two phases. The ISP announced that
UBP would be implemented starting on a specified date, and provided households


                                          23
with information about how their monthly usage compared to the data allowance
within their current internet tier. During this phase, which we call the "announcement
period," households were not billed if their usage exceeded their tier's allowance. In
the next phase, which we call the "treatment period," the ISP assessed overage charges
on households that exceeded their allowances. We observe several months of activity (a
"pre-policy period"), immediately prior to the announcement and treatment periods,
which each last a few months.
   During the pre-policy period the treated and control markets were subject to the
same pricing policies by the ISP. Other than the introduction of UBP, the ISP's internet
tiers were identical across markets in our sample. To our knowledge, the treated
market we observe was chosen "randomly" by the ISP as a trial setting, before UBP
was introduced more broadly. Across all markets we observe, competitors' subscription
offerings did not change meaningfully during the sample period, including in response
to the UBP policy's introduction. Satellite TV was available in each market, as was
internet service via DSL lines. During our sample period in the markets we study,
the ISP offered internet service on a substantially higher-speed and higher-capacity
network than the alternatives.
   To evaluate the comparability of treated and control markets for the empirical
analysis described below, we examine pre-policy trends for a collection of variables
that are central to the analysis that follows. Specifically, we focus on TV subscription
and internet tier transitions, overall internet usage, and the shares of usage devoted
to video and prominent OTTV services, and frequency of engagement with OTTV
services. For these variables, we test whether there are differences in propensity to
subscribe to a service, or different pre-policy trends in the treated market compared
to the control markets. The results are presented in the appendix. We generally find
no meaningful economic differences between the sets of markets.




                                          24
4.2       Households' Responses to the Introduction of UBP

In this subsection we analyze households' responses to the introduction of UBP along
various dimensions of choice.


4.2.1      The Impact on Choice of ISP Services

We start our analysis by studying UBP's impact on the ISP services that households
choose. Specifically, we focus on the choice of internet tier and whether to purchase
TV access. We compare the changes in the choices of households in the treated market,
where UBP was introduced, to changes in the control markets.
       We utilize a Probit model to capture the probability that a household h changes a
subscription decision, denoted by yh = 1. We study various decisions, and in all cases
we ask whether the household changed the service between the end of the pre-policy
period and the end of the sample period. In other words, an observation is a household
and the dependent variable is equal to one if a household made the decision studied,
regardless of whether this occurred during the announcement or treatment periods.
Formally, the model is given by:




          P r(yh = 1) = (0 + T reatmenth × (1 +              ShareNh × 2,N ) + Xh ),         (1)
                                                         N


where  is the CDF of the standard normal distribution. T reatmenth is an indicator
variable equal to 1 if household h resides in a market where the ISP introduced internet
usage prices. ShareNh is a dummy variable equal to 1 if pre-policy household h usage
was in range N , where N is below 50%, between 50% and 100%, or above 100%
of household h internet tier's treatment-period allowance.13 The ShareNh variables
capture the households' likelihood of receiving an overage charge due to usage beyond
  13
    Across all households, 80.5% have a usage share less than 50% of the allowance, 15.1% have
usage between 50% and 100%, and 4.3% have pre-policy usage greater than 100% of the eventual
allowance. Among households that subscribe to Netflix or a linear OTTV service during the pre-
policy period, the proportions of households in the same usage share categories are 71.4%, 22.0%,
and 6.6%, respectively.



                                               25
the tier allowance. Finally, all specifications include controls in Xj for households' pre-
policy internet usage levels divided into deciles, their pre-policy internet usage growth
interacted with usage deciles, and their initial ISP and OTTV subscriptions.
       In Table 2 we report the marginal effects from estimates of equation (1). In columns
(1) and (2) we ask whether a household upgraded the internet service tier after the
UBP policy was introduced. The estimation sample includes all observed households
except those already in the top tier at the end of the pre-policy period. The upgrading
decision directly informs whether an ISP can induce internet users, in general, and
heavy users in particular, to pay tier-upgrading fees, in which case the ISP may have
less incentive to reduce access to OTTV. In the raw data we see that (between the
end of the pre-policy period and the end of the sample) 7.9% of households in the
treated market upgraded their internet tier compared to 4.0% in the control markets
(p < 0.01). In column (1) we show that this difference persists once we control for
observable differences across households: households in the treated market are 3.0
percentage points more likely to upgrade. This difference implies a 0.3% increase in
ISP revenue from tier upgrades alone.
       In column (2) we ask whether there is heterogeneity in the effect. The theoretical
prediction, in Section 3, suggests that usage prices induce more tier-upgrading activity
by households who are heavier users. The estimates are consistent with this prediction;
households' tier upgrading increases in their average pre-policy usage. Households who
use less than 50% of their allowance in the pre-policy period are about 1.6 percentage
points more likely to upgrade their tier, while households with usage shares between
50% and 100% upgrade 5.3 percentage points more frequently, and households with
usage shares above 100% upgrade 11.2 percentage points more frequently.14
       [TABLE 2 HERE]
       In columns (3) and (4) we study the decision to downgrade the service tier. We
study this choice among all households except those in the lowest tier at the end of the
  14
    In additional unreported analysis, we investigate whether upgrade probabilities vary significantly
for Netflix or linear OTTV subscribers. They generally are not.



                                                 26
pre-policy period. In the data, 2.9% of households in the treated market downgraded
their service, compared with 2.6% in the control markets. This result is unchanged
once we control for cross-market observable differences, in column (3). We find that
UBP generates a 0.2 percentage point increase in downgrades, which implies about
0.02% less subscription revenue for the ISP. In column (4) we show that the house-
holds most likely to downgrade used relatively low shares of their tier allowances. For
these households, the introduction of UBP may have increased awareness that a lower
internet tier would accommodate their likely amount of usage.
   Next, we turn to the impact of internet usage prices on households' TV subscription
choices. In columns (5) and (6) we analyze whether the introduction of UBP was
successful in reversing cord cutting by asking if it steered internet-only households
into the TV-internet bundle. The relevant sample is the households who did not have
a TV subscription at the end of the pre-policy period. We see in the data that 4.1%
of households in the treated market add TV, compared to 3.7% of households in the
control markets (p = 0.10). Once we control for differences across household, in column
(5), we estimate that treated households are 0.3 percentage points more likely to add
TV subscriptions; this estimate is not statistically significant. This modest change
to TV subscriptions, which increases the treated market's revenue by about 0.05%,
may be due to the relatively high price of adding TV (about $100) compared to the
household monitoring its internet usage and paying for a tier upgrade or occasional
overage fee. As we show in column (6), there are no values of ShareNh for which there
is a significant difference between the treated and control markets.
   We generally find similar results for cord cutting, focusing on households that ended
the pre-policy period with a TV subscription. In both the treated and control markets,
2.6% of households cut the cord. As we show in column (7), the difference remains
close to zero when we control for observable differences across households. We report
similar results in column (8), which allows for potentially heterogeneous treatment
effects across internet usage intensity. Treated households with usage shares between
50% and 100% are slightly more likely to drop TV, but we find a similar shift away

                                          27
from cord-cutting by treated households in the highest usage group.


4.2.2   The Impact on Internet Usage

Next we study how the introduction of UBP impacted internet usage. To do so, we
estimate the following model:


          log (qh,t ) =0 + T reatmenth,t × (1 +       ShareNh × 2,N ) + Xht
                                                  N                                 (2)
                     +  T rendh,t + h +   h,t ,


where the dependent variable is the logarithm of household h internet usage in month t.
T reatmenth,t is a dummy variables equal to 1 if h was in the treated market and t was
during the treatment period. As in the analysis in the previous sub-section, we interact
T reatmenth,t with ShareN indicators. The vector Xh,t includes the dummy variable
Announceh,t , which is defined similarly to T reatmenth,t but for the announcement
period, plus the interaction of Announceh,t with ShareN indicators. We also allow for
household fixed effects (h ) and cubic time trends that vary with deciles of pre-policy
internet usage.
   We report the estimation results in Table 3. In columns (1) and (2), we estimate
the model using data from all households. In column (1), we find that UBP caused
an 11% reduction in usage during the treatment period. In both the treated market
and the control markets usage increased relative to the pre-policy period, however the
increase in the control markets was smaller. In column (2) we allow the effect to vary
with the pre-policy usage of the household. We find that the reduction in usage is
significant for both light and heavy users, but the reduction is greater for heavy users
within a tier. Households in the two lowest usage categories reduced usage by about
10%, while households with usage shares above 100% made usage reductions nearly
twice as large.
   [TABLE 3 HERE]
   To explore UBP's impact further, we present separately, in columns (3)-(6), the


                                          28
effects for households who upgraded their tier and those who did not. Incentives to
reduce usage are different between the two groups. We find that households who
remained in their original tiers reduced usage by 12.1%, while those who upgraded
reduced usage by only 4.4%, which is not statistically significant. This difference in
usage responses is consistent with our theoretical model, and it highlights an important
channel for usage prices to increase ISP profits. Households have the option to reduce
usage (thereby reducing costs) while keeping subscription payments fixed, or they can
upgrade and continue their previous usage habits while allowing the ISP to capture
a greater share of the surplus. The differences are even larger when we allow the
treatment's impact to vary with the pre-policy usage.15 We find that households who
did not upgrade have larger reductions in internet usage for each value in ShareN ,
including a 33% reduction in usage by households in the highest category.
       In Table 4 we report estimates that explore the source of the reduction in usage.
We do so by estimating a version of equation (2) where we regress the monthly share
of household's h internet usage that is video in month t on the T reatmenth,t and
T reatmenth,t × ShareN interactions. We include the same collection of control vari-
ables as in equation (2), including household-level fixed effects. This sample includes
fewer observations than Table 3 because we do not have complete data on linear OTTV
usage from all control markets during the treatment period.
       [TABLE 4 HERE]
       Overall, once we cluster the standard errors at the market level, the results are
statistically insignificant. In what follows we discuss the point estimates. In column
(1), the point estimate suggests that for the average user the effect of UBP is an
increase in video share by 1.2 percentage points on a base of roughly 38%.16 This
suggests that households place greater priority on streaming video than other types of
  15
     Interestingly, the effect among households who upgrade is not uniform. The heaviest users up-
grade and usage grows more slowly than untreated households. The users who previously used between
50% and 100% of their allowance upgrade and their usage increases more rapidly than similar control
households.
  16
     This figure represents the video usage share of the average user, which is lower than the average
share of video in usage since heavier users have higher usage and a much higher video share.



                                                 29
internet content. This may reflect how difficult it is to move households from internet-
only subscriptions into the bundle. In column (2), when we separate the effect of
the treatment by pre-policy usage share, the point estimates suggest that higher-share
households increase their video share by larger amounts. Higher-share households
generally use more video, but the treatment's impact is greater in percentage terms for
these households. In column (3), we limit the sample to household-month combinations
during which we infer that the household has a Netflix or linear OTTV subscription,17
and we find results similar to those presented in column (2). In columns (4)-(7) we
examine the share of all usage that is devoted to Netflix or linear OTTV. Columns (4)
and (6) include all households in the analysis, while columns (5) and (7) condition on
a household having a Netflix or linear OTTV subscription, respectively. In all cases,
the point estimates suggest that household internet usage becomes more focused on
these large OTTV services under UBP.


4.2.3      The Impact on Subscriptions to Third-Party OTTV Providers

To further investigate the effect of UBP on video usage, we examine the impact on
third-party OTTV firms through households' subscriptions. We focus on Netflix and
linear OTTV (Sling or Hulu) services. To measure the impact of UBP, we ask whether
a household subscribed to a particular service during the treatment period. As in
the earlier analysis of ISP subscriptions, we estimate this effect using a Probit model
with one observation per household. Specifically, we estimate a version of equation
(1), where the dependent variable is whether the household subscribes to an OTTV
service during one or more treatment period months. As in the analysis in Table 4, we
limit the sample to the markets in which we have complete data for all major OTTV
services. We present the results in Table 5.
       We find that Netflix subscriptions increase by 3.3 percentage points in the treated
market relative to the control markets. The response varies somewhat by pre-policy
  17
    We infer Netflix and LinOTTV subscriptions from the observed usage data. Specifically, if the
household uses more than 3GB of Netflix or LinOTTV in a month, then we say that it is a subscriber
in that month.


                                               30
usage. In column (2) we focus on households that did not have a Netflix subscription
during the any month of the pre-policy period (and ask if they added Netflix), and
in column (3) we focus on households that subscribed to Netflix prior to UBP (and
ask if they kept the Netflix subscription). Households with low usage shares were
more likely to add (column (2)) or retain (column (3)) subscriptions in the treated
market, while higher-usage households in the treated market were less likely to add
a Netflix subscription under UBP. This aligns with the price incentives of UBP; low-
share households are the least likely to incur usage-related overage charges due to new
subscriptions.
   [TABLE 5 HERE]
   We report results focusing on linear OTTV subscriptions, instead of Netflix, in
Table 5 columns (4)-(6). As in the case of Netflix subscriptions, linear OTTV sub-
scriptions increased in the treated market. The overall effect of UBP was a 0.2 per-
centage point increase in subscription frequency; this change is on a base of about
8% during the pre-policy period. The greater frequency of linear OTTV subscriptions
under UBP is largely due to households who were pre-policy subscribers and kept
their linear OTTV service during the treatment period. As in the case of Netflix, we
find the linear OTTV subscriptions are more common among households with usage
shares below 100% of pre-policy tier allowances; the coefficient estimates, however, are
generally not significantly different from zero.
   The increases in Netflix and linear OTTV subscriptions, combined with the increase
in streaming video usage documented in Table 4, suggests that the ISP's UBP policy
did not come at the expense of OTTV demand. In fact, UBP appears to have prompted
treated customers to focus on these high-profile third-party OTTV firms. The UBP
policy, therefore, can simultaneously increase revenue through increased internet usage
prices while also stimulating the OTTV access and usage that are necessary to increase
overall surplus from OTTV. Of course, UBP's impact to reduce overall usage implies
that it must negatively affect some internet content, but these effects do not fall on
the video sites we highlight in this paper.

                                              31
4.3    Implications for ISPs' incentives for OTTV

Broadly speaking, an ISP has two possible responses to new streaming services or
more generally an improvement in the quality of OTTV. One possible response is to
steer consumers away from these services and toward the ISP's own TV products.
Alternatively, the ISP may decide to promote OTTV and enhance the quality of the
internet offering. As we show in Section 3, this strategy is particularly profitable if the
ISP can extract surplus from consumers who place higher value on OTTV using some
form of price discrimination or nonlinear pricing. The former strategy is associated
with reducing OTTV usage and possibly access, while the latter benefits from allowing
third-party video content to grow. ISPs' choices between these strategies will depend
on the pricing tools available and the difficulty or ease of moving consumers across
products.
   In Section 3, we provided simulation results for particular parameter values and
specific distributions of tastes that suggest that while the first option (of steering
consumers towards TV services) is possible, it does not seem to be profitable if the
ISP has sufficient pricing tools such as the ability to offer different tiers and UBP.
The empirical results in the previous subsection support the same conclusion for the
following reasons.
   First, the results in Table 2 columns (1) - (4) show that the ISP can use UBP
and a menu of internet plans to induce consumers to change their internet usage
allowance. This allows the ISP to separate users according to their internet usage
and collect additional revenue from heavy users, who value the internet service the
most. Collecting more revenue makes the option of promoting OTTV more profitable
because the ISP can extract more of the value generated from OTTV.
   Second, the results in Table 2 columns (5) - (8) suggest that steering consumers
towards TV service is difficult. We find that, for the UBP policy we observe, the
internet usage price increase was insufficient to steer many consumers from internet-
only subscriptions into the bundle. This is true for both light and heavy users, despite



                                            32
being sufficient to induce upgrades in plans. The relatively muted movement in either
direction for TV subscriptions reveals the potential difficulty in influencing consumers
along this margin and suggests that the ISP would need larger bundle discounts to
steer more consumers, which would reduce the profitability of the steering-focused
strategy.
   Third, as the results in Table 3 show, UBP was effective in reducing overall usage,
especially for consumers who did not upgrade their plan. Furthermore, consumers
who choose to upgrade their internet tier did not use more data. Both these empirical
findings suggest that the ISP's introduction of tiers, holding internet content constant,
may not lead to pressure for an expanded network and higher ISP investment costs.
   Fourth, the point estimates in Tables 4 and 5 show that consumers focused their us-
age on OTTV after UBP is introduced. This suggests that households favor streaming
video over other types of internet content and therefore reductions in OTTV quality
or its foreclosure would not be viewed favorably by consumers.
   The tier upgrades and reduced usage represent outcomes that effectively reallocate
some OTTV surplus from households to the ISP. Households' subscription changes over
internet tiers and TV service increased the ISP's revenue by about 0.32%. Overage
charges, which were paid by 4.7% of treated households, generated $1.54 per household
per month, which implies an additional 1.0% increase in overall ISP revenue. Despite
the fact that some UBP outcomes can have negative impacts on some consumers,
ISPs' incentives to encourage new content and expand their networks may be stronger
when ISPs capture a greater share of total surplus from OTTV. Both the theoretical
results and empirical findings suggest that the ISP can use both bundle discounts and
usage tiers simultaneously in response to households' demand for streaming video. If
the ISP's pricing strategies are more restricted, in particular through restrictions on
its ability to price internet usage, the firm may perceive greater benefits in steering
consumers toward conventional TV and restricting access to OTTV.
   In addition to these direct impacts on the ISP and its subscribers, the pricing strat-
egy impacts OTTV firms. The results in Table 5 suggest that Netflix and linear OTTV

                                           33
subscriptions increased when UBP was introduced. While Netflix offers a mix of origi-
nal programming and older TV shows and movies, other OTTV services like Hulu and
SlingTV offer content that is even more similar to conventional TV. This suggests that
consumers receive value from a range of different OTTV services, and an ISP effort
to steer consumption toward one type of video entertainment (i.e., conventional TV)
could limit the total surplus created by ISP subscriptions. Households' persistence
in using streaming video, despite the UBP's introduction, is consistent with the ISP
having opportunities to capture surplus from consumers' usage of these services, and
therefore encourage their growth and improvement. At the same time, positive effects
of UBP on OTTV subscription demand suggest that the OTTV firms themselves will
continue improvements in developing and delivering content. The ISP's incentive and
ability to direct consumers across video entertainment sources may play a prominent
role in future antitrust or regulatory debates, such as evaluating vertical mergers be-
tween content and distributor firms, or more horizontal mergers involving firms that
compete in either content production, video distribution, or both.



5     Conclusions

We study the impact of increasingly popular online video services on the telecommu-
nications industry. OTTV represents an opportunity for ISPs in that streaming video
increases the demand for internet subscription services, but the new applications also
present several important challenges. OTTV improvements might reduce demand for
ISPs' television services, and delivering internet content may substantially increase
ISPs' costs.
    We provide a model that describes some of the central incentives behind ISPs' pric-
ing policies. We show that indeed the ISP might have an incentive to steer consumers
away from OTTV, but that those incentives decline as the ISP has richer pricing
tools that allow it to share in the gains generated by OTTV. We then use data from
the introduction of UBP to understand consumer behavior and its implications for


                                          34
the steering incentives. Consistent with the theoretical findings, the empirical results
suggest that the ISP has an incentive to help improve internet access.
       Understanding the incentives to steer is relevant for antitrust policy related to the
telecommunications industry. In particular, evaluation of mergers between content and
distribution firms presents a number of challenges. First, market boundaries may be
difficult for regulators and antitrust authorities to identify because little evidence exists
on consumers' willingness to substitute across conventional TV, streaming video, and
other non-video internet applications. Our data show that consumers are willing to
substitute among online entertainment sources and with conventional TV. Specifically,
we find that cord cutters increase their usage of most online applications after dropping
an ISP's TV service, and these increases are roughly proportional to usage levels prior
to the subscription change. Thus, telecommunications antitrust analysis might need to
consider broad market definitions that encompass many forms of digital entertainment,
as well as the central role of ISPs in shaping how content is distributed and surplus is
allocated.18
       Second, antitrust authorities need to assess how existing or new vertical relation-
ships may affect an ISP's incentives to introduce restrictive cross-licensing agreements
or use price instruments to favor its own content over competitors'. The impact of
these strategies depends on consumers' sensitivity to steering strategies. An ISP that
is vertically integrated with a content-producing firm may foreclose some content from
availability to consumers via a competing ISP. A price-based steering strategy with
similar effects is "zero rating," which favors certain content by not counting its us-
age against a monthly allowance. Our estimates show that even blunt mechanisms
like usage-based pricing can have important allocative consequences among consumers
and various firms. Firms may perceive even greater benefits of zero rating than UBP
because a targeted mechanism is likely to be more profitable.
       More broadly, our results are also relevant for the net neutrality debate, in which
  18
    We are not offering any specific market definition, nor did we conduct any formal analysis to
conclude what the market should be. Such an analysis should be done on a case-by-case basis.



                                               35
empirical evidence is rare. Net neutrality's repeal provides ISPs more latitude to dis-
criminate across types of internet traffic. While we do not observe source-specific
discrimination in our analysis, our results are informative about ISPs' incentives to
discriminate when they have the opportunity. For example, we find that usage-based
pricing's primary impact is in inducing consumers to upgrade their internet tiers and
continue using their preferred online applications (e.g., Netflix). If an ISP can success-
fully use tier premiums to extract some of the rents associated with OTTV innovations,
it may not seek more targeted mechanisms to foreclose or diminish the attractiveness
of OTTV. These incentives may change, however, as firms diversify and vertically
integrate into media production, so more research is needed in this area.
   There are several issues our model and empirical results do not address, and we
leave for future research. While our model provides a useful framework for formaliz-
ing the steering incentives of ISPs, a richer specification is required to quantify the
welfare implications of steering. Similarly, the model makes simplifying assumptions
on the interaction between firms, for example competitive OTTV supply. Given the
increasingly complex relationships between content providers and ISPs, and the evolv-
ing regulatory and antitrust environment, modeling and evaluating these policy issues
is a fruitful area for future research.



References

Armstrong, Mark (2006). "Competition in Two-Sided Markets." RAND Journal of
  Economics, 37(3): 668­691.

Armstrong, Mark (2013). "A More General Theory of Commodity Bundling." Journal
  of Economic Theory, 148(2): 448­472.

Barwick, Panle Jia, Parag A. Pathak and Maisy Wong (2017). "Conflicts of Inter-
  est and Steering in Residential Brokerage." American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 9(3): 191­222.


                                           36
Bourreau, Marc, Frago Kourandi and Tommaso Valletti (2015). "Net Neutrality with
  Competing Internet Platforms." Journal of Industrial Economics, 63(1): 30­73.

Choi, Jay Pil, Doh-Shin Jeon and Byung-Cheol Kim (2015). "Network Neutrality,
  Business Models, and Internet Interconnection." American Economic Journal: Mi-
  croeconomics, 7(3): 104­141.

Choi, Jay Pil and Byung-Cheol Kim (2010). "Net Neutrality and Investment Incen-
  tives." RAND Journal of Economics, 41(3): 446­471.

Chu, Chenghuan Sean, Phillip Leslie and Alan Sorensen (2011). "Bundle-Size Pricing
  as an Approximation to Mixed Bundling." American Economic Review, 101(1): 263­
  303.

Cisco    (2018).    "Cisco   Visual    Networking   Index   (VNI)   Complete   Forecast
  Update,          2017­2022."        URL    https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/m/en_us/
  network-intelligence/service-provider/digital-transformation/
  knowledge-network-webinars/pdfs/1213-business-services-ckn.pdf,                    re-
  trieved: April 9, 2020.

comScore (2017). "State of OTT, 2017." URL https://www.comscore.com/
  Insights/Presentations-and-Whitepapers/2017/State-of-OTT,                    retrieved
  April 6, 2020.

comScore (2018). "State of OTT, 2018." URL https://www.comscore.com/
  Insights/Presentations-and-Whitepapers/2018/State-of-OTT,                    retrieved
  April 9, 2020.

Crawford, Greg, Robin Lee, Mike Whinston and Ali Yurukoglu (2017). "The Welfare
  Effects of Vertical Integration in Multichannel Television Markets." Working Paper.

Crawford, Gregory and Matthew Shum (2007). "Monopoly Quality Degradation and
  Regulation in Cable Television." Journal of Law and Economics, 50(1): 181­219.



                                            37
Crawford, Gregory and Matthew Shum (2015). "The Welfare Effects of Monopoly
  Quality Choice: Evidence From Cable Television Markets." Working Paper.

Crawford, Gregory and Ali Yurukoglu (2012). "The Welfare Effects of Bundling in
  Multichannel Television Markets." American Economic Review, 102(2): 643­685.

Dutz, Mark, Jonathan Orszag and Robert Willig (2009). "The Substantial Consumer
  Benefits of Broadband Connectivity for US Households." Internet Intervention Al-
  liance Working Paper.

Economides, Nicholas and Benjamin Hermalin (2012). "The Economics of Network
  Neutrality." The RAND Journal of Economics, 43(4): 602­629.

Economides, Nicholas and Benjamin Hermalin (2015). "The Strategic Use of Download
  Limits by a Monopoly Platform." The RAND Journal of Economics, 46(2): 297­327.

Economides, Nicholas and Joacim Tag (2012). "Network Neutrality on the Internet:
  A Two-Sided Market Analysis." Information Economics and Policy, 24(2): 91­104.

Economides, Nicholas and Joacim Tag (2016). "Internet Regulation, Two-Sided Pric-
  ing, and Sponsored Data." Working Paper.

Edell, Richard and Pravin Varaiya (2002). Providing Internet Access: What We Learn
  from INDEX, volume Broadband: Should We Regulate High-Speed Internet Access?
  Brookings Institution.

eMarketer (2019). "US Subscription Video Landscape 2019." URL https:
  //www.emarketer.com/content/us-subscription-video-landscape-2019,            re-
  trieved April 9, 2020.

Gans, Joshua (2015). "Weak Versus Strong Net Neutrality." Journal of Regulatory
  Economics, 47(2): 183­200.

Gentzkow, Matthew (2007). "Valuing New Goods in a Model with Complementarity:
  Online Newspapers." American Economic Review, 97(3): 713­744.

                                       38
Goetz, Daniel (2016). "Competition and Dynamic Bargaining in the Broadband In-
  dustry." Princeton University Working Paper.

Goolsbee, Austan and Peter Klenow (2006). "Valuing Products by the Time Spent
  Using Them: An Application to the Internet." American Economic Review P&P,
  96(2): 108­113.

Greenstein, Shane and Ryan McDevitt (2011). "The Broadband Bonus: Estimating
  Broadband Internet's Economic Value." Telecommunications Policy, 35(7): 617­632.

Greenstein, Shane, Martin Peitz and Tommaso Valletti (2016). "Net Neutrality: A
  Fast Lane to Understanding the Tradeoffs." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(2):
  127­150.

Grubb, Michael (2015). "Consumer Inattention and Bill-Shock Regulation." Review of
  Economic Studies, 82(1): 219­257.

Grubb, Michael and Matthew Osborne (2015). "Cellular Service Demand: Biased
  Beliefs, Learning, and Bill Shock." American Economic Review, 105(1): 234­271.

Hagemann, Garrett (2017). "Upstream Quantity Discounts and Double Marginaliza-
  tion in the New York Liquor Market." Working Paper.

Hitte, Loran and Prasanna Tambe (2007). "Broadband Adoption and Content Con-
  sumption." Information Economics and Policy, 74(6): 1637­1673.

Ho, Kate and Robin Lee (2019). "Equilibrium Insurer-Provider Networks: Bargaining
  and Exclusion in Health Care Markets." American Economic Review, 109(2).

Lambrecht, Anja, Katja Seim and Bernd Skiera (2007). "Does Uncertainty Matter?
  Consumer Behavior Under Three-Part Tariffs." Marketing Science, 26(5): 698­710.

Lee, Robin and Tim Wu (2009). "Subsidizing Creativity through Network Design:
  Zero-Pricing and Net Neutrality." Journal of Economics Perspectives, 23(3): 61­76.



                                         39
Liebman, Eli (2017). "Bargaining in Markets with Exclusion: An Analysis of Health
  Insurance Networks." Working Paper.

Malone, Jacob, Aviv Nevo and Jonathan Williams (2016). "A Snapshot of the Current
  State of Residential Broadband Networks." NET Institute Working Paper No. 15-06.

Malone, Jacob, John Turner and Jonathan Williams (2014). "Do Three-Part Tariffs
  Improve Efficiency in Residential Broadband Networks?" Telecommunications Pol-
  icy, 38(11): 1035­1045.

MarketWatch (2018). "Over 5 million U.S. consumers will cut the cord
  in   2018,     survey      says."   URL        https://www.marketwatch.com/story/
  over-5-million-us-consumers-will-cut-the-cord-in-2018-survey-says-2018-07-17,
  retrieved April 6, 2020.

McManus, Brian (2007). "Nonlinear Pricing in an Oligopoly Market: the Case of
  Specialty Coffee." RAND Journal of Economics, 38: 512­532.

Miravete, Eugenio (2003). "Choosing the Wrong Calling Plan? Ignorance and Learn-
  ing." American Economic Review, 93(1): 297­310.

Mussa, Michael and Sherwin Rosen (1978). "Monopoly and Product Quality." Journal
  of Economic Theory, 18(2): 301­317.

Nevo, Aviv, John Turner and Jonathan Williams (2016). "Usage-Based Pricing and
  Demand for Residential Broadband." Econometrica, 84(2): 411­443.

Nielsen (2015). "The Total Audience Report: Q4 2014." URL https://www.nielsen.
  com/us/en/insights/report/2015/the-total-audience-report-q4-2014,             re-
  trieved April 3, 2020.

Prince, Jeffrey and Shane Greenstein (2017). "Measuring Consumer Preferences for
  Video Content Provision via Cord-Cutting Behavior." Journal of Economics & Man-
  agement Strategy, 26(2): 293­317.


                                            40
Raval, Devesh and Ted Rosenbaum (2017). "Payer Steering and Patient Welfare: Ev-
  idence from Medicaid." Working Paper.

Reggiani, Carlo and Tommaso Valletti (2016). "Net Neutrality and Innovation at the
  Core and at the Edge." International Journal of Industrial Organization, 45(1):
  16­27.

Rosston, Gregory, Scott Savage and Bradley Wimmer (2013). "Effect of Network Un-
  bundling on Retail Price: Evidence from the Telecommunications Act of 1996."
  Journal of Law and Economics, 56(2): 487­519.

Sidak, Gregory (2006). "A Consumer-Welfare Approach to Network Neutrality Regu-
  lation of the Internet." Journal of Competition Law & Economics, 2(3): 349­474.

Tudon, Jose (2018). "Congestion v. Content Provision in Net Neutrality: The Case of
  Amazon's Twitch.tv." Working Paper.

Varian, Hal (2002). The Demand for Bandwidth: Evidence from the INDEX Experi-
  ment, volume Broadband: Should We Regulate High-Speed Internet Access? Brook-
  ings Institution.

Wu, Tim (2003). "Network Neutrality, Broadband Discrimination." Journal of
  Telecommunications and High Technology Law, 1(2): 141­178.

Zenith     (2019).       "Online      video        viewing   to   reach   100       min-
  utes     a       day     in      2021."     URL        https://www.zenithmedia.com/
  online-video-viewing-to-reach-100-minutes-a-day-in-2021,                      retrieved
  April 6, 2020.




                                              41
Appendix A

A.1     Internet Usage Changes when TV Service is Added

To complement the analysis of Section 2.3, we examine the behavior of households that
added a conventional TV subscription. In Figure A1 panel (a), we track the internet
usage changes for households who added video to their subscriptions. Internet usage
falls significantly after this subscription change. The reduction's magnitude (12%) is
about half the magnitude of the increase in internet usage that occurs after a household
cuts the cord.
   [FIGURE A1 HERE]
   In panel (b) of Figure A1, we show how households' usage of major internet services
changes after adding a TV subscription. Average usage of some types of applications
like Browsing, Music, and Gaming increase slightly during our sample, while Video
streaming falls significantly. The largest absolute and percentage reduction in usage
is in Netflix usage.


A.2     Additional Model Discussion

In this section, we augment the discussion in the main text, and provide a more detailed
description of how consumers' choices would be affected when the ISP introduces usage
tiers. In practice, the tiers may vary in terms of usage allowances, overage prices, or
connectivity speeds. We focus on a case in which the ISP, facing  > 0, shifts from
having no tiers and no usage allowances to having both. This is similar to the situation
in our data, and it also resembles the implementation of the tiering and UBP strategy
implemented by numerous North American ISPs.
   In Figure A2 we demonstrate the effect of the ISP introducing a "low-usage" tier
which is subject to the usage allowance  while a "high-usage" tier has no usage limit.
The same tiers are available to both internet-only and bundle subscribers (iL and bL
for low-usage tiers, and iH and bH for high usage). We impose a set of prices that



                                          42
facilitate reading the different regions of Figure A2; the optimal prices and cap value
would change the sizes and perhaps shapes of some regions.
   Panel (a) of Figure A2 provides an initial distribution of consumers across subscrip-
tion options, before any tiers or caps are offered. As in Figure 3 Panel (a), with  > 0
a significant share of consumers select the i subscription and satisfy their video enter-
tainment tastes with OTTV. The introduction of usage tiers splits i and b subscribers
into a new collection of actions, illustrated in Figure A2 Panel (b).
   [FIGURE A2 HERE]
   Former subscribers to the initial unlimited internet service (i) may update their
subscription and usage choices in several ways. Some consumers, in Figure A2 Panel
(b)'s area I, will accept the usage cap  and remain internet-only. Consumers with a
stronger taste for internet usage, whether for video- or non-video entertainment, may
"upgrade" their internet subscription to iH ; these consumers are in Panel (b)'s area
II. From the ISP's perspective, the tier upgrade is a way to have area II's consumers
pay a greater price for internet service that is equal to what the consumers received
previously. Consumers with relatively strong values of v2 switch from i into the bundle
(areas III and IV). Of these consumers, those with high values of v1 pay for a tier
upgrade in addition to TV service (area IV). When consumers switch to the bundle,
they receive video entertainment through TV, so their OTTV usage falls to zero.
Finally among initial i subscribers, some will cancel their subscriptions completely
(area V) because their relatively strong taste for video entertainment and weak taste
for non-video internet means that capped internet, at the present price, is worth less
than the outside option. In addition to these margins for former i subscribers, some
bundle subscribers with strong internet tastes (in area VI) will opt for bH so that they
can consume internet without a usage limit.




                                           43
A.3        Evaluation of Pre-Treatment Trends

Our empirical analysis compares outcomes in the treated and control markets. In this
section, we investigate whether the markets' trends prior to UBP were meaningfully
different from each other. We examine trends in a collection of variables that are
closely related to our main empirical results.
       For four variables related to ISP subscriptions, we ask whether there are differ-
ences in subscription transitions during the pre-policy period between the treated and
control markets.19 We use one observation per household, and we estimate a Probit
model in which the dependent variable is the household's realized decision regarding:
upgrading internet tier, downgrading internet tier, adding a TV subscription, or drop-
ping a TV subscription. For each dependent variable, the sole explanatory variable is
P reT reatment, an indicator for whether the household is in the treated market. If
treated households are more likely to, for example, add TV, then this tendency will
be apparent in the treated market before UBP is announced. In the first four rows
of Table A1, we report estimation results for the coefficient on P reT reatment. We
find that all four models show very small or zero difference between the treatment and
control markets. The coefficients on P reT reatment are significantly different from
zero in three models, but the coefficient magnitudes are not economically significant.
The pre-policy period is about one quarter of the duration of the announcement and
treatment periods, so the coefficients in Table A1 should be multiplied by four for
comparison to the results presented in Section 4.2. Even after this adjustment, the co-
efficients on Table A1 imply very small differences between the treatment and control
markets. For example, the tier upgrading rate in the treated market is about an order
of magnitude larger after UBP was announced relative to the pre-policy period.
       For six additional variables, we examine weekly data on households' use of the
internet and applications on it. The variables we examine are: the natural log of total
internet usage; the shares of all internet usage devoted to video, devoted to Netflix,
  19
    Subscription choices are made relatively infrequently, so we cannot investigate a trend within the
pre-policy period.


                                                 44
and devoted to linear OTTV; and indicators for whether the household used 0.1GB or
more of Netflix and (separately) linear OTTV on any day of the observed week. For
each variable, we sum the households' activity to the market level, and then we regress
the market-level measure on a market-level dummy variables, a linear time trend, and
the time trend interacted with P reT reatment. In Table A1 we report the coefficient
estimates for the interaction of the time trend and P reT reatment. In all cases but one
(share of internet usage for linear OTTV), the coefficients are not significantly different
from zero. In the case of linear OTTV usage, the coefficient estimate is essentially zero
and therefore economically insignificant.
   [TABLE A1 HERE]




                                            45
6   Tables and Figures

            Table 1: Adoption and Usage of OTTV Applications

                                  Ever Active          Daily Usage (GB)
                                   Users (%)        All HHs     Active Users
        Internet-only HHs
          HBO Go                      14.1            0.03           0.53
          Hulu                        23.2            0.13           1.07
          Netflix                     77.6            1.75           2.86
          SlingTV                      3.3            0.05           3.00
          YouTube                     88.7            1.06           1.49
        Bundle HHs
         HBO Go                       11.8            0.02           0.49
         Hulu                         13.2            0.04           0.85
         Netflix                      67.9            1.10           2.27
         SlingTV                      0.83            0.01           2.81
         YouTube                      74.3            0.69           1.26
       Notes: A household is an active user of an application if it uses 3GB
       or more during a month. The "Ever Active User" column provides the
       share of households that are identified as active users during one or more
       months of the sample period. The daily usage statistics for active users
       are calculated for months when usage is 3GB or more. The top panel re-
       ports these statistics for internet-only households, and the bottom panel
       contains households with both internet and TV subscriptions.




                                          46
                Table 2: The Effect of UBP on Take-up of ISP Subscriptions

                     Upgrade Tier         Downgrade Tier           Add TV              Drop TV
                     (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)
 Treatment         0.030                  0.002                 0.003               0.001
                    (0.002)              (0.001)               (0.004)             (0.002)
 Treatment ×
   Share0-50                  0.016                  0.002               0.006                 0.000
                               (0.002)               (0.001)             (0.003)              (0.002)
   Share50-100                0.053                   -0.001              -0.005             0.008
                               (0.003)               (0.001)             (0.005)              (0.001)
   Share100+                  0.112                 -0.006                0.004              -0.006
                               (0.011)               (0.002)             (0.006)              (0.003)
 Observations      409,073    409,073    383,959    383,959    114,435   114,435   304,742   304,742
Notes: The table reports marginal effects from Probit regressions. The dependent variable, listed in
the first row of the table, is an indicator for whether the household makes the specified subscription
transition between the announcement of UBP and the end of the sample. An observation is a house-
hold and the sample includes all households eligible to make the specified subscription change (e.g, in
columns (1) and (2) all households are included except those already at the highest tier). ShareN is
a dummy equal to one if in the pre-policy period the household used N % of the their internet tier's
treatment-period allowance. All regressions include as controls the Shareh variables, position in the
monthly total internet usage distribution (discretized into deciles), pre-policy growth in total usage,
usage deciles interacted with pre-policy growth, OTTV subscription indicators, internet tier and TV
subscription dummies. Standard errors, clustered by market, are in parentheses, with stars indicating
the following significance levels:  (p < 0.10), (p < 0.05), (p < 0.01).




                                                   47
                 Table 3: The Effect of UBP on Internet Usage

                      (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
                                                       
 Treatment          -0.110                   -0.121                    -0.044
                    (0.045)                  (0.046)                  (0.036)
 Treatment ×
   Share0-50                      -0.107                    -0.111                 -0.085
                                  (0.048)                   (0.048)               (0.047)
   Share50-100                   -0.104                    -0.154                0.104
                                  (0.035)                   (0.036)               (0.037)
   Share100+                    -0.190                    -0.329                 -0.081
                                  (0.035)                   (0.035)               (0.037)
 Constant          3.441        3.441        3.432        3.432       3.647      3.647
                    (0.020)       (0.020)     (0.021)       (0.021)    (0.024)    (0.023)
 Sample             All HHs     All HHs     Upgr=N        Upgr=N      Upgr=Y     Upgr=Y
 Observations      3,789,621   3,789,621    3,625,398     3,625,398   164,223    164,223
Notes: The table reports estimates from linear regressions. An observation is a
household-month. The dependent variable is log internet usage in gigabytes. ShareN
is a dummy equal if in the pre-policy period the household used N% of the their in-
ternet tier's treatment-period allowance. Additional controls include: household fixed
effects; a heterogeneous time trend which interacts deciles of total usage distribution
with a cubic time trend; and the Announcementh t variable, which is interacted with
ShareN in the even-numbered columns. Standard errors, clustered at the market
level, are reported in parentheses, with stars indicating the following significance levels:

 (p < 0.10), (p < 0.05), (p < 0.01).




                                            48
                   Table 4: The Effect of UBP on Online Video Usage

                               Video Share                  Netflix Share         LinOTTV Share
                      (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)
 Treatment           0.012
                    (0.020)
 Treatment ×
   Share0-50                      0.009        0.028       0.018       0.039     0.001        0.003
                                 (0.016)      (0.025)     (0.014)     (0.026)     (0.000)     (0.001)
   Share50-100                    0.031        0.018       0.025       0.027       0.003       0.007
                                 (0.045)      (0.034)     (0.039)     (0.034)     (0.002)     (0.005)
   Share100+                      0.020        0.021       0.018       0.024       0.004      0.021
                                 (0.048)      (0.036)     (0.040)     (0.034)     (0.002)     (0.006)
 Constant          0.383        0.383        0.630       0.158       0.394       0.008       0.161
                    (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.000)     (0.002)
 Observations      2,508,084    2,508,084    1,006,732   2,508,084   986,121    2,508,084    146,345
Notes: The table reports estimates from linear regressions. An observation is a household-month.
The dependent variable, depending on the column is the share of video/Netflix/Linear OTTV out
of total internet usage. The sample in columns (1), (2), (4) and (6), includes all households-months,
while other columns the sample includes household-months with a Netflix subscription (column
(5)), linear OTTV subscription (column (7)), or both (column (3)). ShareN is a dummy equal
if in the pre-policy period the household used N% of the their internet tier's treatment-period al-
lowance. Additional controls include: household fixed effects; a heterogeneous time trend which
interacts deciles of total usage distribution with a cubic time trend; and the Announcementh t
variable, which is interacted with ShareN in the even-numbered columns. Standard errors, clus-
tered at the market level, are in parentheses, with stars indicating the following significance levels:

  (p < 0.10), (p < 0.05), (p < 0.01).




                                                  49
Table 5: The Effect of the Price Change on Take-up of OTTV Subscriptions

                                  Netflix                         LinOTTV
                        (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)
    Treatment         0.033                              0.002
                      (0.014)                           (0.007)
    Treatment ×
      Share0-50                    0.030     0.008                  0.002       -0.015
                                 (0.020)     (0.004)               (0.007)     (0.014)
      Share50-100                 -0.047    0.016                   -0.001     0.028
                                 (0.054)     (0.001)               (0.010)     (0.013)
      Share100+                   -0.093    -0.023                  -0.003    -0.047
                                 (0.064)     (0.002)               (0.012)     (0.006)
    Sample              All       New        Keep         All       New         Keep
    Observations      278,676    153,679    124,997     278,676    260,247     18,429
   Notes: Each column contains marginal effects from a probit regression. Each ob-
   servation is a single household. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether
   the household subscribes to the OTTV service specified in the first row of the ta-
   ble during the treatment period. All regressions include as controls the uninter-
   acted Shareh variables, position in the monthly total internet usage distribution
   (discretized into deciles), pre-policy growth in total usage, usage deciles interacted
   with pre-policy growth, OTTV subscription indicators, internet tier and TV sub-
   scription dummies. Standard errors are in parentheses, with stars indicating the
   following significance levels:  (p < 0.10), (p < 0.05), (p < 0.01).




                                            50
        Table A1: Pre-policy Regressions

                             Coefficient (SE)    p-value
                                       
 Upgrade Tier                    0.001            0.000
                                  (0.000)
 Downgrade Tier                  -0.001           0.098
                                  (0.001)
 Add TV                           0.001           0.054
                                  (0.000)
 Drop TV                           -0.000         0.679
                                  (0.000)
 Log Total GB                      -0.010         0.253
                                  (0.009)
 Video Share                        0.001         0.460
                                  (0.001)
 Netflix Share                      0.000         0.995
                                  (0.001)
 LinOTTV Share                   0.000            0.039
                                  (0.000)
 Netflix Subscriptions             -0.000         0.896
                                  (0.002)
 LinOTTV Subscriptions             0.000          0.657
                                  (0.000)
Notes: Each row is a regression with dependent variable
indicated in the first column. The first four rows are
subscriber-level regressions of the binary outcomes from
Table 2 on a treatment indicator. The final six rows are
regressions of the continuous outcome variables from Ta-
bles 3-5 on a time trend, market dummies, and the in-
teraction of the time trend and treatment indicator at
the market-week level. The first eight variables are ex-
actly as defined in Section 4 regressions. The Netflix
and LinOTTV subscriptions variables are defined as the
share of households that are active users of the indicated
application using the same threshold as Table 5 (usage
exceeding 0.1 GB/day), except at the weekly level. The
second column reports the coefficient on the treatment
indicator (first four rows) and treatment-time trend in-
teraction (final six rows), with standard errors in paren-
theses. p values are reported in the third column.




                           51
                        Figure 1: Cord-cutter Usage Changes



                                                                                   32.86%




                                                         21.15%




                                                                                            35.67%
                                                                  11.99%   6.68%




                (a) Total Usage                            (b) Usage Composition
Notes: Panel (a) summarizes the average daily usage (GBs) of internet subscribers in the
eight weeks before and after dropping TV services (upper plots) in comparison to all other
internet subscribers (lower plots). The dots are average daily usage, the dashed line is
average usage across before and after the switching event (with two weeks on either side
omitted), and the solid line is a global local-linear regression fit of the data. The shaded
areas are 95% confidence intervals. Panel (b) summarizes the average daily usage (GBs)
of internet traffic types by cord cutters in the eight weeks before and after dropping TV
services (two weeks on either side of the switching event are omitted). For each traffic type,
the percent change in usage level between the two periods is shown above the two bars.




                                              52
Figure 2: Estimated Total Subscriber Monthly Payments with OTTV




            Notes: This figure shows the distribution of esti-
            mated monthly payments by cord cutters in the
            month before and after dropping pay TV. The to-
            tal monthly operator bill is observed in the ISP
            billing data. Monthly OTTV expenditures are es-
            timated using 2015 subscription fees for each of the
            video services observed in the usage data.




                                    53
                 Figure 3: Consumer Response to Changes in 




                 (a) Choices                                 (b) Market Shares
Notes: These figures illustrate consumer choices for different levels of  , holding prices
fixed. In panel (a) we present consumer choices for  equal to 0 and 0.7 holding prices
fixed at (pi , pt , pb ) = (0.75, 0.65, 0.9), which are the profit-maximizing prices for  = 0,
 = 1.25, and  = 0.2. In panel (b), we present market shares when  increases from 0
to 1 and prices are fixed at (pi , pt , pb ) = (0.75, 0.65, 0.9).




                                              54
                Figure 4: Optimal Prices for Varying Values of 




                 (a) Prices                               (b) Market Shares
Notes: Panel (a) displays the ISP's profit-maximizing prices as  varies from 0 to 1. Panel
(b) provides the market shares resulting from these prices. We compute prices and shares
numerically using the assumptions described in the text.




                                            55
Figure 5: Optimal Prices and Allowance with Usage Limits for Varying Values of 




           (a) Prices and Allowance                        (b) Market Shares
  Notes: Panel (a) displays the ISP's profit-maximizing prices and allowance when the ISP
  sets a usage allowance, as  varies from 0 to 1. Panel (b) summarizes the change in market
  shares at each optimal price combination.




                                             56
   Figure 6: Optimal Tiered Prices and Allowance for Varying Values of 




        (a) Prices and Allowance                       (b) Market Shares
Notes: Notes: Panel (a) depicts the ISP's optimal tier prices and usage allowance as 
varies from 0 to 1. Panel (b) summarizes the change in market shares at each optimal
price and allowance combination.




                                         57
Figure 7: Profits by Pricing Strategy for Varying Values of 




        Notes: This figure shows ISP profits when it uses
        optimal bundle prices, optimal prices and usage
        cap, and optimal prices and cap with usage tiers.




                               58
              Figure A1: Usage Changes when TV Service is Added



                                                                                 -19.64%




                                                        -2.51%




                                                                 0.63%                     -9.51%
                                                                         1.35%




               (a) Total Usage                             (b) Usage Composition
Notes: Panel (a) summarizes the average daily usage (GBs) of internet subscribers in the
eight weeks before and after adding TV services (upper plots) in comparison to all other
internet subscribers (lower plots). The dots are average daily usage, the dashed line is
average usage across before and after the switching event (with two weeks on either side
omitted), and the solid line is a global local-linear regression fit of the data. The shaded
areas are 95% confidence intervals. Panel (b) summarizes the average daily usage (GBs) of
online traffic types by TV-adders in the eight weeks before and after adding TV services
(2 weeks on either side of the switching event omitted). For each traffic type, the percent
change in usage level between the two periods is shown above the two bars.




                                             59
                       Figure A2: Effect of Tiers and Allowances




                  (a) Baseline                                      (b) Substitution
Notes: This figure shows the effect of the introduction of a tier with a usage allowance
on subscription choices. Throughout,  is fixed at 0.7. Market shares are first plotted
for prices (pi , pt , pb ) = (0.75, 0.65, 0.9). Next, a usage allowance is placed on the original
internet tier, and a new premium internet tier is introduced with no allowance. The new
prices are (pi,L , pi,H , pt , pb,L , pb,H ) = (0.75, 0.85, 0.65, 0.9, 1.0). Each shaded region depicts
a set of consumer types that makes a particular subscription change. The usage allowances
 is equal to 0.8.




                                                  60
