                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DO DIFFERENCES IN SCHOOL QUALITY GENERATE HETEROGENEITY IN
                  THE CAUSAL RETURNS TO EDUCATION?

                                       Philip DeCicca
                                      Harry Krashinsky

                                     Working Paper 27089
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27089


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We thank Maoyong Fan, Mitchell Hoffman, Erik Nesson, Paul Niekamp, Minh Nguyen, and Phil
Oreopoulos for helpful comments. Krashinsky acknowledges funding from the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Philip DeCicca and Harry Krashinsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Differences in School Quality Generate Heterogeneity in the Causal Returns to Education?
Philip DeCicca and Harry Krashinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 27089
May 2020
JEL No. I26,J24,J38

                                           ABSTRACT

Estimating the returns to education remains an active area of research amongst applied
economists. Most studies that estimate the causal return to education exploit changes in schooling
and/or labor laws to generate exogenous differences in education. An implicit assumption is that
more time in school may translate into greater earnings potential. None of these studies, however,
explicitly consider the quality of schooling to which impacted students are exposed. To extend
this literature, we examine the interaction between school quality and policy-induced returns to
schooling, using temporally-available school quality measures from Card and Krueger (1992).
We find that additional compulsory schooling, via either schooling or labor laws, increases
earnings only if educational inputs are of sufficiently high quality. In particular, we find a
consistent role for teacher quality, as measured by relative teacher pay across states, in generating
consistently positive returns to compulsory schooling.


Philip DeCicca
Ball State University
117 Whitninger Building
Muncie, IN 47303
and NBER
ppdecicca@bsu.edu

Harry Krashinsky
Centre for Industrial Relations
121 St. George Street
University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 2E8
Canada
harry.krashinsky@utoronto.ca
1. Introduction

         It is well-established that compulsory schooling and child labor laws (CSLs and CLLs,
respectively) increased average schooling levels in the U.S. in the 20th century. Perhaps not
surprisingly, a large and growing number of studies have exploited these policy-induced
increases in schooling to examine its impact on labor market outcomes like wages and
employment, as well as other plausibly impacted outcomes like health and criminal activity.
None of these studies, however, have investigated a possible interaction between policy-induced
schooling and school quality. That is, none explore whether students induced to complete
additional schooling experience returns to that schooling that vary with its quality.

         We attempt to fill this gap by exploring the possible interaction between policy-induced
returns to schooling and school quality, where the latter is proxied by established measures of
school quality taken from the seminal paper by Card and Krueger (1992). In particular, we
examine whether and to what extent the estimated monetary returns to schooling vary with the
three state-level measures of school quality measures they employ: pupil-teacher ratio, relative
teacher salaries, and length of the school term. In principle, the quality of the additional
schooling induced by compulsory schooling and/or labor laws may affect human capital
accumulation and, hence, the ultimate labor market return to that schooling. Indeed, the
existence of such interactive effects hinges on whether these school quality proxies, themselves,
have positive impacts on such labor market outcomes. As we will discuss, recent research,
particularly with respect to the first two measures, suggests that such interactive effects plausibly
exist.

         We find evidence that school quality does affect the impact of policy-induced schooling
on earnings. We first generate estimates that confirm the findings of Stephens and Yang (2014)
which generally suggest there is no effect of policy-induced schooling on labor market earnings
using U.S. Census data from 1960 to 1980 on prime-aged males. Building on their main
specification, while addressing their general critique, we allow our estimates of the monetary
returns to schooling to vary across higher and lower values of the three school quality proxies in
question. While we fail to find consistent evidence of an interactive effect of class size (i.e.,
pupil to teacher ratio) and average term length (i.e., length of school year), we find strongly
bifurcated results for relative teacher pay. In particular, we find consistently positive and
statistically significant returns to schooling for those students who were educated in a state that
paid its teachers more than the state-median relative salary. By contrast, we find consistent
evidence of a zero or negative return to schooling for students schooled in states with lower than
median relative teacher wages. Overall, our results suggest that returns to compulsory schooling
are positive in states with higher than median relative teacher salaries, while no relationship
exists in lower than median states, suggesting that school quality, particularly that which may be
directly related to teacher quality, may play an important role in the ultimate pecuniary returns to
compulsory education.

        In the following section, we provide a brief background on research related to the returns
to schooling in the United States, as well as reasons why heterogeneity in the three measures of
school quality used by Card and Krueger (1992) may affect policy-induced returns to schooling,
though our main results focus on relative teacher pay. Section 3 presents our empirical strategy,
which follows Stephens and Yang (2014). Section 4 describes our data and presents our
findings, which as noted above, suggest that school quality related to teacher pay may increase
returns to policy-induced schooling. While we focus on relative teacher pay, we also present
analogous estimates associated with pupil to teacher ratio and length of school term. Section 5
briefly concludes the paper.

2. Background

2.1 A very brief overview of the impact of policy-induced returns to education

        Economists have long been interested in the returns to schooling, both theoretically and
empirically. On the empirical side, economists have long recognized the statistical difficulties of
obtaining valid estimates of the relationship between schooling and earnings. Starting with
Angrist and Krueger (1991), the use of two policies--compulsory schooling laws (CSLs) and
child labor laws (CLLs)--as instruments for completed schooling gained tremendous popularity
to obtain more meaningful estimates of this relationship. Over time, Angrist and Krueger (1991)
led to many similar studies, many of which found positive and large financial returns to
schooling. 1


1
  Two notable examples are Card (2001) and Oreopoulos (2006). Other early studies such as Lang and Kropp
(1986), Acemoglu and Angrist (2000), Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2005) and Goldin and Katz (2011) tended to
find a positive relationship between policy-induced schooling and labor market outcomes like earnings, while later,
         Recent work by Stephens and Yang (2014) revisits this extensive literature, which has
expanded well-beyond labor market outcomes like earnings to outcomes representing health,
crime and civic engagement to name a few, and makes a relevant critique. 2 In particular,
Stephens and Yang (2014) show that estimates of the returns to schooling (and other outcomes)
in many of these earlier studies are sensitive to the inclusion of school quality measures. More
specifically, they show that inclusion of state-level measures of relative teacher pay, pupil to
teacher ratio (i.e., class size) and length of the school term from Card and Krueger (1992) results
in structural estimates of the relationship between schooling and earnings that are essentially
zero, in spite of first stage estimates that imply compulsory schooling laws are valid instruments.

         On the face of it, Stephens and Yang (2014) include these variables from Card and
Krueger (1992) to account for unobserved school quality. Here, the concern is that unobserved
differences in school quality may be correlated with the policy variables that serve as
instrumental variables (i.e., hopefully generate quasi-random variation in schooling levels). If
so, and if they are omitted from the model, instrument exogeneity is violated. And, indeed,
Stephens and Yang (2014) demonstrate the relevant consequences. We take their logic one step
further and allow the impact of increases in induced schooling to vary by these school quality
measures, as we elaborate on below. In doing so, we believe that we are the first to examine
whether policy-induced increases in education depend on the quality of that additional, induced
schooling.

2.2 Why school quality might affect policy-induced returns to education?

         As noted, it is well-established that compulsory schooling laws and child labor laws have
increased average levels of education in the U.S. throughout much of the 20th century. While
researchers have exploited these policy-induced increases in schooling to obtain improved
estimates of the true return to schooling, no existing work has addressed the possibility that the
impact of this additional schooling may depend on its quality. Instead, the literature has
essentially treated all additional schooling as uniform, even though that is highly unlikely. The
logic of why quality should matter is straightforward: If students are required to spend more


particularly non-U.S., studies tended to find decidedly less evidence (c.f., Meghir and Palme, 2005), Pischke and
von Wachter (2008), Grenet (2013)).
2
  For an excellent review of work related to the social or non-pecuniary benefits of compulsory law-induced
schooling see Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011).
time in school than originally intended, and if this time is spent in high-quality schooling, then
the return to that schooling should tend to be higher than if the required schooling was poor in
nature. In other words, since the quality of policy-induced schooling almost certainly varies
across place and/or time, heterogeneity in the rate of return to policy-induced schooling is
virtually assured. And, although our econometric approach limits us to using state-level
measures of school quality, we are able to proxy for it using three variables from Card and
Krueger's (1992) seminal paper. In particular, we use their state-level measures of relative
teacher pay, pupil to teacher ratio (i.e., class size) and the length of a school year (in days) to
proxy for school quality. More precisely, we allow the return to policy-induced schooling to
vary across states above and below their median values. 3 In what follows, we briefly discuss
research on each of these three measures, focusing on why we believe they are reasonable
proxies for school quality. Ultimately, none of these measures are perfect proxies for school
quality, but they are clearly germane to an improved understanding of its impact on estimates of
the returns to schooling.


2.2.1 Relative teacher pay

           Of the three school quality proxies we employ, the most consistent empirical evidence
exists for relative teacher pay as a measure of school quality. The gist is that higher relative
wages attract higher quality teachers to the classroom. In turn, these higher quality teachers
produce students who have learned more, and are subsequently more productive in the labor
market. As a result, there are two relevant strands in this literature: one that examines the
relationship between teacher pay and teacher quality, and another that examines the relationship
between teacher quality and student outcomes, though as noted below there is at least one high
quality study that examines the reduced form relationship between teacher compensation and
student outcomes. Regarding the first strand, an early study by Murnane and Olson (1989) finds
that higher teacher wages, both in absolute and relative terms, increased both entry and duration
in the teaching profession. Similarly, Ferguson (1991) and Figlio (1997, 2002) find that higher
salaries lead to more qualified teachers entering the teaching profession. Along these lines,
Figlio and Rueben (2001) find that tax limit-induced reductions in school spending lead to a


3
    The method used to calculate these medians will be described later in the paper.
reduction in the average quality of education majors, as well as new cohorts of public school
teachers. Higher relative teacher salaries may also lead to less teacher turnover, which could
affect school quality. Hanushek et al. (2004), for example, examine teacher job switching and
attrition, and find that while teacher mobility is mainly driven by student characteristics, salary
reduces such turnover, albeit modestly. Hanushek and Rivkin (2006) document falling relative
teacher salaries in the middle of the twentieth century, and note that "The decline in the relative
earnings of teachers has likely led to a fall in average teacher quality of incoming teachers over
this period." More recently, Ondrich et al. (2008) find that higher relative teacher salaries reduce
teacher attrition. In particular, these authors find that teachers in New York State school districts
with higher relative salaries in their county are less likely to leave teaching or switch to a
different district within New York State.

         So, while the evidence suggests that higher teacher pay leads to higher quality teachers,
do higher quality teachers translate into improved student achievement? A large number of
studies, using within-school measures of teacher quality, suggest they do. For example, a study
by Rockoff (2004), which used administrative panel data from New Jersey, finds that moving up
one standard deviation in the teacher fixed effect distribution (i.e., teacher fixed effects are
treated as a proxy for unobserved teacher quality) leads to a one-tenth of a standard deviation
increase in both reading and math test scores. Similarly, Rivkin et al. (2005), using panel data
from Texas schools, find that unobserved teacher quality has substantial impacts on reading and
mathematics achievement; indeed, their findings imply that a one standard deviation increase in
teacher quality improves student outcomes more than a ten-student reduction in class size. 4
Measuring quality in a manner similar to the previous two studies, Aaronson et al. (2007) find
that teacher quality has similar impacts for a sample of ninth graders in Chicago Public Schools,
including particularly large effects for lower-ability students.

         More recent studies document a relationship between teacher quality and future
outcomes, including wages. Hanushek (2011) uses existing estimates, including those described
above, to estimate the impact of within-school teacher quality on labor market productivity. He
finds that a one standard deviation increase in teacher quality leads to an annual increase of


4
 Similar to Rockoff (2004), this study captures quality that is not directly related to observable characteristics like
credentials or experience.
$400,000 in the present value lifetime earnings, assuming a fixed class size of twenty. Chetty et
al. (2014) find that high valued added (i.e., high quality) teachers improve long-run outcomes
with respect to college attendance, teen childbearing and earnings. In particular, these authors
find that replacing a teacher in the bottom five percent of their value-added distribution with an
average teacher would increase the present value of lifetime earnings by about $250,000. 5

         As noted, some studies also examine the impact of the reduced form relationship between
teacher pay and students outcomes. This is important since the measurement of teacher quality
varies across the two literatures described above. 6 In a well-cited study, Loeb and Page (2000)
find that raising teacher wages reduces high school dropout rates. In particular, these authors
find that a ten percent increase in teacher wages reduces the dropout rate by nearly four percent.
The authors note that mixed results in other related studies is likely due to non-wage
characteristics of teaching positions and market-level differences in alternative job opportunities.

2.2.2 Pupil to teacher ratio

         We next briefly turn to why we believe the pupil-teacher ratio, or class size as the
relevant literature refers to it, represents a reasonable proxy for schooling quality. Class size
reduction is an intuitive way to increase schooling quality, since more attention from one's
teacher should, all else equal, lead to improved student outcomes. That said, since it requires
hiring extra teachers, it is very expensive to implement, and there are potential quality issues if
the hiring of many new teachers is required, as might be the case with a large-scale initiative to
reduce class size. The U.S. literature is somewhat mixed on the impact of class size on student
achievement, but tends to find that smaller class sizes lead to improved student outcomes.

         The most prominent study of the impacts of class size is the well-known Project STAR
randomized experiment from Tennessee. Early research based on Project STAR data found
achievement gains on the order of four percentage points the first year selected students
experienced substantially smaller classes, and that such test score advantages increased by about



5
  For context, this change would represent a 5% increase relative to average lifetime income, which is a large
hypothetical effect, but emblematic of the impact of teacher quality on earnings.
6
  In general, teacher quality in the literature on the impact of teacher pay on teacher quality is measured via process
outcomes, like level of schooling and certification status, while it is measured using within-school variation in the
literature on the impact of teacher quality on student outcomes.
one percentage point per year after the first year (Krueger, 1999) 7.                  In a more recent study,
Konstantopolous and Chun (2009) find continued benefits of Project STAR-related class size
reductions extending to all socioeconomic groups up until eighth grade, implying the existence
of long-run impacts. Most recently, Dynarski, Hyman and Schanzenbach (2013) explore the
existence of even longer-run impacts of smaller class sizes via Project STAR. These authors find
evidence that those students originally assigned to smaller classrooms had an increased
probability of attending and graduating from college, and tended to increase their enrollment in
STEM fields, with particularly large effects for black students 8.

         Outside of the experimental, but narrowly tailored, findings from Project STAR, the
relevant evidence is more mixed, and includes high quality studies that find no systematic impact
of class size on student achievement. In particular, several studies that use yearly fluctuations in
population or student enrollment to identify changes in class size find little to no evidence that
class size improves student outcomes. In the first study of this type, Hoxby (2000) finds no
evidence of class size affecting student achievement and notes that even modest impacts can be
ruled out (i.e., the author finds a relatively precisely estimated zero). Using a similar empirical
strategy, Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain (2005) and Jepsen and Rivkin (2009) find little evidence of
such impacts in Texas and California, respectively. More recently, Chingos (2013), using a
different empirical strategy, finds no systematic evidence of beneficial impacts of a state-wide
class size reduction program in Florida. Ultimately, the impact of class size on student outcomes
is not completely clear, but it appears that Project STAR provides reasonably strong empirical
evidence to believe that class size has the potential to increase student achievement. As a result,
like Card and Krueger (1992), we consider it to be a potentially reasonable proxy for school
quality, although it's possible that the influence of class size within this context may be limited.



7
  Class size was reduced by almost half from 20 to 12 students per classroom in this program; results presented later
in this study that exploit differences in class size across states do not have similar variation to exploit. Note also that
Krueger (1999) found that class size reductions had a larger positive impact for minority children and those
receiving subsidized lunches, suggesting that there may be substantial distributional impacts of reducing class size
8
  The authors also address the question of whether such benefits offset the large costs associated with the kind of
class size reductions associated with Project STAR and conclude that they likely do not. That said, they also note
that the benefits of class size reduction might exceed the costs involved if the program was focused only on the
poorest third of students, who saw the largest benefits (i.e., if class size reductions were targeted to this group).
While an accurate cost-benefit analysis is crucial in deciding whether class size reduction initiatives are a net social
gain, recall that for our purposes we are concerned only with making the case that smaller class sizes may plausibly
lead to a higher quality schooling experience.
2.2.3 Term length

       Finally, we turn to the merits of term length, or length of school year, as a proxy for
school quality. Unlike the other two proxies of quality from Card and Kruger (1992) that we
employ, research on the length of school year is less common, and generally less rigorous than
research on the impacts of teacher compensation and the pupil-teacher ratio. Overall, studies
find mixed results on the impact of a state's mandated length of school year on student
achievement. For example, while Grogger (1997) and Eide and Showalter (1998) find
insignificant effects on student outcomes and subsequent earnings, while Rizzuto and Wachtel
(1980) and Betts and Johnson (1997) find a positive impact. For the most part, however, these
studies do not employ ostensibly valid research designs--in particular, they do not account
adequately for state level factors that might impart omitted variable bias (e.g., they do not
include state fixed effects in their models) so these results may be more suggestive than causal.
       Later studies by Lee and Barro (2001) and Woessmann (2003) take a different approach
and exploit cross-country differences in school resources, including length of school year. While
this approach exploits differences larger than those seen among U.S. states, both of these studies
find essentially no impact on student achievement, as measured by standardized test scores. That
said, Lavy (2015) takes a similar approach with more recent data and finds that length of school
year is positively associated with higher standardized test scores. A more rigorous study by
Pischke (2007) uses quasi-experimental variation in length of school year from West Germany.
More specifically, the author exploits the mid-1960s "short" school years when the school year
in some West German states was reduced by 13 weeks for two school years, or a total of 26
weeks of schooling lost relative to what came before and after. What makes this quasi-
experiment so useful for internal validity is that all other elements of the schooling experience
were held constant (e.g., curriculum and degree received upon completion). Pischke (2007)
finds that, despite its large magnitude, this reduction in length of school year had no impact on
long-run employment and earnings, though he finds evidence it increased grade repetition in the
elementary school years and led to exposed students being less likely to enroll in higher
secondary school tracks. The latter two findings suggest that term length could be a useful
measure, but given the relative lack of research and inconsistency in the findings of existing
work, we place more weight on the first two measures.
       More generally, while none of these measures are perfect proxies for school quality, the
logic for why school quality might matter is sound, and they constitute the best available data on
school quality that can be matched to our sample. And, to maintain consistency with the
literature, our sample is also used in most relevant work that employs compulsory schooling laws
as instrumental variables to examine the relationship between schooling and earnings.


3. Methodology
       Our regression methodology follows Acemoglu and Angrist (2001) and Stephens and
Yang (2014). The analysis will primarily consider the impact of schooling on log weekly
earnings, but will also analyze the effect of schooling on additional outcomes. To that end, a
two-stage-least squares (2SLS) model will be used, with two different specifications for the
second-stage outcome equation. One specification of the second stage will be:

                       , = , +  +  +  , +  , .                                                    (1)
In this case:  , represents the years of schooling for individual i born in year t in state s; 
and  represent fixed effects for each state-of-birth s and birth-cohort t, respectively; and  ,
represent a set of characteristics for each individual i born in year t in state s. Depending on the
particular regression used, these characteristics can include: a quartic in age, indicators for
census extracts used to create the data, and an indicator for gender. The first-stage equation used
for this second-stage model is:

                         , =  +  +  +  , +  , .                                                   (2)
The variable  represents either the mandatory schooling laws (CSLs) or child labor
laws (CLLs) in state-of-birth s and year-of-birth t depending on the specification. Regarding
CSLs, there are a number of different possible instruments to use in this respect, and to remain
consistent with prior studies, the main specification will use three indicator variables to represent
laws requiring 7, 8 and 9 years of mandatory schooling, which will be represented by the
variables RS7, RS8 and RS9, respectively. For CLLs, we follow Acemoglu and Angrist (2001)
and parameterize these laws based on the age at which individuals are permitted to leave school
for work, as we will discuss in more detail later.
         In addition, this study will also use an alternative specification for the second-stage
outcome equation:

                 , = , +  +  +    +  , +  , .                                                                     (3)
In this case,    represents the interaction between indicators for the four census
regions and the indicators for year-of-birth. 9 For this particular second-stage model, the related
first-stage regression is:

                   , =  +  +  +    + , +  , .                                                                     (4)
         The last major methodological component to the estimation approach undertaken in this
study involves the incorporation of school quality measures. As we have noted, Card and
Krueger (1992) compiled multiple measures of school quality for each state-of-birth and year-of-
birth cohort in the data: relative teacher salary, pupil to teacher ratio, and term length. While we
believe that the evidence about teacher quality, as measured by relative teacher salaries, is
stronger than that related to pupil to teacher ratio and term length, we nevertheless allow the
impact of policy-induced increases in formal schooling on weekly earnings to vary by all three
measures of school quality.

         In particular, we bifurcate our samples using each of the three state-level school quality
measures. More specifically, we compute a state-of-birth average for relative teacher salary,
pupil-teacher ratio, and term length for all birth cohorts in the sample. These averages are listed
in Appendix Tables 1A, 1B and 1C. For each of the three variables, we bifurcate the sample into
two roughly equal groups: states whose average value of the school quality variable is greater
than the population-weighted median, and states whose average value is less than the population-
weighted median. 10 We estimate 2SLS models for the entire sample, as well as these two
subsamples for each measure of school quality. 11


9
  The inclusion of this term represents the major difference between Acemoglu and Angrist (2001) and Stephens and
Yang (2014).
10
   For robustness's sake, this study used different methods to bifurcate the states according to average teacher salary.
One alternative approach used was dividing the sample by average teacher salary into two equal numbers of states.
This resulted in a larger number of observations in the sample of individuals born in states with higher-paid teachers,
since these states had larger birth cohorts. Nevertheless, the results from this approach are substantively similar to
the results presented in this paper, and are available upon request.
11
   As noted, we will also generate estimates for the other measures of school quality collected by Card and Krueger:
pupil-teacher ratios and term length. We follow a similar approach to the one used with teacher salaries, by splitting
the states into two groups: those with higher-than-median and lower-than-median measures of the specific school-
4. Data and Results

         We use data that are identical to those used in Stephens and Yang (2014) and Acemoglu
and Angrist (2001). To describe the basic characteristics of these data, Table 1 displays some
summary statistics of key variables for certain subsamples within the data. Specifically, the first
three columns of Table 1 show summary statistics for white males between the ages of 25 and 54
from the 1960 to 1980 U.S. Censuses. The first column shows sample averages for the entire
group of white males in the sample, and the second and third columns show sample averages for
the two subsamples of interest: individuals born in states whose average relative teacher salaries
are above and below the population-weighted median, respectively. The estimates in the
columns demonstrate that individuals born in states with better-paid teachers have higher average
log weekly earnings, education and log occupational scores. 12 In general, the same patterns
manifest in the final three columns (that analyze all white respondents between the ages of 25
and 54). 13 This is broadly suggestive that the educational training and labor market outcomes are
generally different for the two samples, which motivates the analysis of the returns to education
for these two groups ­ an explanation for these differences may be that changes in mandatory
schooling are more effective when additional mandated schooling time is delivered by better
paid and presumably higher quality educators.

         The final rows of the table show that a disproportionate number of respondents in the
"higher-than-median" subsample are from non-southern states, compared to the "lower-than-
median" subsample. This is due to the fact that a disproportionate number of southern states
have relatively lower teacher salaries. Stephens and Yang (2014) documented the difference in
the returns to education for these two geographical areas, so the regression analysis will be
replicated with samples of southern and non-southern states to confirm that this geographical
difference is not the key factor that drives the results. In addition, the second-last row of the
table shows that a larger number of states are present in the "lower-than-median" states in


quality characteristic. The results with these two measures of school quality are broadly similar with the ones
presented for teacher salaries, though not consistently so; for the sake of more complete information, we include the
corresponding regression in appendix tables, and discuss them in the text below.
12
   Occupational score is a ranking of occupational scores by median earnings in the 1950 Census.
13
   These samples are identical to the ones used in Stephens and Yang (2014) and Acemoglu and Angrist (2001),
although Acemoglu and Angrist focus on the subsample of respondents between the ages of 40 and 49. Sample
means and regression results for that particular subsample are similar to the ones presented in this paper for the 25 to
54-year-old sample.
comparison with the "higher-than-median" states; this is due to the fact that states with lower
relative teacher salaries also had smaller birth cohorts.

Estimates of the return to schooling by teacher quality

         Table 2 presents the returns to education estimated for the samples described in Table 1.
Specifically, Table 2 shows the OLS and 2SLS estimates of  from equations (1) and (3): the
effect of an additional year of education on log weekly earnings. Columns (1), (3) and (5)
display these estimates from equation (1), which excludes region-by-year-of-birth interactions,
and columns (2), (4) and (6) present these estimates from equation (3), which include region-by-
year-of-birth interactions. 14 Together, these first six columns present estimates from the sample
of white males aged 25-54. The results in columns (1), (3) and (5) show that in the absence of
region-by-year-of-birth interactions, the OLS and 2SLS returns to education are generally similar
across the pooled sample, and two bifurcated subsamples. The OLS return is typical in its
magnitude, and the Moreira confidence intervals listed beneath the 2SLS estimates of  do not
include zero, which indicate a statistically significant effect of education. Furthermore, the first
stage of the 2SLS estimate is similar, too ­ the coefficients on RS7, RS8, and RS9 are generally
increasing in magnitude, and the F-test of their joint significance is above any reasonable
threshold to detect weak instruments.

         However, different results are present in columns (2), (4) and (6), once region-by-year-
of-birth interactions are included in the model. As with Stephens and Yang (2014), the
coefficient on the 2SLS estimate of  in column (2) is small in magnitude, and its confidence
interval indicates that it is not possible to reject a zero return to education in this case. But this
result is different once the bifurcated samples are considered. Individuals born in states with
better-paid teachers do not exhibit a similar 2SLS return to education ­ for these states, the 2SLS
estimate of  in column (4) is approximately seven percent, and its confidence interval rejects
the hypothesis that this estimate is zero. Furthermore, the first stage regression is generally
supportive that the mandatory schooling laws are effectual, too ­ the coefficients on the RS7,
RS8, and RS9 are increasing in magnitude, and the F-test of their joint significance rejects the



14
  In this case, the variable Xst,i does not include any variables ­ therefore, year-of-birth and state-of-birth indicators
are the only other right-hand-side variables in these regressions.
hypothesis that they are weak instruments. Indeed, the F-statistic is over double that of the
pooled sample.

         By contrast, the results in column (6) suggest that the inclusion of region-by-year-of-birth
interactions for states of birth with less-well-paid teachers indicate that changes in mandatory
schooling laws are not effectual policies for either changing overall educational attainment or
enhancing labor market earnings. In these states, the first-stage regression exhibits coefficients
on RS7, RS8, and RS9 that are not increasing in magnitude, as would be expected, and the F-test
of their joint significance reveals an F-statistic that is indicative of a weak instrument. The
resulting second stage estimates of  from equation (3) is similar in magnitude to that of
equation (1) for this subsample, but is accompanied by a sufficiently wide confidence interval
that does not permit a zero effect to be rejected.

         Our estimate in column (2), which is consistent with the corresponding one in Stephens
and Yang (2014), suggests that changes in mandatory schooling laws were ineffectual in
improving earnings for individuals in our overall sample, but this masks an underlying
heterogeneity in the returns to education. Rather, our findings imply that these laws are
ineffectual for individuals in states that pay their teachers relatively lower salaries. By contrast,
individuals born in states that pay their teachers relatively higher salaries exhibit positive and
significant 2SLS estimates of the return to education, regardless of the inclusion of region-by-
year-of-birth indicators. In particular, we estimate that the return to an additional year of
schooling is just over seven percent. This pattern suggests that merely changing laws to force
students to obtain more education does not unconditionally improve labor market outcomes;
instead, students who are required to obtain more education in states with higher-paid (and
perhaps higher-skilled) teachers benefit from the additional educational training they receive. 15

         The final six columns of Table 2 display the same estimates for the larger sample of all
whites between the ages of 25 and 54, and a similar pattern is evident with this sample as was




15
   Of course, it can also be argued that the changes in the mandatory schooling laws are not binding in the states with
relatively lower teacher salaries, and this is an alternative explanation for this finding. In larger samples discussed
later on, it will be demonstrated that the first-stage is more robust in these states, but similarly small 2SLS estimates
still persist in these cases. This suggests that relative teacher pay is primary cause of this difference, not non-
binding laws.
exhibited in the first six columns of the table. 16 Columns (7) and (8) demonstrate that the 2SLS
estimate of  for the pooled sample is positive and statistically significant when the framework
excludes region-by-year-of-birth interactions, but  is small and statistically insignificant when
the model includes these interactions, as in Stephens and Yang (2014). And although this pattern
is mirrored in columns (11) and (12) for the subsample drawn from states with teachers paid
relatively lower salaries, no such pattern is evident in columns (9) and (10), for the subsample
drawn from states with teachers paid relatively higher salaries. Indeed, inclusion of these
interactions reduces the implied return to schooling from 8.2 percent to 6.8 percent, but the latter
estimate remains precisely estimated, and is similar to the estimate of 7.4 percent for our
corresponding sample of similarly-aged white males. So, again, our estimates imply a
heterogeneity in the returns to education: CSL-induced increases in education in states with
relatively high teacher pay has systematically positive returns, while this return is not evident in
states with relatively lower teacher pay.

Further Refinements

         Estimates in Table 3 refine our Table 2 estimates even further. The first six columns of
Table 3 exhibit the estimates of  that are drawn only from equation (3) ­ that include region-by-
year-of-birth interactions ­ but are subdivided within each sample by southern and non-southern
states. Columns (1) and (2) show that for both southern and non-southern states in the pooled
sample, 2SLS estimates of  are still small in magnitude and not statistically different than zero.
But the same pattern evident for the "higher-than-median" subsample is also evident in columns
(3) and (4) for both the southern and non-southern states within this subsample. Both sets of
states exhibit positive and statistically significant 2SLS estimates of the return to education, and
their first stages both have acceptably high F-statistics, and gradually increasing coefficients on
RS7, RS8 and RS9. The "lower-than-median" subsample, however, shows the same pattern in
columns (5) and (6) with one notable difference: although the 2SLS estimates of the return to
education are not statistically different than zero (in the non-southern states of birth) or negative
(in the southern states), it is notable that the first stage for the non-southern subsample is
relatively strong. The F-statistic testing the joint significance of the coefficients is well above


16
   In this case, the variable Xst,i includes a quartic in age, as well as two indicator variables for the Census extract
from which the data was collected.
any reasonable threshold for rejecting the instruments as weak. This is important because it
serves as evidence to differentiate two potential explanations for the low returns to schooling in
the "lower-than-median" subsample: non-binding changes in mandatory schooling laws (which
would result in insignificant returns to schooling) and lower-salaried teachers, who may not be as
adept at training students as their better-paid counterparts. In column (5), the first stage F-
statistic shows that the mandatory schooling laws are clearly binding in non-southern states, but
the extra educational training imparted by these laws does not have a significant effect on
earnings for students.

       Taken together, our results suggest that although regional effects are clearly important
within this framework, it is also critical to consider heterogeneity in the returns to education, and
whether the quality of the education which students are compelled to complete when assessing
its ultimate impact on outcomes of interest like the wage rate. Indeed, as we have documented,
states with better-paid teachers appear to exhibit positive and statistically significant 2SLS
returns to education, while there is much less evidence of an effect in states with less-well-paid
teachers.

       In the last six columns of Table 3, the model is re-estimated for individuals who reside in
their states of birth ("non-migrants") and those who do not ("migrants") to address the potential
concern about bias being introduced by systematic differences in migration patterns between the
subsamples used in the paper. Since migration is endogenous, and may be partly caused by local
economic opportunities, a possible concern is that the "higher-than-median" and "lower-than-
median" subsamples have different opportunities in this regard, and this difference may generate
the variation in the estimates of  for these two subsamples. The last six columns of Table 3
suggest that this is not the case. Columns (7) and (8) show that non-migrants in the pooled
sample have a small negative, but statistically significant return to education, while migrants
have a significantly positive return to education. The implication of these results becomes
clearer when considering the final four columns: in columns (9) and (10), individuals in the
"higher-than-median" subsample exhibit positive and statistically significant returns to
education, regardless of whether or not they still reside in their state of birth. This suggests that
the positive returns to education documented for this subsample throughout our analyses are not
generated exclusively by migration choices. Although migrants appear to have somewhat larger
returns to education than non-migrants, non-migrants appear to obtain more education due to
compulsory schooling laws, which appears, in turn, to raise their earnings. By contrast, the
"lower-than-median" subsample estimates in columns (11) and (12) suggest that non-migrants
are not deriving a benefit from CSL-induced education. Given the acceptably large F-statistic of
the first stage, it would appear that changes in compulsory schooling laws force this group to
obtain more education, but given that it is acquired from teachers with relatively lower salaries,
they don't appear to benefit from this extra training. In fact, the estimates are negative and
statistically different than zero for this group.

Additional estimates and robustness checks

        In addition to examining wage outcomes, Table 4 examines the impact of education on
other labor market indicators, as well as non-market outcomes. As was the case with Table 2,
Table 4 presents a comparison of OLS and 2SLS estimates of the effect of education on various
outcomes, but for brevity's sake, only one set of 2SLS estimates are presented: those
corresponding to the specification in equation (3) along with controls for school quality. The
first row of the table shows the result that has been documented in the earlier tables: the
inclusion of region-by-year-of-birth interactions yields 2SLS estimates of the effect of education
on earnings that are not statistically different from zero for the pooled sample, but heterogeneity
in the effect of education is evident for the lower-than-median and the higher-than-median
subsamples. This effect is mirrored in row 2, which uses the log occupational score as the
outcome measure within the regression, and the next four rows demonstrate that the differential
effect of education on labor market outcomes for the two subsamples is not due to differences in
its effect on unemployment, marital status, or institutionalization.

        As a robustness check of the results in Tables 2 and 3, the analysis also uses the child
labor instruments constructed by Angrist and Acemoglu (2001) in lieu of compulsory schooling
ages. Corresponding results are presented in Appendix Tables 2 and 3. These instruments are
defined as larger of two possible values: (i) the difference between the age at which an individual
may first receive a work permit and the age at which they must enrol in school, and (ii) the
education required to obtain a work permit. These instruments are meant to capture the
minimum amount of schooling an individual can obtain before entering the workforce, and for
the purpose of this study, these instruments will be represented by three indicator variables that
represent laws requiring 7, 8 and 9 years of schooling before work is possible, which will be
represented by the variables CL7, CL8 and CL9, respectively.

        For brevity's sake, Appendix Table 2 displays only the 2SLS results from this
framework, and the findings are generally consistent with those in Table 2. In the pooled
sample, the 2SLS estimates of the return to education are statistically different from zero when
the framework does not include region-by-year-of-birth interactions, but is not statistically
different from zero when these interactions are included in the framework. This is true in
columns (1) and (2) for white males between the ages of 25 and 54, and in columns (7) and (8)
for white males and females in the same age range. But as was the case with compulsory
schooling laws, it is also true that there is a different return to education for the two subsamples
divided by relative teacher pay. For the "higher-than-median" subsample in columns (3) & (4),
and (9) & (10), the 2SLS estimates of the return to education are uniformly statistically different
from zero, and the first stage in all cases has acceptably large F-statistics to reject the notion that
the child labor indicators are weak instruments. The "lower-than-median" subsample also
exhibits the pattern that is evident in earlier tables. In columns (5) & (6), and (11) & (12), the
inclusion of region-by-year-of-birth interactions in the specification changes the 2SLS estimates
of the return to education from statistically significant to not statistically different than zero.
This occurs despite the fact that the first stages in all four columns have reasonably high F-
statistics, suggesting that a lack of enforcement of these laws is not the prime reason for the
statistical insignificance of the second-stage estimates.

        Appendix Table 3 examines the robustness of these findings by replicating the analysis
with samples of southern and non-southern states, as well as "non-migrants" and "migrants". In
all cases, Appendix Table 3 only includes 2SLS results from models which include region-by-
year-of-birth interactions (i.e., equations (3) and (4)). The first two columns of the table show
that the 2SLS estimates of the return to education are not statistically different than zero for the
pooled sample in both southern and non-southern states. But the "higher-than-median" and
"lower-than-median" subsamples exhibit ­ again ­ different estimates. The "higher-than-
median" subsample has estimates of the return to education that are statistically different than
zero in both sets of states, whereas the "lower-than-median" subsample has estimates of the
return to education that are not statistically different than zero (or even negative) for both sets of
states. So, again, it appears that school quality, at least that which operates through teachers,
plays an important role beyond that of any regional differences, and underpins heterogeneity in
the returns to education.

         In the last six columns of Appendix Table 3, estimates by "migrant" and "non-migrant"
status mimic those shown in Table 3. Columns (7) and (8) show that non-migrants in the pooled
sample have a small negative, but statistically significant return to education, while migrants
have a significantly positive return to education. Again, individuals in the "higher-than-median"
subsample exhibit positive and statistically significant returns to education, regardless of whether
or not they reside in their state of birth (i.e., in columns (9) and (10)). This again suggests that
the positive returns to education documented for this subsample in other cases are not due to
positive returns being extracted from migration choices. Although migrants appear to have a
somewhat larger return to education than non-migrants, non-migrants also appear to obtain more
education when child labor laws tighten, and the resulting increase in education appears to raise
their earnings. By contrast, the "lower-than-median" subsample estimates in columns (11) and
(12) suggest that non-migrants are not deriving a benefit from education. Given the acceptably
large F-statistic of the first stage, it again appears that changes in child labor laws force this
group to obtain more education, but they don't appear to benefit from this extra training since, as
in Table 3, the estimates are negative and statistically different than zero for this group.



Other measures of School Quality

         Appendix Tables 4 through 7 present OLS and two-stage-least squares for samples that
are divided by states that have higher-than-median and lower-than-median term lengths and
pupil-teacher ratios. In Appendix Tables 4 and 5, the states are split by term length 17, and the
results are generally consistent with the results in Tables 2 and 3 using both the "required
schooling" instruments and the "child labor" instruments. In columns 4 and 10 in both Appendix
tables, it is evident that states with higher-than-median instructional days in a year have positive
and (mostly) statistically significant 2SLS returns to education when regional trends are included



17
  In this case, states were split according to those with more than 178 instructional days (on average) during the
school year, and those with less than 178 instructional days (on average).
in the regression, while columns 6 and 12 in both Appendix tables show that those with lower-
than-median instructional days do not have statistically significant 2SLS returns to education. In
Appendix Tables 6 and 7, the states are split by pupil-teacher ratios 18, and the results
demonstrate that bifurcating by this measure has little effect on the 2SLS results; in both
subsamples, the 2SLS findings are not statistically significant, both with and without regional
trends. This result may be evident because of the relatively small variation in average pupil-
teacher ratios across states; the average pupil-teacher ratio in the lower-than-median subsample
is 24.6, while the equivalent measure is 28.8 in the higher-than-median subsample. Prior studies
have suggested that relatively small changes in this measure need not have a significant effect on
student achievement, and this notion is consistent with these findings here, as well.

5 Conclusions

         In this paper, we explored a new interaction between policy-induced returns to schooling
(i.e., that which are induced by either compulsory schooling laws or child labor laws) and school
quality. While the logic is clear--the impact of policy-induced increases in schooling should
affect its return--we believe that we are the first to investigate the interactive impact of school
quality on the return to education. While we fail to find consistent evidence of an interactive
effect of class size and term length, we find consistently strong evidence for such impacts of
relative teacher pay. More precisely, we find consistently positive and statistically significant
returns to schooling for those students who were educated in a state that paid its teachers more
than the state-median relative salary. In contrast, we find consistent evidence of a zero or
negative return to schooling for students schooled in states with lower than median relative
teacher wages.
         Our results imply that school quality, particularly that which is plausibly related to
teacher quality, may play an important role in the ultimate pecuniary returns to additional policy-
induced education. In other words, school quality may well give rise to heterogeneity in the
returns to additional policy-induced education.             Furthermore, these results have strong
implications for several strands of empirical literatures that have assumed a homogeneous, causal
return to education as a mechanism for examining other relationships in economics. Aside from

18
 In this case, states were split according to those whose average pupil-teacher ratio is less than 26.8, and those
whose average pupil-teacher ratio is greater than 26.8.
labor economics, studies in health economics, crime, and political economy all implement
models that exploit universally positive returns to education that now need to be reconsidered in
light of these findings.
                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics

                              White Males Ages 25-54                      All Whites Ages 25-54
                                     Higher       Lower                          Higher       Lower
                           Pooled                                     Pooled
                                      than         than                            than        than
                           Sample                                     Sample
                                     Median      Median                         Median       Median

   Log Weekly               5.501        5.541       5.454             5.214        5.250        5.172
    Earnings               (0.793)      (0.770)     (0.818)           (0.896)      (0.884)      (0.909)
                            12.54        12.83       12.19             12.53        12.78        12.23
    Education
                           (3.007)      (2.841)     (3.158)           (2.824)      (2.691)      (2.946)
Log Occupational            3.350        3.365       3.333             3.258        3.271        3.242
     Score                 (0.331)      (0.326)     (0.336)           (0.349)      (0.346)      (0.353)
                            0.059        0.059       0.060             0.082        0.082        0.083
     Divorced
                           (0.236)      (0.235)     (0.237)           (0.275)      (0.274)      (0.276)
                            0.036        0.035       0.037             0.034        0.034        0.035
   Unemployed
                           (0.186)      (0.184)     (0.188)           (0.182)      (0.182)      (0.183)
  Percent born in           0.302        0.102       0.538             0.303        0.106        0.535
  Southern State           (0.459)      (0.303)     (0.499)           (0.459)      (0.307)      (0.499)
 Number of States
                             49           21           28               49           21           28
    of Birth
    Observations           2,166,387 1,174,871         991,516         3,680,223 1,992,397 1,687,826
Notes: The data are drawn from the U.S. Census extracts from 1960, 1970 and 1980; the gender, race and
age range of the subsamples are defined in the first row of the table. Columns entitled "pooled sample"
include all observations in the sample; columns entitled "Higher than Median" use individuals born in
states with relative average teacher salaries above the population-weighted median; columns entitled
"Lower than Median" use individuals born in states with relative average teacher salaries below the
population-weighted median. Specific states in the "Higher than Median" and "Lower than Median"
subsamples (and the relative average teacher salaries paid in each state) are specified in Appendix Table
1.
             Table 2: Comparison of OLS and 2SLS Estimates of the Returns to Schooling for Pooled Sample and Subsamples Divided by Teacher Pay

                                    White Males Ages 25-54                                                              All Whites Ages 25-54
                                                                        Lower than
                    Pooled              Higher than Median                                            Pooled             Higher than Median           Lower than Median
                                                                          Median
              (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)        (6)            (7)          (8)            (9)          (10)           (11)         (12)
             0.063        0.063          0.062        0.062          0.064     0.064           0.068        0.068          0.067        0.067          0.069        0.069
OLS
           (0.0004)     (0.0004)       (0.0006)     (0.0006)       (0.0004) (0.0004)         (0.0003)     (0.0003)       (0.0004)     (0.0004)       (0.0003)     (0.0003)
2SLS         0.097       -0.014          0.086        0.074          0.103     -0.113         0.105         -0.003         0.082       0.068           0.143       -0.072
            [0.080,     [-0.066,        [0.068,      [0.051,        [0.059,   [-0.400,       [0.083,       [-0.058,       [0.059,     [0.043,         [0.110,     [-0.180,
            0.117]       0.021]         0.106]       0.096]         0.152]     0.066]        0.123]         0.016]        0.096]      0.084]          0.193]       0.036]
First
Stage
             0.097        0.047          0.203        0.018         0.059       0.082         0.079         0.029          0.247       0.016           0.031        0.061
RS7
            (0.036)      (0.027)        (0.060)      (0.040)       (0.037)     (0.035)       (0.033)       (0.022)        (0.055)     (0.033)         (0.030)      (0.028)
             0.268        0.135          0.424        0.273         0.222       0.067         0.246         0.136          0.437       0.257           0.188        0.079
RS8
            (0.028)      (0.024)        (0.044)      (0.037)       (0.032)     (0.032)       (0.026)       (0.019)        (0.038)     (0.029)         (0.026)      (0.025)
             0.449        0.217          0.656        0.457         0.285       0.076         0.406         0.222          0.668       0.434           0.252        0.096
RS9
            (0.033)      (0.029)        (0.057)      (0.049)       (0.034)     (0.034)       (0.028)       (0.023)        (0.050)     (0.041)         (0.028)      (0.026)
F-test       81.4            23.6         61.7        51.0           30.4        2.4           91.7            40.6        75.2         60.9           38.0          4.7
N           2,166,387 2,166,387         1,174,871 1,174,871          991,516 991,516          3,680,223 3,680,223          1,992,397 1,992,397           1,687,826 1,687,826
         Notes: The data use the U.S. Census extracts from 1960, 1970 and 1980. The estimates in columns (1) to (6) use a sample of white males aged 40
         to 49, and the estimates in columns (7) to (12) use a sample of white males aged 25 to 54. The estimates in columns (3), (4), (9) and (10) are
         derived from individuals born in states whose average teacher pay is above the population-weighted median value, and the estimates in columns
         (5), (6), (11) and (12) are derived individuals born in states whose average teacher pay is below the population-weighted median value. OLS and
         2SLS estimates of the returns to schooling are in the first two rows of the table, and the Moreira confidence interval for the 2SLS estimates are
         listed in brackets underneath the 2SLS estimates. The key instruments used in the first stage regression are three required schooling dummies,
         indicating seven, eight or nine years of required schooling in a state for a particular birth cohort; these coefficients are listed in the rows entitled
         RS7, RS8 and RS9. All regressions include year-of-birth and state-of-birth indicator variables, and estimates in even-numbered columns also
         contain region-by-year-of-birth indicator variables.
           Table 3: Comparison of OLS and 2SLS Estimates of the Returns to Schooling for the Pooled Sample and Subsamples Divided by Teacher Pay

                                     All Whites Ages 25-54                                                              All Whites Ages 25-54
                    Pooled             Higher than Median           Lower than Median                   Pooled            Higher than Median         Lower than Median
             Non-                       Non-                         Non-                        Non-                       Non-                       Non-
                         South                     South                        South                       Migrant                   Migrant                   Migrant
            South                       South                       South                      Migrant                    Migrant                    Migrant
              (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)              (5)         (6)             (7)          (8)           (9)        (10)            (11)      (12)
OLS          0.067        0.069         0.067       0.069            0.069       0.069           0.068        0.066         0.065      0.069           0.070     0.063
           (0.0004)     (0.0004)      (0.0004)    (0.0008)         (0.0006)    (0.0004)        (0.0003)     (0.0004)      (0.0005) (0.0005)          (0.0005) (0.0004)
2SLS        -0.009       0.019          0.031        0.244          0.036        -0.111         -0.067        0.097         0.045       0.150         -0.127       0.221
           [-0.031,     [-0.097,       [0.009,      [0.196,        [-0.042,     [-0.350,       [-0.105,      [0.032,       [0.021,     [0.100,       [-0.234,     [0.031,
            0.001]       0.085]        0.041]       0.319]          0.067]      -0.087]        -0.030]       0.150]        0.065]      0.201]        -0.019]      0.412]
First
Stage
RS7         0.212         0.033         0.261        0.138          0.275        0.048          0.012         0.118         -0.005      0.190          0.043       0.086
           (0.056)       (0.028)       (0.065)      (0.116)        (0.062)      (0.030)        (0.025)       (0.037)       (0.035)     (0.060)        (0.033)     (0.045)
RS8         0.418         0.066         0.425        0.375          0.943        0.064          0.146         0.147         0.251       0.343          0.130       0.022
           (0.037)       (0.026)       (0.039)      (0.121)        (0.103)      (0.026)        (0.021)       (0.032)       (0.029)     (0.050)        (0.027)     (0.041)
RS9         0.574         0.116         0.639        0.498          1.004        0.086          0.246         0.171         0.450       0.416          0.128       0.014
           (0.042)       (0.028)       (0.055)      (0.121)        (0.104)      (0.028)        (0.026)       (0.036)       (0.045)     (0.062)        (0.029)     (0.043)
F-test       67.3            6.3         47.4        16.5            40.7         3.2            42.8            7.6         54.9        19.7           8.0         1.5
  N        2,566,127 1,114,096          1,782,054 210,343              784,073     903,753      2,320,750 1,359,473        1,313,309 679,088          1,007,441   680,385
         Notes: The data use a sample of white males and females aged 25 to 54 from the 1960, 1970 and 1980 U.S. Census extracts. Estimates in columns
         (7), (9) and (11) use a subsample of respondents from southern states; the estimates in columns (8), (10) and (12) use a subsample of respondents
         from non-southern states. The estimates in columns (3), (4), (9) and (10) are derived from individuals born in states whose average teacher pay is
         above the population-weighted median value, and the estimates in columns (5), (6), (11) and (12) are derived individuals born in states whose
         average teacher pay is below the population-weighted median value. OLS and 2SLS estimates of the returns to schooling are in the first two rows
         of the table, and the Moreira confidence interval for the 2SLS estimates are listed in brackets underneath the 2SLS estimates. The key instruments
         used in the first stage regression are three required schooling dummies, indicating seven, eight or nine years of required schooling in a state for a
         particular birth cohort; these coefficients are listed in the rows entitled RS7, RS8 and RS9. All regressions include year-of-birth and state-of-birth
         indicator variables, and estimates in columns (2), (4), (6), and (7) through (12) also contain region-by-year-of-birth indicator variables.
   Table 4: Comparison of OLS and 2SLS Estimates of the Effect of Schooling on Additional Outcomes
                     for the Pooled Sample and Subsamples Divided by Teacher Pay
                                      Pooled            Higher than Median         Lower than Median
                                 (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)
White males ages 25-54:
                                OLS          2SLS        OLS         2SLS           OLS          2SLS
   Log weekly wage
                                            -0.014                   0.074                      -0.113
[(1) & (2) mean = 5.21          0.063                    0.062                      0.064
                                           [-0.066,                 [0.051,                    [-0.291,
(3) & (4) mean = 5.26         (0.0004)                 (0.0006)                   (0.0004)
                                            0.021]                   0.096]                     0.066]
(5) & (6) mean = 5.15]
 Log occupational score
                                              -0.0011                       0.034                        -0.040
 [(1) & (2) mean = 3.34            0.036                        0.038                       0.035
                                              [-0.023,                     [0.024,                      [-0.121,
 (3) & (4) mean = 3.36           (0.0002)                     (0.0002)                    (0.0002)
                                               0.017]                      0.046]                        0.041]
 (5) & (6) mean = 3.32]
       Unemployed
                                               0.0003                       -0.009                       -0.007
 [(1) & (2) mean = 0.033          -0.005                       -0.005                      -0.005
                                              [-0.0062,                    [-0.014,                     [-0.049,
  (3) & (4) mean = 0.032        (0.00007)                     (0.0001)                    (0.0001)
                                               0.0132]                     -0.002]                       0.034]
 (5) & (6) mean = 0.033]
         Divorced
                                               -0.0063                      -0.012                       0.062
 [(1) & (2) mean = 0.047         -0.0018                       -0.002                       -0.001
                                              [-0.0175,                    [-0.019,                     [-0.010,
  (3) & (4) mean = 0.046        (0.00006)                    (0.00009)                    (0.00008)
                                               0.0036]                     -0.007]                       0.133]
 (5) & (6) mean = 0.048]
    In mental institution
                                               0.0008                      -0.0003                      -0.0062
 [(1) & (2) mean = 0.003          -0.0008                      -0.001                      -0.0007
                                              [-0.0022,                    [-0.002,                      [-0.01,
  (3) & (4) mean = 0.003         (0.0006)                    (0.00004)                    (0.00003)
                                               0.0045]                      0.002]                        0.01]
 (5) & (6) mean = 0.003]
           In jail
                                               0.0016                      0.0005                        0.0075
 [(1) & (2) mean = 0.004         -0.0009                      -0.0009                      -0.0009
                                              [-0.0016,                   [-0.0013,                     [-0.010,
  (3) & (4) mean = 0.003        (0.00002)                    (0.00003)                    (0.00003)
                                               0.0050]                     0.0023]                       0.010]
 (5) & (6) mean = 0.004]
White females ages 25-54:
         Divorced
                                               0.0062                      -0.0031                      0.0168
 [(1) & (2) mean = 0.064         -0.0008                       -0.0014                     -0.0003
                                              [-0.0009,                   [-0.0102,                    [-0.0049,
  (3) & (4) mean = 0.064        (0.00009)                     (0.0002)                    (0.0001)
                                               0.0164]                     0.0047]                      0.0200]
 (5) & (6) mean = 0.064]
    In mental institution
                                                -0.0010                      -0.0012                    -0.00002
 [(1) & (2) mean = 0.002          -0.0006                       -0.0007                     -0.0005
                                               [-0.0026,                    [-0.0028,                    [-0.004,
  (3) & (4) mean = 0.002         (0.00003)                     (0.00004)                   (0.00003)
                                                0.0014]                      0.0011]                      0.004]
 (5) & (6) mean = 0.002]
   Notes: The data use the U.S. Census extracts from 1960, 1970 and 1980. The estimates use samples of
   white males and females aged 25 to 54; the estimates in columns (3), (4) are derived from individuals
   born in states whose average teacher pay is above the population-weighted median value, and the
   estimates in columns (5), (6) are derived from individuals born in states whose average teacher pay is
   below the population-weighted median value. All regressions include year-of-birth and state-of-birth
   indicator variables, and estimates in columns (2), (4), and (6) also contain region-by-year-of-birth
   indicator variables and school quality measures.
                 Appendix Table 1: State Averages, Ranks and Cumulative Frequencies of Relative Teacher Salary

                  Above-Median States                                                   Below-Median States
                                             Average                                                                Average
                        Average           Teacher Salary                                      Average            Teacher Salary
    State                                                                  State
                     Teacher Salary        Cumulative                                      Teacher Salary         Cumulative
                                            Frequency                                                              Frequency
      D.C                1.482                 100                      Minnesota              1.001                 46.59
  New York               1.360                99.67                      Colorado              0.995                 44.25
 Massachusetts           1.270                90.51                     Wisconsin              0.990                 43.28
   California            1.230                87.27                      Nevada                0.977                 40.63
 Rhode Island            1.227                82.36                     Wyoming                0.969                 40.52
   Maryland              1.214                81.82                     Louisiana              0.962                 40.31
  New Jersey             1.172                80.56                      Montana               0.956                 38.79
 Pennsylvania            1.142                77.68                       Texas                0.933                 38.33
    Arizona              1.121                69.90                      Michigan              0.933                 32.94
 New Mexico              1.110                69.46                      Virginia              0.925                 28.62
  Connecticut            1.101                68.91                       Idaho                0.924                 26.65
    Florida              1.092                67.63                   South Carolina           0.921                 26.16
  Washington             1.085                66.43                      Missouri              0.904                 25.04
North Carolina           1.083                65.07                        Iowa                0.879                 22.24
    Illinois             1.078                62.45                      Vermont               0.876                 20.12
New Hampshire            1.068                56.77                     Oklahoma               0.875                 19.81
   Delaware              1.066                56.39                      Georgia               0.874                 17.86
     Utah                1.052                56.20                       Kansas               0.860                 15.83
    Indiana              1.036                55.56                     Tennessee              0.859                 14.33
    Oregon               1.012                52.76                   West Virginia            0.845                 11.95
     Ohio                1.003                51.94                      Alabama               0.843                 10.17
                                                                       South Dakota            0.840                  8.26
                                                                         Nebraska              0.811                  7.68
                                                                          Maine                0.809                  6.53
                                                                       North Dakota            0.807                  5.82
                                                                         Arkansas              0.801                  5.17
                                                                        Kentucky               0.795                  3.70
                                                                        Mississippi            0.732                  1.09
            Appendix Table 1B: State Averages, Ranks and Cumulative Frequencies of Relative Pupil-Teacher Ratio

             Smaller-than-Median States                                              Larger-than-Median States
                                          Average Pupil-                                                         Average Pupil-
                   Average Pupil-         Teacher Ratio                                   Average Pupil-         Teacher Ratio
    State                                                                State
                   Teacher Ratio           Cumulative                                     Teacher Ratio           Cumulative
                                           Frequency                                                              Frequency
 South Dakota          17.68                  0.59                  West Virginia             26.90                  52.49
 North Dakota          18.29                  1.23                     Missouri               27.03                  55.29
   Nebraska            19.97                  2.38                   New Mexico               27.11                  55.84
   Montana             20.03                  2.85                      Ohio                  27.16                  61.19
     Iowa              20.83                  4.96                     Arizona                27.33                  61.63
   Wyoming             20.87                  5.18                    California              27.43                  66.54
    Kansas             20.95                  6.68                       D.C.                 27.66                  66.54
   Vermont             22.60                  6.99                   Pennsylvania             27.82                  74.65
    Oregon             23.28                  7.81                    Oklahoma                28.24                  79.40
  Minnesota            23.86                  10.15                      Utah                 28.54                  80.04
New Hampshire          23.86                  10.53                    Virginia               28.67                  82.01
  Wisconsin            23.98                  13.18                   Maryland                28.70                  83.26
   Colorado            24.05                  14.15                   Louisiana               29.39                  84.77
   Delaware            24.18                  14.33                   Kentucky                29.72                  87.37
    Nevada             24.23                  14.44                   Tennessee               30.42                  89.75
    Maine              24.42                  15.15                 South Carolina            30.58                  90.87
  New Jersey           24.68                  18.04                    Georgia                30.77                  92.90
  New York             24.76                  27.20                 North Carolina            31.34                  95.52
 Massachusetts         25.13                  30.44                    Alabama                31.90                  97.43
 Rhode Island          25.27                  30.99                    Arkansas               32.35                  98.91
    Illinois           25.50                  36.67                   Mississippi             33.74                   100
     Idaho             25.77                  37.16
  Connecticut          25.86                  38.44
   Michigan            26.52                  42.77
  Washington           26.70                  44.13
     Texas             26.79                  49.51
    Florida            26.79                  50.71
                   Appendix Table 1C: State Averages, Ranks and Cumulative Frequencies of Term Length

            Longer-than-Median Term Lengths                                        Shorter-than-Median States
                                        Average Term                                                            Average Term
                      Average Term          Length                                       Average Term              Length
    State                                                              State
                         Length           Cumulative                                        Length               Cumulative
                                          Frequency                                                              Frequency
   Illinois              183.7               100                  New Hampshire              176.9                 45.27
  Maryland               183.6              94.32                   California               176.9                 44.89
 New Jersey              182.9              93.07                    Nebraska                176.8                 39.98
 New York                182.2              90.18                     Oregon                 176.6                 38.83
Pennsylvania             181.7              81.02                    Colorado                176.1                 38.01
  Delaware               181.0              73.24                   Wyoming                  175.9                 37.04
 Connecticut             180.8              73.06                  South Dakota              175.4                 36.83
Rhode Island             180.4              71.77                     Florida                175.3                 36.24
  Michigan               180.2              71.23                       Utah                 174.8                 35.04
  Missouri               179.3              66.90                  North Dakota              174.5                 34.40
   Maine                 179.2              64.10                   Minnesota                174.1                 33.75
Massachusetts            178.6              63.38                   Oklahoma                 173.9                 31.41
 Wisconsin               178.5              60.15                    Vermont                 173.4                 29.45
New Mexico               178.4              57.50                      Idaho                 173.1                 29.15
 Washington              178.4              56.96                  West Virginia             172.9                 28.65
    Ohio                 178.2              55.60                     Kansas                 172.8                 26.87
     DC                  177.8              50.25                 North Carolina             172.5                 25.37
                                                                      Indiana                172.2                 22.75
   Iowa                177.7               49.92                    Louisiana                172.0                 19.97
  Montana              177.4               47.80                       Texas                 170.8                 18.43
  Nevada               177.1               47.34                     Georgia                 170.1                 13.05
  Virginia             177.0               47.23                    Tennessee                170.0                 11.02
                                                                     Arizona                 169.9                  8.65
                                                                  South Carolina             168.8                  8.20
                                                                    Kentucky                 165.9                  7.08
                                                                     Alabama                 165.1                  4.48
                                                                     Arkansas                162.9                  2.57
                                                                    Mississippi              155.9                  1.09
                                  Appendix Table 2: 2SLS Estimates of the Returns to Schooling with the Child Labor Instrument
                                                for the Pooled Sample and Subsamples Divided by Teacher Pay
                                  White Males Ages 25-54                                                            All Whites Ages 25-54
                                                                    Lower than
                  Pooled              Higher than Median                                          Pooled              Higher than Median          Lower than Median
                                                                      Median
            (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)       (6)            (7)            (8)          (9)         (10)           (11)         (12)

2SLS       0.076        0.023          0.071        0.086         0.105     -0.053         0.077        0.002          0.077        0.073          0.102       -0.058
          [0.058,      [-0.036,       [0.043,      [0.036,       [0.093,   [-0.050,       [0.067,      [-0.055,       [0.053,      [0.046,        [0.079,     [-0.050,
          0.106]        0.060]        0.110]       0.135]        0.154]     0.009]        0.104]        0.021]        0.101]       0.105]         0.130]      -0.010]
First
Stage
           0.137        0.104          0.249       0.094          0.104      0.121         0.128        0.075          0.291        0.070          0.069        0.085
CL7
          (0.025)      (0.019)        (0.043)     (0.037)        (0.026)    (0.023)       (0.020)      (0.015)        (0.040)      (0.031)        (0.020)      (0.017)
           0.183        0.090          0.246       0.109          0.167      0.046         0.154        0.068          0.260        0.087          0.122        0.024
CL8
          (0.022)      (0.017)        (0.033)     (0.027)        (0.029)    (0.026)       (0.018)      (0.013)        (0.030)      (0.022)        (0.023)      (0.019)
           0.337        0.164          0.480       0.221          0.297      0.123         0.323        0.158          0.520        0.199          0.264        0.118
CL9
          (0.028)      (0.020)        (0.048)     (0.040)        (0.031)    (0.026)       (0.024)      (0.017)        (0.046)      (0.034)        (0.027)      (0.020)
F-         54.4            22.0        41.1         18.5          31.8       14.7          65.2            33.4        50.3         23.6           36.0         20.6
test
N        2,166,387 2,166,387          1,174,871 1,174,871          991,516 991,516          3,608,223 3,608,223          1,992,397 1,992,397         1,687,826 1,687,826
        Notes: The data use the U.S. Census extracts from 1960, 1970 and 1980. The estimates in columns (1) to (6) use a sample of white males aged 40
        to 49, and the estimates in columns (7) to (12) use a sample of white males aged 25 to 54. The estimates in columns (3), (4), (9) and (10) are
        derived from individuals born in states whose average teacher pay is above the population-weighted median value, and the estimates in columns
        (5), (6), (11) and (12) are derived individuals born in states whose average teacher pay is below the population-weighted median value. OLS and
        2SLS estimates of the returns to schooling are in the first two rows of the table, and the Moreira confidence interval for the 2SLS estimates are
        listed in brackets underneath the 2SLS estimates. The key instruments used in the first stage regression are three child labor indicators, indicating
        seven, eight or nine years of required schooling in a state for a particular birth cohort before it is permissible to work; these coefficients are listed
        in the rows entitled CL7, CL8 and CL9. All regressions include year-of-birth and state-of-birth indicator variables, and estimates in even-
        numbered columns also contain region-by-year-of-birth indicator variables.
                                Appendix Table 3: 2SLS Estimates of the Returns to Schooling with the Child Labor Instrument
                                              for the Pooled Sample and Subsamples Divided by Teacher Pay
                                  All Whites Ages 25-54                                                        All Whites Ages 25-54
                  Pooled           Higher than Median         Lower than Median               Pooled              Higher than Median                 Lower than Median
             Non-                    Non-                      Non-                      Non-                       Non-                               Non-
                        South                   South                     South                     Migrant                   Migrant                           Migrant
            South                    South                     South                   Migrant                    Migrant                            Migrant
              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)           (9)        (10)                   (11)       (12)
2SLS        -0.005      -0.022       0.044      0.254          0.082      -0.077        -0.058       0.089          0.060      0.148                  -0.110     0.051
           [-0.055,    [-0.089,     [0.009,    [0.150,       [-0.010,    [-0.150,      [-0.108,     [0.042,        [0.015,    [0.111,                [-0.190,   [0.007,
            0.027]      0.021]      0.071]      0.358]        0.130]     -0.030]       -0.026]       0.137]        0.105]     0.189]                 -0.029]    0.084]
First
Stage
CL7          0.217       0.090           0.392       -0.095         -0.077       0.103          0.048        0.175          0.061       0.197          0.039       0.168
            (0.034)     (0.019)         (0.045)     (0.089)        (0.037)      (0.019)        (0.017)      (0.023)        (0.035)     (0.045)        (0.021)     (0.026)
CL8          0.184       0.020           0.298       -0.111         -0.074       0.028          0.063        0.145          0.067       0.253          0.078       -0.027
            (0.026)     (0.022)         (0.033)     (0.089)        (0.035)      (0.022)        (0.014)      (0.021)        (0.024)     (0.034)        (0.022)     (0.028)
CL9          0.360       0.132           0.558       0.084          0.015        0.124          0.151        0.186          0.192       0.279          0.148       0.111
            (0.033)     (0.023)         (0.049)     (0.098)        (0.035)      (0.023)        (0.019)      (0.025)        (0.038)     (0.047)        (0.024)     (0.029)
F-test       47.8         16.1           47.0         8.7            7.5         15.5           26.7         22.0           17.9        30.5           13.2        25.3
  N        2,566,127 1,114,096          1,782,054 322,663            784,073       903,753       2,320,750 1,359,473         1,313,309 679,088           1,007,441 680,385
         Notes: The data use a sample of white males and females aged 25 to 54 from the 1960, 1970 and 1980 U.S. Census extracts. Estimates in columns
         (7), (9) and (11) use a subsample of respondents from southern states; the estimates in columns (8), (10) and (12) use a subsample of respondents
         from non-southern states. The estimates in columns (3), (4), (9) and (10) are derived from individuals born in states whose average teacher pay is
         above the population-weighted median value, and the estimates in columns (5), (6), (11) and (12) are derived individuals born in states whose
         average teacher pay is below the population-weighted median value. OLS and 2SLS estimates of the returns to schooling are in the first two rows
         of the table, and the Moreira confidence interval for the 2SLS estimates are listed in brackets underneath the 2SLS estimates. The key instruments
         used in the first stage regression are three child labor indicators, indicating seven, eight or nine years of required schooling in a state for a
         particular birth cohort before it is permissible to work; these coefficients are listed in the rows entitled CL7, CL8 and CL9. All regressions include
         year-of-birth and state-of-birth indicator variables, and estimates in columns (2), (4), (6), and (7) through (12) also contain region-by-year-of-birth
         indicator variables.
              Appendix Table 4: OLS and 2SLS Estimates of the Returns to Schooling for Pooled Sample and Subsamples Divided by Term Length

                                   White Males Ages 25-54                                                              All Whites Ages 25-54
                                        Terms Longer                 Terms Shorter                                          Terms Longer                Terms Shorter
                  Pooled                                                                              Pooled
                                         than Median                  than Median                                            than Median                 than Median
            (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)              (5)         (6)            (7)           (8)           (9)         (10)            (11)        (12)
           0.063        0.063         0.062       0.062            0.065       0.064          0.068         0.068         0.067       0.067           0.069       0.069
OLS
         (0.0004)     (0.0004)      (0.0006)    (0.0006)         (0.0004)    (0.0005)       (0.0003)      (0.0003)      (0.0004)    (0.0004)        (0.0003)    (0.0004)
2SLS      0.097        -0.014         0.017        0.035          0.108        -0.024         0.105        -0.003         0.004       0.020           0.134       0.013
         [0.080,      [-0.066,       [-0.008,     [0.004,        [0.089,      [-0.125,       [0.083,      [-0.058,       [-0.016,    [-0.010,        [0.115,     [-0.067,
         0.117]        0.021]         0.042]      0.061]         0.128]        0.077]        0.123]        0.016]         0.026]      0.033]         0.153]       0.092]
First
Stage
          0.097         0.047         0.026        0.033          0.129        0.051          0.079         0.029         0.026        0.012          0.112        0.045
RS7
         (0.036)       (0.027)       (0.044)      (0.040)        (0.047)      (0.036)        (0.033)       (0.022)       (0.036)      (0.031)        (0.040)      (0.028)
          0.268         0.135         0.283        0.257          0.195        0.059          0.246         0.136         0.320        0.271          0.174        0.065
RS8
         (0.028)       (0.024)       (0.039)      (0.038)        (0.041)      (0.033)        (0.026)       (0.019)       (0.033)      (0.032)        (0.035)      (0.026)
          0.449         0.217         0.382        0.386          0.455        0.122          0.406         0.222         0.414        0.404          0.402        0.115
RS9
         (0.033)       (0.029)       (0.051)      (0.050)        (0.040)      (0.036)        (0.028)       (0.023)       (0.044)      (0.043)        (0.033)      (0.028)
F-
           81.4            23.6        39.2        32.8            55.5         4.3            91.7            40.6        62.5        50.8           64.2          6.5
test
N        2,166,387 2,166,387         1,098,241 1,098,241         1,068,146 1,068,146         3,680,223 3,680,223          1,850,340 1,850,340           1,829,883 1,829,883
        Notes: The data use the U.S. Census extracts from 1960, 1970 and 1980. The estimates in columns (1) to (6) use a sample of white males aged 25
        to 54, and the estimates in columns (7) to (12) use a sample of white respondents aged 25 to 54. The estimates in columns (3), (4), (9) and (10) are
        derived from individuals born in states whose average term length is greater than the population-weighted median value, and the estimates in
        columns (5), (6), (11) and (12) are derived individuals born in states whose average term length is shorter than the population-weighted median
        value. OLS and 2SLS estimates of the returns to schooling are in the first two rows of the table, and the Moreira confidence interval for the 2SLS
        estimates are listed in brackets underneath the 2SLS estimates. The key instruments used in the first stage regression are three required schooling
        dummies, indicating seven, eight or nine years of required schooling in a state for a particular birth cohort; these coefficients are listed in the rows
        entitled RS7, RS8 and RS9. All regressions include year-of-birth and state-of-birth indicator variables, and estimates in even-numbered columns
        also contain region-by-year-of-birth indicator variables.
              Appendix Table 5: OLS and 2SLS Estimates of the Returns to Schooling for Pooled Sample and Subsamples Divided by Term Length

                                   White Males Ages 25-54                                                              All Whites Ages 25-54
                                        Terms Longer                Terms Shorter                                           Terms Longer                Terms Shorter
                  Pooled                                                                              Pooled
                                         than Median                 than Median                                             than Median                 than Median
           (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)             (7)           (8)           (9)         (10)            (11)       (12)
2SLS      0.076        0.023         0.002        0.076           0.110      0.019            0.077        0.002         0.027        0.049           0.102      0.003
         [0.058,      [-0.036,      [-0.057,     [0.010,         [0.091,    [-0.046,         [0.067,      [-0.055,      [-0.006,     [0.005,         [0.086,    [-0.045,
         0.106]        0.060]        0.060]      0.143]          0.130]      0.083]          0.104]        0.021]        0.060]      0.093]          0.119]      0.048]
First
Stage
          0.137         0.104         0.129        0.060          0.139        0.123          0.128         0.075         0.182        0.060          0.106        0.089
CL7
         (0.025)       (0.019)       (0.037)      (0.035)        (0.029)      (0.022)        (0.020)       (0.015)       (0.035)      (0.031)        (0.023)      (0.017)
          0.183         0.090         0.156        0.095          0.146        0.042          0.154         0.068         0.194        0.093          0.116        0.024
CL8
         (0.022)       (0.017)       (0.028)      (0.026)        (0.032)      (0.025)        (0.018)       (0.013)       (0.026)      (0.022)        (0.027)      (0.019)
          0.337         0.164         0.232        0.137          0.424        0.147          0.323         0.158         0.305        0.154          0.378        0.134
CL9
         (0.028)       (0.020)       (0.039)      (0.037)        (0.037)      (0.026)        (0.024)       (0.017)       (0.037)      (0.032)        (0.032)      (0.021)
F-
           54.4            22.0        15.9         9.8            46.5        18.1            65.2            33.4        27.1        16.6           50.5         21.5
test
N        2,166,387 2,166,387           1,098,241 1,098,241        1,068,146 1,068,146          3,608,223 3,608,223          1,850,340 1,850,340         1,829,883 1,829,883
        Notes: The data use the U.S. Census extracts from 1960, 1970 and 1980. The estimates in columns (1) to (6) use a sample of white males aged 25
        to 54, and the estimates in columns (7) to (12) use a sample of all white respondents aged 25 to 54. The estimates in columns (3), (4), (9) and (10)
        are derived from individuals born in states whose average term length is greater than the population-weighted median value, and the estimates in
        columns (5), (6), (11) and (12) are derived individuals born in states whose average term length is less than the population-weighted median value.
        OLS and 2SLS estimates of the returns to schooling are in the first two rows of the table, and the Moreira confidence interval for the 2SLS
        estimates are listed in brackets underneath the 2SLS estimates. The key instruments used in the first stage regression are three child labor
        indicators, indicating seven, eight or nine years of required schooling in a state for a particular birth cohort before it is permissible to work; these
        coefficients are listed in the rows entitled CL7, CL8 and CL9. All regressions include year-of-birth and state-of-birth indicator variables, and
        estimates in even-numbered columns also contain region-by-year-of-birth indicator variables.
          Appendix Table 6: OLS and 2SLS Estimates of the Returns to Schooling for Pooled Sample and Subsamples Divided by Pupil-Teacher Ratio

                                  White Males Ages 25-54                                                              All Whites Ages 25-54
                                      Smaller classes               Larger classes                                        Smaller classes              Larger classes
                  Pooled                                                                             Pooled
                                        than Median                  than Median                                            than Median                 than Median
            (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)              (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)         (10)            (11)         (12)
           0.063        0.063        0.063       0.063            0.064        0.063         0.068         0.068         0.069       0.069           0.068        0.068
OLS
         (0.0004)     (0.0004)     (0.0006)    (0.0006)         (0.0005)     (0.0005)      (0.0003)      (0.0003)      (0.0004)    (0.0004)        (0.0003)     (0.0004)
2SLS      0.097        -0.014         0.063       -0.029          0.114       0.019          0.105        -0.003        0.022        -0.041         0.105       0.031
         [0.080,      [-0.066,       [0.050,     [-0.064,        [0.097,     [-0.030,       [0.083,      [-0.058,      [-0.009,     [-0.070,       [0.093,     [-0.028,
         0.117]        0.021]        0.112]       0.004]         0.134]       0.098]        0.123]        0.016]        0.052]      -0.012]        0.128]       0.090]
First
Stage
          0.097         0.047         -0.023      -0.017         0.206        0.156          0.079         0.029         -0.217      -0.092         0.235        0.138
RS7
         (0.036)       (0.027)       (0.068)     (0.125)        (0.046)      (0.036)        (0.033)       (0.022)       (0.057)     (0.076)        (0.041)      (0.028)
          0.268         0.135         0.296       0.245          0.214        0.133          0.246         0.136         0.138       0.206          0.255        0.131
RS8
         (0.028)       (0.024)       (0.066)     (0.127)        (0.038)      (0.033)        (0.026)       (0.019)       (0.054)     (0.079)        (0.033)      (0.025)
          0.449         0.217         0.411       0.338          0.545        0.198          0.406         0.222         0.264       0.321          0.514        0.184
RS9
         (0.033)       (0.029)       (0.068)     (0.127)        (0.043)      (0.036)        (0.028)       (0.023)       (0.055)     (0.079)        (0.038)      (0.028)
F-         81.4            23.6       49.8         32.1           30.4        10.6
                                                                                              91.7            40.6       71.3         55.7           68.8        14.9
test
N        2,166,387 2,166,387          1,101,342 1,101,342        1,065,045 1,065,045          3,680,223 3,680,223       1,879,243 1,879,243           1,800,980 1,800,980
        Notes: The data use the U.S. Census extracts from 1960, 1970 and 1980. The estimates in columns (1) to (6) use a sample of white males aged 25
        to 54, and the estimates in columns (7) to (12) use a sample of all white respondents aged 25 to 54. The estimates in columns (3), (4), (9) and (10)
        are derived from individuals born in states whose average pupil-teacher class ratios are smaller than the population-weighted median value, and
        the estimates in columns (5), (6), (11) and (12) are derived individuals born in states whose average pupil-teacher class ratios are larger than the
        population-weighted median value. OLS and 2SLS estimates of the returns to schooling are in the first two rows of the table, and the Moreira
        confidence interval for the 2SLS estimates are listed in brackets underneath the 2SLS estimates. The key instruments used in the first stage
        regression are three required schooling dummies, indicating seven, eight or nine years of required schooling in a state for a particular birth cohort;
        these coefficients are listed in the rows entitled RS7, RS8 and RS9. All regressions include year-of-birth and state-of-birth indicator variables, and
        estimates in even-numbered columns also contain region-by-year-of-birth indicator variables.
          Appendix Table 7: OLS and 2SLS Estimates of the Returns to Schooling for Pooled Sample and Subsamples Divided by Pupil-Teacher Ratio

                                   White Males Ages 25-54                                                              All Whites Ages 25-54
                                       Smaller classes              Larger classes                                         Smaller classes              Larger classes
                  Pooled                                                                              Pooled
                                        than Median                  than Median                                            than Median                  than Median
           (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)            (7)           (8)           (9)         (10)            (11)        (12)
2SLS      0.076        0.023         0.092        0.040           0.138       0.032           0.077        0.002         0.018        -0.037          0.140       0.047
         [0.058,      [-0.036,      [0.068,      [-0.012,        [0.127,     [-0.020,        [0.067,      [-0.055,      [-0.022,     [-0.082,        [0.126,     [-0.001,
         0.106]        0.060]        0.139]       0.091]         0.159]       0.092]         0.104]        0.021]        0.058]       0.007]         0.160]       0.094]
First
Stage
          0.137         0.104         0.143        0.148          0.229        0.118          0.128         0.075         0.125        0.101          0.200        0.065
CL7
         (0.025)       (0.019)       (0.042)      (0.041)        (0.029)      (0.028)        (0.020)       (0.015)       (0.034)      (0.032)        (0.026)      (0.022)
          0.183         0.090         0.248        0.190          0.034        -0.035         0.154         0.068         0.188        0.133          0.069        -0.062
CL8
         (0.022)       (0.017)       (0.039)      (0.041)        (0.026)      (0.037)        (0.018)       (0.013)       (0.033)      (0.032)        (0.024)      (0.029)
          0.337         0.164         0.269        0.226          0.479        0.145          0.323         0.158         0.277        0.202          0.425        0.115
CL9
         (0.028)       (0.020)       (0.042)      (0.042)        (0.039)      (0.030)        (0.024)       (0.017)       (0.035)      (0.033)        (0.035)      (0.025)
F-         54.4            22.0                                                                65.2            33.4
                                       25.2        14.5            68.2        18.6                                        31.7        24.1           56.9         20.3
test
N        2,166,387 2,166,387         1,101,342 1,101,342           1,065,045 1,065,045         3,608,223 3,608,223         1,879,243 1,879,243          1,800,980 1,800,980
        Notes: The data use the U.S. Census extracts from 1960, 1970 and 1980. The estimates in columns (1) to (6) use a sample of white males aged 25
        to 54, and the estimates in columns (7) to (12) use a sample of all white respondents aged 25 to 54. The estimates in columns (3), (4), (9) and (10)
        are derived from individuals born in states whose average pupil-teacher class ratios are smaller than the population-weighted median value, and
        the estimates in columns (5), (6), (11) and (12) are derived individuals born in states whose average pupil-teacher class ratios are larger than the
        population-weighted median value. OLS and 2SLS estimates of the returns to schooling are in the first two rows of the table, and the Moreira
        confidence interval for the 2SLS estimates are listed in brackets underneath the 2SLS estimates. The key instruments used in the first stage
        regression are three child labor indicators, indicating seven, eight or nine years of required schooling in a state for a particular birth cohort before it
        is permissible to work; these coefficients are listed in the rows entitled CL7, CL8 and CL9. All regressions include year-of-birth and state-of-birth
        indicator variables, and estimates in even-numbered columns also contain region-by-year-of-birth indicator variables.
