                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DISSECTING MECHANISMS OF FINANCIAL CRISES:
                         INTERMEDIATION AND SENTIMENT

                                      Arvind Krishnamurthy
                                           Wenhao Li

                                       Working Paper 27088
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27088


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We thank Paymon Khorrami, Christopher Hrdlicka, Yueran Ma, Guillermo Ordonez, Alp Simsek,
Laura Veldkamp, and seminar participants at USC, Stanford, UW Foster, Virtual Finance Workshop,
Barcelona Asset Prices, Finance and Macroeconomics Workshop, NY Fed, and SITE 2020 for comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Arvind Krishnamurthy and Wenhao Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Dissecting Mechanisms of Financial Crises: Intermediation and Sentiment
Arvind Krishnamurthy and Wenhao Li
NBER Working Paper No. 27088
May 2020, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. E7,G01

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a model of financial crises with both a financial amplification mechanism, via
frictional intermediation, and a role for sentiment, via time-varying beliefs about an illiquidity
state. We confront the model with data on credit spreads, equity prices, credit, and output across
the financial crisis cycle. In particular, we ask the model to match data on the frothy pre-crisis
behavior of asset markets and credit, the sharp transition to a crisis where asset values fall,
disintermediation occurs and output falls, and the post-crisis period characterized by a slow
recovery in output. A pure amplification mechanism quantitatively matches the crisis and
aftermath period but fails to match the pre-crisis evidence. Mixing sentiment and amplification
allows the model to additionally match the pre-crisis evidence. We consider two versions of
sentiment, a Bayesian belief updating process and one that overweighs recent observations. Both
models match the crisis patterns qualitatively, while the non-Bayesian model better matches the
pre-crisis froth quantitatively. Finally, we show that a lean-against-the-wind policy has a
quantitatively similar impact in both versions of the belief model, indicating that policy need not
condition on true beliefs.


Arvind Krishnamurthy
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
akris@stanford.edu

Wenhao Li
liwenhao@marshall.usc.edu
1     Introduction

Financial crises have a common character. There is a pre-crisis period that is marked by a
runup in credit, leverage, low risk spreads, and an expansion in output. Credit and asset
valuations appear frothy before a crisis. The transition to the crisis is sharp. There are losses
to the financial sector, defaults and bank-runs, a jump in risk spreads, and contraction in
credit and output. The aftermath of the crisis is a gradual recovery in credit, output, and fall
in risk spreads. These patterns emerge from a large and growing body of research examining
financial crises episodes across countries and time, dating back to the 19th century. See
Bordo et al. (2001), Borio and Lowe (2002), Claessens, Kose and Terrones (2010), Reinhart
and Rogoff (2009a), Schularick and Taylor (2012), Jord`      a, Schularick and Taylor (2011),
Jord`a, Schularick and Taylor (2013), Baron and Xiong (2017), and Krishnamurthy and
Muir (2017). This empirical research describes and quantifies these common patterns.

   Theoretical research on crises has fallen into two categories. The first emphasizes frictions
in financial intermediation that drive an amplification mechanism. The key idea is that the
fragility of the financial sector, measured typically as high leverage or low levels of equity
capital-to-assets, is an endogenous state variable. An unexpected large-loss event hitting the
economy in a state where the financial sector is fragile sets in motion mechanisms whereby
the shock is amplified, there is disintermediation, a rise in risk spreads and contraction in
output. Recovery takes time, tracking a gradual re-intermediation. The amplification model
speaks directly to the transition to crisis and the aftermath of the crisis. See work by Gertler
and Kiyotaki (2010), He and Krishnamurthy (2013), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), He
and Krishnamurthy (2019), and Li (2019).

   The second line of research emphasizes the role of beliefs, and harkens back to Kindel-
berger (1978). Agents pre-crisis see a string of good-news shocks that makes them optimistic
about the path of the economy. Lending grows, risk spreads are low, and output grows.
Bad-news events realize that lead agents to revise their views of the economy, creating the
transition to the crisis. A slow-recovery follows as beliefs slowly revert back to a steady-
state level. The key state variable in these models is agents' beliefs. There are two flavors
of these models: one in which learning and belief updating is Bayesian (Moreira and Savov,
2017) and the other where updating is non-rational (Bordalo, Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2018).
Bordalo, Gennaioli and Shleifer (2018) argues forcefully for a form of non-rational learning
whereby beliefs over-react to current news. These authors argue that such over-reaction is
essential to capture the crisis patterns.

   This paper builds a model that integrates both of these elements, frictional financial
intermediation and time-variation in beliefs, into a quantitative macro-finance model. Our
objective is to understand the extent to which these mechanisms can account qualitatively
and quantitatively for the crisis patterns, and to understand which elements of these mecha-


                                               1
nisms are essential. We build a model with a financial intermediary sector subject to capital
constraints and financed in part by demandable debt. There are two sources of shocks in
the model, a Brownian shock to the return on capital and an illiquidity shock where the
market for capital assets temporarily freezes up, and debtors refuse to roll over their debts,
as in a bank run. In this latter state, sales of capital assets incur a liquidation cost, or al-
ternatively, loans against capital are charged an illiquidity premium. The economy transits
through booms and busts driven by the Brownian shock and its impact on the dynamics of
real capital and the equity capital of the financial sector. Crises are events where both the
financial sector equity capital is low, and the illiquidity shock occurs. In this case, there
are runs on banks leading to disintermediation, declines in asset values, and a reduction
in output. The financial frictions model of our paper is a variant of Li (2019). It draws
on ingredients from the recent macro-finance literature on financial crises and intermedia-
tion frictions, and particularly He and Krishnamurthy (2013); Brunnermeier and Sannikov
(2014); Gertler and Kiyotaki (2015).

    Agents in the economy make decisions based on their beliefs about the likelihood of the
illiquidity shock. The illiquidity shock is a Poisson event, the intensity of which follows a
two-state Markov process. Agents infer the state and hence the likelihood of the illiquidity
shock based on history. A string of no-shock realizations leads them to believe that shocks
are unlikely (i.e., the true state is the low-intensity state). A shock occurrence leads them
to think that shocks are more likely (i.e., the true state is the high-intensity state). We
consider two flavors of this learning mechanism, a Bayesian rational updating process and a
non-rational diagnostic updating process that overweighs current realizations. The Bayesian
learning mechanism is fairly standard. Our modeling is closest to Moreira and Savov (2017).
The diagnostic updating process is motivated by the work of Bordalo, Gennaioli and Shleifer
(2018), and is also related to the models of Greenwood, Hanson and Jin (2019) and Maxted
(2019).

   We report four principal results:

1. The model with financial frictions and a Bayesian belief process can qualitatively match
   the main features of the pre-crisis, crisis, and aftermath. Our quantitative exercise
   matches the crisis and aftermath but fails to match the extent of pre-crisis froth.

2. Replacing the Bayesian belief process with a diagnostic updating process brings the quan-
   titative results closer to the pre-crisis data. The improvement here is quantitative, not
   qualitative.

3. Turning off the belief mechanism (i.e., holding the intensity of the illiquidity process
   constant) misses the pre-crisis froth qualitatively. The signs on the pre-crisis relationships
   in this case are the opposite of those in the data. However, this model can match the
   crisis and aftermath patterns.

                                               2
4. The impulse responses of both the Bayesian and diagnostic model, conditional on a state
   chosen to match the same measured credit spread and bank leverage, are quantitatively
   similar.

   The model has two key state variables: one governing the wealth-share of bankers and
the other describing agents' beliefs over the intensity of the illiquidity shock. The wealth-
share variable, coupled with financial frictions, governs a financial amplification mechanism
studied in prior work. We show that this amplification mechanism helps the model match
data on the crisis and its aftermath. In particular, the financial amplification mechanism of
the model generates a sharp drop in asset prices, credit, and output. The mean drop in our
model is in line with the data, but more telling, the skewness of these variables and their
comovement also match data counterparts. That is, a key feature of financial crises is non-
linearity, reflected in a skewed distribution of output declines. The model's amplification
mechanism generates skew in line with that of the data. The model also generates a slow
recovery due to the persistence mechanism of financial frictions models.

   While the financial frictions wealth-share mechanism is the key to understanding the
model's match of the crisis and aftermath, the belief state variable is needed for the model
to match the pre-crisis patterns. In the model, the frequency of the illiquidity shock follows
a hidden two-state Markov process, and agents update their beliefs over the state based
on history in a Bayesian fashion. Agents' beliefs of the shock probability is thus also a
state variable driving the model's dynamics. If a crisis has not occurred for some time,
agent beliefs drift towards the low likelihood state. Bankers choose to increase leverage
as they are less concerned about liquidity risk. Risk spreads fall and credit grows. From
this state, if an illiquidity shock arrives, beliefs jump towards the high likelihood state and
banker wealth falls, leading to financial amplification of the shock and persistence as in a
crisis. The belief mechanism helps explain why spreads are low and credit is high before the
crisis. More surprisingly, low spreads and high credit help predict a crisis. The reason is
that bankers act more risk-tolerant in the pre-crisis period ­ they drive down spreads/risk
premia and increase credit. They also take actions that effectively shift GDP outcomes into
tail states. It may be surprising that we find that there are times when crises are more
likely and yet risk prices are low and bankers take more leverage. Our model ties these
observations together by generating more risk tolerance in the pre-crisis period, driven by
the beliefs state variable.

   We probe this model in two dimensions. First, we find that if the belief intensity is held
constant (i.e., no learning mechanism), the model fails to match the pre-crisis patterns. In
such a model, only the banker wealth-share is a state variable. The fragility of the economy
to a crisis is measured by the banker wealth-share state variable. When this is low, a
negative shock triggers a crisis. Thus a crisis is more likely when negative shocks reduce
banker wealth (at the same time, raising leverage). However, this means that forward-

                                              3
looking asset prices will account for the increased fragility as the wealth share state variable
falls. As a result, the model implies that credit spreads will rise, and bank credit will fall
in the period before a crisis, contrary to the data. On the other hand, we find that this
static-belief model is able to match the data for the crisis and its aftermath, clarifying that
the financial amplification mechanism drives these patterns. We also show that this model
generates a negative relation between bank credit and equity market excess returns (risk
premia), as documented by Baron and Xiong (2017). This occurs in our model because
variation in the wealth-share drives variation in bankers' risk tolerance that generates the
required comovement between credit and risk premia. It is worth emphasizing that this
result arises in a model with no variation in beliefs.

   Second, we consider an alternative diagnostic learning mechanism that leads beliefs to
have a non-rational component, over-extrapolating from recent observations. Similarly to
the Bayesian model, this model matches the crisis and aftermath evidence, but it additionally
gets closer to quantitatively matching the pre-crisis froth evidence. The reason is that the
sensitivity of bankers' leverage decisions to the true illiquidity state is higher under diagnostic
beliefs than Bayesian beliefs. This "steepening" of the leverage decision is the key force that
brings the model more in line with the data.

   Putting this together, our analysis indicates that a financial amplification mechanism
plus a belief mechanism provides a parsimonious account of the main crisis facts. The static
belief model fails to match the data. However, our analysis also indicates that the qualitative
patterns of the data do not clearly distinguish the two belief models.1

   Lastly, we ask the question, does it matter for policy purposes whether we are living in
a world with diagnostic beliefs or one with Bayesian beliefs? Although our model is not
suited for welfare analysis, it can shed light on the impact of a change in policy on economic
outcomes. We consider an unexpected policy that transfers wealth from households to
bankers so that the banker wealth share increases by 10% during a pre-crisis boom period.
The policy captures the impact of increasing bank equity to lean-against-the-wind, along
the lines of Gertler, Kiyotaki and Prestipino (2020). Under each version of the model, we
pick an initial condition in terms of credit spreads and bank leverage and map these into the
state variables in each model (they map to different values of the state variable across the
models). We then simulate the path of the economy with and without the recapitalization
policy. We calculate the difference in quantities and prices between the with- and without-
recapitalization and repeat this across both models. Our main finding is that these impulse
response differences are quite similar across both models. The policy raises the mean path
of output and credit, and the conditional response of these variables to an illiquidity shock,
but these responses are quantitatively similar across both models. Key to this similarity
   1
    The qualitative pattern that may disentangle non-rational from rational beliefs is a negative expected
return on the equity market in some states of the world. While there is some evidence on this pattern in
the literature (Baron and Xiong, 2017), it is among the weaker evidence in the crisis literature.


                                                    4
result is that both models are calibrated to common data but are not forced to having a
common parameterization, and both models are tied to the same initial condition in terms
of observables. In particular, the diagnostic model does not just take the Bayesian model
parameters and add a new diagnostic parameter. In this case, which is not economically
meaningful, the impulse responses are no longer similar.

   This paper's goals and approach is closest to that of two other recent papers, Greenwood,
Hanson and Jin (2019) and Maxted (2019). Both of these papers construct models of
the boom-bust crisis cycle with a role for beliefs. Greenwood, Hanson and Jin (2019)
present a model where lenders extend credit based on beliefs over the default probabilities
of borrowers. There is a feedback between realized default and beliefs regarding default
probabilities, similar to the model of this paper, that creates a persistence and amplification
mechanism. Like us, their paper aims to match facts on credit growth, credit spreads, and
risk premia. But their model is not a full macroeconomic model, and thus does not speak
to other macroeconomic data such as output and the conditional distribution of output
growth. Their model also does not have an intermediary sector, so it cannot assess the
role of intermediary frictions relative to beliefs. Finally, lenders are risk-neutral in their
model, so that without diagnostic expectations, risk premia are zero. As a result, their
model does not give the Bayesian belief process a chance of explaining the data. Maxted
(2019) presents a macro-finance model that is closer to ours. There is an intermediation
sector that is central to crisis dynamics. The paper also considers a full macroeconomic
setting, and can thus speak to more macro data. Nevertheless, the paper considers only a
subset of the crisis data that we aim to match in this paper. Like Greenwood, Hanson and
Jin (2019), the paper does not allow an evaluation of a Bayesian belief process. Without
diagnostic expectations, the model of the paper collapses to a pure intermediation model
along the lines of He and Krishnamurthy (2019). The other main difference relative to our
model is that the diagnostic belief shifts the mean drift of the capital process, whereas in
our case, the effect is on the tail of the distribution (we are similar to Greenwood, Hanson
and Jin (2019) in this regard). Although it is not entirely clear at this stage which approach
(shifting mean versus shifting mass in tail) is the right way forward, one difference in these
two approaches is that ours directly impacts risk premia, whereas the mean shift has no
direct impact on risk premia.

    Our paper also advances the recent continuous-time macro-finance literature (He and
Krishnamurthy, 2013; Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2014; Di Tella, 2017). The models in this
literature feature non-linearities and are solved using global methods. Thus the advantage
of these models is that they can characterize the non-linear dynamics in financial crises.
However, a major disadvantage of these models is that they are computationally challenging,
and current models restrict attention to one or two-state variables following a Brownian
diffusion process. In this paper, we present and solve a model with two state variables and
endogenous jumps. Our methodology helps broaden the scope of the literature to encompass

                                              5
richer dynamics with sudden and large disruptions, which are plausibly central to financial
crises.

   There are other recent papers that also touch on the issues of this paper. Gertler,
Kiyotaki and Prestipino (2020) introduces bank runs into a macro-intermediation model.
Beliefs, modeled via a sunspot, play a role in driving crisis dynamics. The objective of
their paper is to study the 2007-2009 financial crisis rather than disentangling mechanisms
underlying the crisis cycle facts. Bordalo et al. (2019) introduce diagnostic beliefs into a
relatively standard RBC model. Their model does not have an intermediation mechanism
and thus helps to understand the role of diagnostic beliefs. Farboodi and Kondor (2020)
present a model of time-varying sentiment that generates a credit cycle that is qualitatively
in line with the facts. All agents in their model are rational, so that sentiment evolves in
a Bayesian manner. Thus, like us, they show that the basic facts of the credit cycle can
be generated within a Bayesian model. The objective of the paper is different than ours,
as their model is not suited to a quantification exercise and does not have an intermediary
sector. In our model, the illiquidity shock and the bank run are exogenous. In Gorton and
Ordonez (2014, 2020), the debt crisis occurs when agents endogenously choose to acquire
information and this information is bad-news, turning previously safe-debt risky.

   Finally, this paper also contributes to a larger literature on beliefs and learning in macroe-
conomics models. Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2006) show that asymmetry in learning
about productivity can generate asymmetries in business cycles. Simsek (2013) explores the
interaction of beliefs and credit, building a model where beliefs over upside versus downside
payoffs have an asymmetric impact on asset valuations, total credit and fragility of the econ-
omy. Motivated by the slow recovery from the 2008 recession, there is research tying learning
to slow recoveries. In Fajgelbaum, Schaal and Taschereau-Dumouchel (2017), information
flows slowly in times of low activity and uncertainty remains high, discouraging investment.
In Kozlowski, Veldkamp and Venkateswaran (2020), agents learn about the parameters of
the economic shock process, and a large negative shock realization as in a deep recession
alters agents' estimates of these parameters, leading to a persistent impact of the shock on
economic growth.

    The rest of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we review general patterns of the crisis
cycle in the data. In Section 3, we set up a model that combines financial intermediation
frictions and beliefs regarding an illiquidity shock. In Section 4, we solve and explain how
we calibrate the the model(s). In Section 5, we evaluate the model, explaining its fit and
the role of beliefs. In Section 6, we consider how the Bayesian and diagnostic models may
inform policy. We then conclude in Section 7. An appendix follows.




                                               6
2     The Crisis Cycle

This section reviews broad patterns of the crisis cycle, drawn from the empirical literature
on crises. Along the way, we list (numbered below) specific quantitative estimates from the
literature which guide our modeling exercise.

    What is a financial crisis? Jord`
                                    a, Schularick and Taylor (2011) state:

         In line with the previous studies, we define financial crises as events dur-
      ing which a country's banking sector experiences bank runs, sharp increases in
      default rates accompanied by large losses of capital that result in public inter-
      vention, bankruptcy, or forced merger of financial institutions.

We focus on events, as per the quotation, as financial crises. These events are banking crises
and do not necessarily include currency crises or sovereign debt crises, which are other crises
of interest, unless such events coincide with a banking crisis. Jord`a, Schularick and Taylor
(2011)'s dating of banking crises is closely related to the approach of Bordo et al. (2001),
Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a), and Laeven and Valencia (2013). Bordo and Meissner (2016)
discuss the approaches that researchers have taken to crisis-dating as well the drawbacks of
different approaches.


1. We target an unconditional frequency of financial crises of 4%. In an article written
   for the Annual Review of Economics, Taylor (2015) reports the historical frequency of
   financial crises to be 6%. This data point is obtained from a sample of countries in both
    developing and advanced stages, and covers the period after 1860. The Handbook of
    Macroeconomics chapter by Bordo and Meissner (2016) reports numbers in the range
    of 2 to 4% across the studies by Bordo et al. (2001) and Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a).
    Another evidence comes from Jord`  a, Schularick and Taylor (2013), which shows that the
    average frequency of crises is 3.6% using data from multiple countries. In light of the
    above evidence, we pick the medium value 4% as our target.

2. Baron and Xiong (2017) measure equity market crashes, defined as a fall in bank equity
   market prices in excess of 30%. They report that crashes occur with a frequency of 3.2%
   per quarter in a sample from 1920 to 2012. Note that not every equity crash corresponds
   to a real crisis, which is a point also emphasized by Greenwood, Hanson and Jin (2019).


   Figure 1 plots the mean path of credit spread, credit, and GDP across a sample of 41
international financial crises identified by Jord`
                                                 a, Schularick and Taylor (2013). The figure is
drawn from Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017), which includes data on credit spreads relative
to other studies of crises. Date 0 on the figure corresponds to the date of a financial crisis.
The top-left panel plots the path of the mean across-country credit spread, relative to the

                                              7
             Spread Path                        Credit Path                  GDP Path


  .6




                                     5




                                                                  2
                                     4
  .4




                                                                  0
                                   2 3
                                  Crisis




                                                                  -2
  .2




                                                                  -4
  0




                                     1




                                                                  -6
  -.2




                                     0




                                                                  -8
        -5         0          5            -5           0     5        -5         0          5
                 time                                 time                      time



Figure 1: Mean path of credit spread, bank credit, and GDP across a sample of 41 financial
crises identified in Jord`
                         a, Schularick and Taylor (2013). Units for spread path are 0.4 means
that spreads are 0.4 s above their average for a given country. Units for credit path are that
5 indicates that credit/GDP is 5% above the trend for a given country. Units for GDP path
are that -8 means that GDP is 8% below trend for a given country. Source: Krishnamurthy
and Muir (2017)


mean spread for country-i, from 5-years before the crisis to 5-years after the crisis. The units
here are that 0.4 means that spreads are 0.4 s larger than the country's time-series average
spread, while -0.2 means that spreads are 0.2 s below the country's time-series average. The
data is annual from 14 countries spanning a period from 1879 to 2013.

    We see that spreads run below their average value in the years before the crisis. They
rise in the crisis, going as high as 0.4 s over their mean value in the year after the crisis
date, before returning over the next 5 years to the mean value. The half-life of the credit
spread recovery is 2.5 years in this figure.

    The top-right panel plots the path of the quantity of bank credit divided by GDP. The
credit variable is expressed as the average across-country percentage change in the quantity
of credit/GDP from 5-years before the crisis to a given year, after demeaning by the sample
growth rate in credit for country-i. The value of 5 for time 0 means that credit/GDP is 5%
above the country trend. We see that credit grows faster than average in the years leading
up to the crisis at time zero. After this point, credit reverses so that by time +5 the variable
is back near the country average.

   The bottom-left panel plots GDP, again as an average percentage change from 5-years
before the crisis, after demeaning by the sample growth rate in GDP for country-i. GDP
grows slightly faster than average in the years preceding the crisis. GDP falls below trend
in the crisis and remains low up to 5 years after the crisis.

Transition to crisis: A crisis is characterized by a sharp jump in credit spreads, a reversal
in the quantity of credit and a decline in GDP. From the data underlying Figure 1, we see
that:

3. Credit spreads rise by 0.7 s of their mean value at the crisis.

4. GDP declines by 9.1%. Reinhart and Rogoff (2009b) report a peak-to-trough decline in

                                                  8
             .1




                                                               10
             .08




                                                               0
                                                      3 year GDP Growth
             .06




                                                                  -10
   Density
             .04




                                                         -20   -30
             .02




                                                               -40
             0




                                                                          -1       0            1        2   3
                   -20     -10              0    10
                          3-year growth in GDP                                           Spread Change


                         (a) Panel A                                                   (b) Panel B

Figure 2: Panel A presents a histogram of 3-year GDP growth from the start of a crisis, as
dated by Jord` a, Schularick and Taylor (2013). Panel B presents a scatter plot of the spike
in spreads in the year of the crisis against 3-year GDP growth after the crisis..


   GDP across a larger sample of crises of 9.3%. Jord`a, Schularick and Taylor (2013) report
   a 5-year decline in GDP from the date of crisis of around 8%. Cerra and Saxena (2008)
   report output losses from banking crises of 7.5% with these losses persisting out to 10
   years. We will use the 9.1% number in our quantitative exercise.

   The rise in credit spreads in the year of the crisis is mirrored in other asset prices.
Reinhart and Rogoff (2009a) report that equity prices decline by an average of 55.9% during
banking crises. Muir (2017) shows that the price-dividend ratio on the stock market falls in
a crisis, and the excess return on stocks rises during the crisis, indicated a generalized rise
in asset market risk premia.

Aftermath and severity of crisis:


5. The half-life of the recovery of the credit spread to its mean value is 2.5 years.

6. There is variation in the severity of the crisis. Figure 2, Panel A presents data on the
   variation in the severity of the crisis, as measured by 3-year GDP growth following a
   crisis. The figure reflects significant variation in crisis severity.

7. The variation in the severity of the crisis is correlated with the increase in spreads mea-
   sured at the transition into the crisis, as illustrated in Figure 2, Panel B. Krishnamurthy
   and Muir (2017) report a coefficient of -7.46 (s.e. 1.46) from a regression of 3-year GDP
   growth following a crisis on the increase in credit spreads from the year before the crisis
   to the year of a crisis.

                                                                               9
 Pre-crisis period: In the pre-crisis period, credit markets appear frothy, reflecting low
 credit spreads and high credit growth. In particular,

 8. Conditioning on a crisis at year t, and looking at the 5 years prior to the crisis, Krishna-
    murthy and Muir (2017) show that credit spreads are 0.34 s below their country mean
    (where this country mean is defined to exclude the crisis and 5 years after the crisis).

 9. Conditioning on a crisis at year t, credit/GDP in the 5 years before the crisis is 5%
    above country mean. The relation between a lending boom and subsequent crisis is well
    documented in the literature. See Gourinchas et al. (2001), Schularick and Taylor (2012),
    and Baron and Xiong (2017).

 Predicting Crises: There is also evidence that periods of frothy conditions predict and
 not just precede crises. There are two quantitative estimates that we will aim to match.

10. Schularick and Taylor (2012) find that a one-standard deviation increase in credit growth
     over the preceding 5 years (= 0.07 in their sample) translates to an increased probability
     of a financial crisis of 2.8% over the next year.

11. Conditioning on an episode where credit spreads are below their median value 5 years
    in a row, Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017) estimate that the conditional probability of a
    crisis rises by 1.76%.



 3     A Model of Financial Crises with Amplification and
       Sentiment

 In this section, we present a model of financial crises that incorporates both a financial
 amplification mechanism and a role for sentiment. We fix a probability space (, F , P) and
 assume all stochastic processes are adapted to this space and satisfy the usual conditions.
 The economy evolves in continuous time. It is populated by a continuum of a unit mass of
 two classes of agents, households, and bankers. For clarity, aggregate variables are in capital
 letters, and individual variables are in lower case letters. The basic setup is a variant of Li
 (2019), which is drawn from Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) and Kiyotaki and Moore
 (1997).


 3.1     Agents and Assets

 Households maximize expected value of the discounted log utility,
                                             
                                                e-t log(ch
                                                         t )dt                              (1)
                                         0


                                                   10
and bankers optimize expected value of the same form of discounted log utility,
                                            
                                               e-t log(cb
                                                        t )dt                               (2)
                                        0


The expectation could be either Bayesian or diagnostic, as we will specify later.

    We introduce two shocks that allow us to distinguish between financial crises and other
fluctuations. The first is a Brownian shock dBt that reflects every-day economic fluctuations.
The second is a Poisson shock dNt that we call a "financial illiquidity" shock. As will be
clear, this shock triggers illiquidity and bank runs, and a possible financial crisis.

   Output is produced by capital. We will simplify by assuming that the capital is held
directly by either banks or households. In a richer and more realistic model, the capital will
be held and operated by firms that receive loans from banks or households, along the lines
of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997). We simplify by collapsing firms into banks, and assuming
the banks own the capital.

   Our key assumption is that credit flowing through banks allows the economy to achieve
higher output and returns to capital. Intermediation is a socially valuable service, and for ex-
ample, disintermediation in a crisis reduces output. We capture this feature by assuming that
banker-operated capital has productivity A   ¯, which is higher than the household-operated
capital productivity of A.

   The dynamic evolution of productive capital owned by agent j  {banker, household} is

                                 dkj,t
                                         t dt - dt +  dBt
                                       = K           K
                                                                                            (3)
                                 kj,t

where the rate of new capital installation Kt is endogenously determined through invest-
ment,  is the exogenous depreciation rate, and  K is exogenous capital growth volatility.

   Denote the price of productive capital as pt . Investment undertaken by an owner of
productive capital is chosen to solve:

                                            t - (t ),
                                     max pt K    K
                                      K
                                      t



where (·) is an investment adjustment cost:

                                                        K
                                 (K ) = K +              ( -  )2 .                          (4)
                                                       2

That is, we assume quadratic costs to investment, leading to the q -theory of investment

                                                                pt - 1
                           pt =  (K
                                  t )                  K
                                                       t = +           .                    (5)
                                                                   



                                                  11
   The return on capital held by agent j =banker is

                                      d(pt kj,t )    ¯ - (K
                                                    (A        t ))kj,t
                            ¯ j,t
                           dR K
                                  =               +                    dt.                   (6)
                                       pt kj,t           pt kj,t

The return to capital held by a household, denoted by dRK
                                                        j,t , is the same except for the lower
productivity A.

   The dynamics of capital price pt is denoted as

                                dpt
                                     = p      p       p
                                       t dt + t dBt - t- dNt ,                               (7)
                                pt -

where p      p       p
         t , t , and t- are all endogenously determined. The "minus" notation (i.e. pt- )
reflects a pre-jump asset price, as will be made clear.


3.2    Financing, Distress, and Bank Runs

Since banker held capital is more productive than household held capital, there is room for
an intermediation relationship whereby households provide some funds to bankers to invest
in capital. We assume that the only form of financing is short-term (instantaneous) debt at
the rate rd . Bankers cannot raise equity, long-term debt, or other forms of financing. When
                                                               b
we refer to bank equity, we mean the net-worth of bankers, wt    . That is, the financing side of
the model is one of inside equity and outside short-term debt. These model simplifications
do sweep aside important issues, but we nevertheless go down this path because we aim
to build a simple quantitative amplification mechanism and see how well it matches data,
rather than explore the micro-foundations of intermediary models.

    We assume that in the event of a illiquidity shock, all short-term debt holders run to
their own bank and withdraw financing in a coordinated fashion. Raising resources to cover
this withdrawal is temporarily costly. That is, asset markets are temporarily illiquid in the
illiquidity event. We assume that if a bank raises F units of resources it pays a cost of 0 F .
The cost can be thought of as a fire-sale liquidation cost when selling capital. Alternatively,
the cost can be mapped into a premium on raising emergency financing from other banks or
other households in the economy. In this latter case, we need to step outside the modeling
and interpret the illiquidity event lasting longer than dt. Then, 0 is proportional to the
spread over the riskless rate that the bank pays to obtain funds over the illiquidity episode
(if the event lasts dt then a financing spread maps into a cost of order dt). Finally, we
assume that the cost is not dissipated but is paid to households. This assumption is not
essential to the analysis.

   Note that we do not model a Diamond and Dybvig (1983) bank-run game. We simply
assume that the shock leads all debtors to pull their funding. It is possible to model the

                                                 12
game in detail following Li (2019) whose model is the basis for this paper. However, we
learn from that study that the model's positive implications are almost the same with and
without the deeper model of the bank-run game. Li (2019)'s objectives are normative, to
study how policies forestall liquidity crises, whereas this study's objective is positive, to
quantitatively understand mechanisms contributing to financial crises.


3.3    Beliefs and Crises

The intensity of the illiquidity shock process dNt follows a two state continuous-time Markov
process, ~ t  {L , H }. This intensity changes from L to H at rate LH , and changes
from H to L at rate LH . Agents, neither bankers nor households, observe              ~ t . Instead
agents infer ~ t from observing the history of Nt , i.e., via realizations of the shock process.

   We denote the Bayesian expectation as t = Et [~ t ]. Using Bayes rule,

Lemma 1 (Bayesian Belief Process).

                (L - t- )H L + (H - t- )LH                            (t- - L )(H - t- )
      dt =                                                   dt +                        dNt    (8)
                     -(t- - L )(H - t- )                                     t -


   Therefore, if illiquidity occurs, the expected intensity t jumps up. As time goes by,
without further illiquidity shocks, the expected intensity t gradually falls.


3.4    Diagnostic Expectations

Section 3.3 outlines our model when agents form expectations over       ~ t in a rational fash-
ion, using Bayes rule. We also consider a version of our model where agents overweight
recent observations. Specifically, we model the diagnostic beliefs of (Bordalo, Gennaioli and
Shleifer, 2018). We adapt their model to our continuous dynamic equilibrium environment.

    Denote the Bayesian belief for the probability of ~ t = H as t , and the diagnostic belief
for the probability of ~ t = H as   . Then we define the diagnostic beliefs as
                                    t

                                                             
                                                     t          1
                                   
                                   t = t ·                                                      (9)
                                               Et-t0 [t ]       Zt

                                                                       
                                                        1 - t             1
                            1 - t
                                
                                  = (1 - t ) ·                                                 (10)
                                                     Et-t0 [1 - t ]       Zt
where Zt is a normalization to ensure that (9) and (10) add up to 1. We call the lag t0 as the
"look-back period," which is one in the discrete time model of Bordalo, Gennaioli and Shleifer
(2018). In our case, the diagnostic beliefs of the process are simply distorted Bayesian


                                                13
                                                         
beliefs with the benchmark from t0 time ago. The process t features both overreaction and
underreaction, depending on the gap between current t and past t-t0 .

   Denote the diagnostic belief for the expected intensity of illiquidity shocks as

                                     ~  
                               t = Et [] := t H + (1 - t )L
                                                       



where E  is the expectation with respect to the probability distribution under the diagnostic
belief. Then we have the following result:
                                                                 ~
Lemma 2 (Diagnostic Belief Process). The diagnostic belief t = Et [] is


                                                   (H - t ) + (t - L )
                  t =  L + (  t - L )
                                                           
                                                                                              (11)
                                            T
                                            t -L    t -L
                                        (   H -T
                                                   / H -t
                                                          ) ( H -  t ) + (  t -  L )
                                               t



where T         ~                            ~
      t = Et-T [t ] is the expected value of t under the Bayesian expectation.


   In Figure 3, we plot the evolution dynamics of the Bayesian and diagnostic belief pro-
cesses, where the diagnostic belief process is described by (11). We find that when  is small,
as shown in panel (a), the pre-illiquidity shock belief is slightly lower than the Bayesian be-
lief, and then jumps to a higher level after a illiquidity shock. Initially, there is overreaction,
but after one year, the perceived frequency of the illiquidity shock is below the Bayesian
belief. When  is large, as shown in panel (b), the pre-illiquidity shock belief is much lower,
and the post-illiquidity shock overreaction is stronger. One year after the illiquidity shock,
the perceived frequency of illiquidity becomes much smaller.

    Under the diagnostic belief, we assume that all agents are unaware of their belief bias
(i.e., they think t as if it is t ) and apply rational decision rules. As a result, although
we need to keep track of both  and  for simulating the model dynamics, we only need
 for a "snapshot" of the economy. For this reason, in what follows, we only discuss the
model solutions under the Bayesian belief. The diagnostic model easily follows through by
replacing  with  in the policy functions.


3.5    State Variables and Decisions

We define the total wealth of banks as Wtb and the total wealth of households as Wth . Then
we have three state variables. One is the wealth share of bankers, denoted by

                                                  Wtb
                                        wt =             ,                                    (12)
                                               Wtb + Wth

The second is the expected jump intensity . The final one is the total productive capital
Kt . We construct an equilibrium whereby all relevant object scale linearly with capital.

                                                   14
                                 0.6




                                                                                                                      0.6
                                           Bayesian Belief                                                                      Bayesian Belief
                                           Diagnostic Belief                                                                    Diagnostic Belief

                                 0.5




                                                                                                                      0.5
 perceived frequency of crises




                                                                                      perceived frequency of crises
                                 0.4




                                                                                                                      0.4
                                 0.3




                                                                                                                      0.3
                                 0.2




                                                                                                                      0.2
                                 0.1




                                                                                                                      0.1
                                 0.0




                                                                                                                      0.0
                                       0     2        4          6     8   10   12                                          0     2        4          6     8   10   12
                                                               years                                                                                years

                                                     (a)  = 1                                                                             (b)  = 5

Figure 3: Simulation of Beliefs with Different Values of the Diagnostic Parameter . The
parameter   0 means the strength of the behavioral feature of the diagnostic belief. Other
parameters are set as L = 0.001, H = 0.5, H L = 0.5, LH = 0.1. These parameters
imply that a financial illiquidity shock happens once about each 12 years. The diagnostic
belief process is fully described by (11).


This reduces the computational problem to solving a model with two state variables, wt and
.
              b                                                                h
    Denote wt    as the wealth of a representative banker. Similarly, denote wt  as the wealth
                                                                             b   b
of a representative household. Let the associated value function be V (wt          , wt , t ) and
  h   h
V (wt , wt , t ), respectively, at time t. To guarantee a non-degenerate wealth distribution,
we assume bankers randomly transit to becoming households at rate  .2 Bankers take this
transition possibility into account in their optimization problems.


Bankers

Each banker can invest in productive capital and borrow from households or other banks via
                                    f
short-term debt at interest rate rt   . Note that short-term debt is riskless even though the
price of capital will jump in equilibrium. This is because a forward-looking banker with log
utility will never make a portfolio choice that leaves him with negative wealth in any state.
                                                                               b
Denote the banker's portfolio choice (as a fraction of the banker's wealth wt    ) in productive
              K                                                  f                            f
capital as xt , and the interbank borrowing and lending as xt with equilibrium rate rt          .
                                                  f                                    f
Then the borrowing from household is xt + xt - 1. Total borrowing is xt + xt - 1. If
                                            K                                   K

                          2
    Without this assumption, the banker, who earns a higher return on capital, will come to own almost all
of the wealth of the economy.


                                                                                 15
      f                                                         f
 t + xt - 1 > 0 bankers lever up to own capital, while if xt + xt - 1 < 0, bankers save
xK                                                         K

some of their wealth in riskless debt.

   Starting from time t, the time that banker will switch to becoming a household is denoted
                                                                                b
as T , which is exponentially distributed with rate  . A banker with wealth wt    solves the
problem
                                                        T
   V b (wt
         b
           , wt , t ) =           sup          E[           e-(s-t) log(cb
                                                                         s )ds + e
                                                                                   -T h  b
                                                                                     V (wT          b
                                                                                           , wT ) w t , wt ] ,   (13)
                                        f
                          cb
                           t 0,   xK
                                   t- ,xt- 0
                                                    t


subject to the solvency constraint
                                                               b
                                                              wt  0.                                             (14)

The second part of the objective function is the transition to a household, which changes
the continuation value from V b to V h .


Households

Each household chooses the consumption rate ch                      K
                                             t and capital holding yt as a fraction of
household wealth for the following objective
                                                                          
                   V h (wt
                         h
                           , wt , t ) =             sup         E[           e-(s-t) ln(ch      h
                                                                                         s )ds wt , wt ],        (15)
                                               ch
                                                t 0,
                                                         K 0
                                                        yt            t


subject to the solvency constraint
                                                               h
                                                              wt  0.                                             (16)


3.6    Equilibrium Definition

Denote the share of capital owned by bankers as

                                                                xK t Wt
                                                                       b
                                                t =                          .                                   (17)
                                                            xK    b    K
                                                             t W t + yt W t
                                                                           h


Then the aggregate production of consumption goods is

                                                   ¯ + (1 - t )A)Kt .
                                           Yt = (t A                                                             (18)

        ¯ > A, output is increasing in t .
Because A

   Given that there is no heterogeneity within bankers and within households, we can express




                                                                 16
the dynamics of aggregate wealth as

                                        dWtb   dwt b
                                             =       - dt                                       (19)
                                         Wtb     b
                                                wt

                                     dWth   dwt h
                                                     Wtb
                                          =       +      dt,                                    (20)
                                      Wth     h
                                             wt      Wth
where the second terms in both (19) and (20) are due to the transition of bankers to house-
holds.

    We derive a Markov equilibrium, where all choices only depend on the state variables
wt and t . Let c^b = cb /wb be the consumption of a representative banker as a fraction of
the banker's wealth, and c ^h = ch /wh similarly. The following formalizes the equilibrium
definition.

Definition 1 (Equilibrium). An equilibrium is a set of functions, including the price of
capital p(wt , t ), bank debt yield r(wt , t ), household consumption wealth ratio c     ^h (wt , t )
and lending xK (wt , t ), banker consumption wealth ratio c^b (wt ) and lending y K (wt , t ), such
that

· Consumption, investment and portfolio choices are optimal.

· Capital good market clears
                                      Wtb xK      h K
                                           t + W t y t = p t Kt .                               (21)

· The aggregate non-financial wealth of households and banks equal to total value of capital

                                         Wtb + Wth = pt Kt .                                    (22)


· Interbank market clears
                                              Wtb xf
                                                   t = 0                                        (23)

· Consumption goods market clears

                          ^b
                          c    b
                                  ^h
                           t Wt + c
                                        h     ¯
                                    t Wt = (t A + (1 - t )A)Kt - it Kt .                        (24)


3.7    State-Dependence and Distress Dynamics

We solve the model and illustrate the nonlinear and state-dependent effects of a financial
illiquidity event and the dynamics of the capital price around illiquidity shocks.

   Figure 4, Panel (a) graphs the price of capital in blue as a function the banker's wealth
share, wt , which is one of the state variables in the equilibrium (t is the other state variable).

                                                 17

                       




       

                                                   



(a) Price of capital as a function of wt , pre- and post- dNt shock



             











                                                           

                                  


        (b) Path of the capital price around a bank run.

   Figure 4: Illustration of a bank run in equilibrium




                                18
We note that the price of capital is increasing in wt up to a point and then is flat thereafter.
In the increasing portion, both bankers and households own capital. As the wealth share
increases, more of the capital is in the bankers' hands, and hence more of the capital produces
a higher dividend of A¯. This force leads to a positive relationship between the price of capital
and the wealth share. To the right of the dashed line, all of the capital is in the bankers'
hands. Now, it will be the case that as the wealth share of bankers rises to the right of the
dashed line, the risk premium required by bankers to absorb capital risk falls, which by itself
would raise capital prices. However, because of log utility, the interest rate rises to offset
the fall in the risk premium, and the net effect on the discount rate is to keep the price of
capital constant to the right of the dashed-line.

    There are two cases of interest. If the illiquidity shock occurs when banker wealth share
is high ­ on the right side of the dashed line in panel (a) ­ bankers suffer the exogenous
liquidation loss, which means that the post-shock wealth share jumps to the left, as indicated
by the red arrow. But since at this new wealth share, the price of capital is the same as at the
old wealth share, there is no endogenous fall in the price of capital. On the other hand, on the
left side of the dashed line, the exogenous loss leads to a fall in banker wealth share, which
leads to an endogenous fall in the price of capital, which implies further losses to bankers, and
so on. The post-shock capital price traces along the red dashed line, reflecting a downward
jump in the capital price and the banker wealth share state variable. The exogenous loss is
amplified in this case. Our model thereby captures an amplification mechanism, where the
degree is state-dependent.

   Figure 4, Panel (b) illustrates the price path of capital in a case where one illiquidity
shock occurs at time T and the wealth share is in the amplification region. We see that
the pre-illiquidity shock price of capital follows a smooth path governed by the Brownian
diffusion dZt . From T - to T the price of capital jumps downwards. After T , the price of
capital again follows a smooth path.

   The rest of this section goes through this logic algebraically. For simplicity, we omit the
t or t- subscriptions in the following sections. For an individual bank, we can define the
net funding withdrawal that has to be fulfilled by productive capital during a illiquidity as

                                     x = (xK + xf - 1)+                                     (25)


   To simplify the above expression, we prove that banks take leverage in equilibrium.

Lemma 3. In equilibrium, banks always borrow from households and take leverage, i.e.,

                                            xK  1




                                               19
   Proof is provided in Appendix A.4. Because of Lemma 3, we have

                                   xd = x = xK + xf - 1                                   (26)


   From the banker optimization problem, we have the following first order conditions:

                                                    
                                rf - rd =                                                 (27)
                                             1 - xK  p -   x
                          ¯
                          A                                   p
                    R +     - r f = ( K +  p ) 2 xK +                                     (28)
                          p                            1 - xK  p -   x
where R is the ex-dividend return of productive capital, with R = p -  + K +  K  p -
(K )/p. As clearly illustrated, if the total volatility ( K +  p ) increases, keeping the
portfolio choice xK the same, a banker requires a larger amount of risk compensation.
Furthermore, if the expected intensity  of the financial illiquidity shock rises, then the risk
premium also rises. Finally, we observe that keeping everything else equal, a larger jump p
in the capital price leads to a higher risk premium.

    Equation (28) also indicates how the belief  affects bank leverage xK . All else equal, we
find that a higher  results in a lower xK . Further, in equilibrium, the lower xK will result
in less severe crisis (lower p ), which partly offsets the direct impact of  on xK .

   We next derive the excess expected return on capital. We rewrite the banker budget
dynamics as

           dwb                     ¯
                                   A
               =    rf + xK (R +     - p - rf ) - xd (rd - rf ) - xd dt - c
                                                                          ^dt
           wb                      p

                             +xK ( K +  p )dBt - b (dNt - dt)

where the last component is the compensated Poisson process dNt - dt, which is a Mar-
tingale. It is clear that the excess return of capital above the risk-free rate of bankers is
      ¯ - p - rf . Using (28), we can express this capital risk premium as
R + A/p

                      ¯
                      A                                 xK  p +   x
                R +     - p - rf = ( K +  p )2 xK + p                                     (29)
                      p                               1 - xK  p -   x

which takes into account the downward impact of asset returns due to the realizations of
illiquidity shocks. From this equation, we find that this premium is strictly positive in a
Bayesian model.




                                              20
3.8    Credit Spreads

We define a credit spread in this section that is needed in mapping the model to credit
spread data. It is important to state at the outset that the defaultable bonds we price
are in zero net supply. They are not issued by banks or households and do not affect the
general equilibrium. We define the credit spread as the yield differential between a risky
zero-coupon bond and a zero-coupon safe bond with the same [expected] maturity. Define
 as the expected maturity of the bond. We assume that the bond matures based on
the realizations of the Poisson event with intensity 1/ . This modeling allows for a simple
recursive formulation for bond pricing. Moreover, we suppose that a fraction of the maturity
events result in default, while another fraction result in full repayment. In particular, we
assume that a bond matures in two cases: (1) conditional on the financial illiquidity dNt
shock, the bond matures with probability  ; (2) conditional on another independent Poisson
process dNt (with intensity    t ), the bond matures with probability 1. The two intensities
sum up to a fixed number, i.e.,
                                        t +    t = 1/                                   (30)

where  can be interpreted as the maturity of the bond. We can see that

                                         1/  H

and therefore,
                                            1
                                          
                                          H
which is the maximum maturity of bonds that we can define with this method.

    Each risky bond has a face value of 1. One unit value of a risky asset is continuously
posted to back this risky bond, i.e., the bond is fully collateralized if the bond matures
as long as there is no jump in the value of the risky asset. If dNt hits when the bond
matures, the underlying risky asset's value jumps downwards by m · p      t- + ^ 0 . The first
                                                                        p
term varies with economic conditions. It contains capital price drop t- , and a multiplier
m that measures the exposure of the collateral to capital price decline. The second term
here a constant "baseline" loss given default. If maturity occurs with no illiquidity event,
we assume that the bond pays back in full. Thus, the loss function upon maturity for the
risky bond is
                                   ^ t = (m ·  p
                                               t- + ^ 0 )dNt                             (31)

   This structure gives a time-varying default probability. Specifically, when a bond ma-
tures, the probability of default is

                                      t
                                            =  t                                         (32)
                                      t + t




                                             21
Therefore, the unconditional probability of default is   ¯ , where ¯ is the unconditional
average of the expected illiquidity frequency.

   Denote the current market value of this risky bond as vt = v (wt , t ), and the market
                          ¯t . Then we define the credit spread as
value of the safe bond as v

                                              1             1
                             S t ( pt 0 ) =     log(1/vt ) - log(1/v
                                                                   ¯t )                   (33)
                                                            

We expect St  0, given that risky bonds may default, and default occurs in high marginal
utility states. Solving for this credit spread involves solving an endogenous jump equation
with second-order derivatives. Details are provided in Appendix A.7.



4    Model Solution and Calibration

In this section, we solve and calibrate three variants of the model:

1. Bayesian (rational) Model: Agents form beliefs over the illiquidity state following Bayes
   rule, and this belief varies over time (i.e., L < H ).

2. Diagnostic (non-rational) Model: Agents form beliefs over the illiquidity state via diag-
   nostic expectations, and belief varies over time (i.e., L < H ).

3. Static belief Model: Agents' belief are constant at ¯.


   Under diagnostic beliefs, we assume that while agents' beliefs are diagnostic, they think
that their and all other agents' beliefs are Bayesian. In other words, the policy functions
are the same as those under Bayesian beliefs. However, because these policy functions are
evaluated under diagnostic beliefs, the equilibrium outcomes are different. Furthermore, the
dynamics of the states are different due to the underlying difference between diagnostic belief
and the truth. The solution strategy for the diagnostic belief model is to solve the Bayesian
decision rules under Bayesian belief  = 0, and then apply the same policy functions and
simulate the diagnostic model with the diagnostic belief of  > 0.

    There are four parameters governing beliefs in the Bayesian model: H , L , LH , and
H L . However, as we set L near zero, the model has three parameters. The diagnostic
model adds  as one more degree of freedom (the 'look-back period" parameter t0 is set to
1, the implicit value from discrete-time diagnostic belief process such as Bordalo, Gennaioli
and Shleifer (2018)). We explain how these parameters are calibrated below.

   We also present results from a version of the model where we turn off the belief mechanism
("Static Belief Model"). This model has only one parameter    ¯ governing the crisis frequency
process which is constant over time. As will be clear, this static belief model fails to match

                                                    22
important features of the data. We present this static belief model primarily to explain the
mechanisms of the belief models.


4.1    Solution Methodology

The challenge of solving this model comes from both multiple state variables and the en-
dogenous jumps in the state variables. To ensure stability, we use a functional iteration
method that begins with an initial guess of the capital price function p(0) (w, ), and then
iterates over the equilibrium equation system to get an updated price p(1) . This updating
step involves solving a fixed-point problem at each state (w, ). Then we iterate until at
step k , we have
                             1   H
                                     |p(k+1) (w, ) - p(k) (w, )|ddw < 
                         0       L

for a small positive number .

   To search for parameter values that best match moments, we need to repeatedly solve
the model for a large combination of parameter values. A simple discretization of the
parameter space (5 parameters for the benchmark, 7 parameters for the Bayesian model,
and 8 parameters for the diagnostic model) renders the task computationally infeasible. To
resolve this difficulty, we apply the Smolyak grid method (Judd et al., 2014) to generate a
discretized state space. For each version of the model, we follow the estimation procedure:

· Discretize the state space of parameters around their initial values. We pick a discretiza-
  tion level of 3 in the Smolyak discretization. This results in 177 combinations for the
  static belief model, 241 combinations for the Bayesian model, and 389 combinations for
  the diagnostic model. Simulate all of these models and collect their moment values.

· Denote the moments in the data as m1 , · · · , mJ , and the moments from the model as
  ^ 1, · · · , m
  m            ^ J . From all of the parameter combinations, pick the one that minimizes the
  objective
                                            J
                                               |m
                                                ^ j - mj |
                                                           .
                                          j =1
                                                   mj

· Once we have picked a set of parameters, we search in a smaller region around this set
  of parameters and find a new best set of parameters in the smaller region. We iterate
  the above process until the difference between the optimized objective value between two
  iterations is below a threshold.

The algorithm is time-consuming. We parallel the process and solve it using high-performance
clusters.



                                                23
4.2    Model Simulation

We simulate the model at a monthly frequency but analyze simulations at a yearly frequency
to be consistent with the data. The procedure of simulation is as follows for each version of
the model.


· From initial values wt = 0.1 and t = ¯ , we draw shocks.

· We set the simulation interval as dt = 1/12 (a month), and generate the independent
                                  
  Brownian shocks dBt  N (0, dt), as well as an independent frequency of illiquidity
  shock process ~ t . Based on the illiquidity shock process   ~ t , we generate illiquidity shocks
  dNt that hits with probability  ~ t dt for the time interval dt.

· Once shocks are generated, we solve for the dynamics of state variables, including wt , t ,
  and Kt . For the static belief model, t = ¯ . For the diagnostic belief model, we need to
  generate  t based on t .


· With state variables determined, we generate all other quantities and prices of the model.

· We discard the first one thousand data points of each simulation path collected in this
  manner. As a result, the initial values do not affect our computed moments. The sim-
  ulation approximates picking initial conditions from the ergodic distribution of the state
  variables.

· Finally, we average all of the monthly quantities for a given year to get an annual data
  set. For prices, we use the first observation of every year.


In order to map model outputs to data, we define the following events:


· A financial distress: in the year, there is at least one illiquidity shock dNt = 1.

· A financial crisis: bank credit/GDP in a given year falls into the lowest 4% quantile of
  the distribution of bank credit/GDP (Fact 1).

In our model, large output declines in a year coincide with the financial illiquidity events.
Therefore, financial crises under the above definition are a subset of financial illiquidity
events.


4.3    Parameter Calibration and Estimation

Our calibration strategy is to identify each model parameter with a corresponding moment.
We apply a combination of calibration and estimation for model parameters. Specifically,

                                                24
      we directly set parameter values for those with standard values in the literature. Then we
      estimate the rest of parameters based on moments chosen to best reflect the economics of a
      given parameter.

         A list of the calibrated parameters for the core model (not including the credit spread)
      are shown in Table 1. We follow the macroeconomics literature to set annual depreciation
      rate  = 0.1 (Gertler and Kiyotaki, 2010), annual time discount rate  = 4% (Gertler and
      Kiyotaki, 2010), and investment adjustment cost  = 3 (He and Krishnamurthy, 2019). For
      the emergency liquidity costs (0 ), we do not have good data for the historical financial
      crises to pin these down. From data of the 2008 crisis, the effective liquidation loss is about
      0.05, which is the value of 0 ·  in Li (2019). Alternatively, we can interpret this liquidation
      loss as a funding premium. The value of 0 = 0.05 translates to a 10% premium for a
      illiquidity event that lasts 6 months.

                               Table 1: Calibrated Parameters for the Core Model

                          Parameters                 Choice                 Moment

                     Depreciation rate                10%      Depreciation rate in the literature
                     Time discount rate                4%      Discount rate in the literature
                     Investment adjustment cost         3      Adjustment cost in literature
          0          Distress illiquidity costs       0.05     Data


          For the credit spread, we have the following calibration (summary in Table 2)

                      Table 2: Calibrated Parameters for the Credit Spread Construction

Parameters                                                     Choice     Moment

                         Risky bond maturity                   7 Years    Maturity of 7 years.
                         Maturing probability in illiquidity    0.31      Average default intensity of 0.04
mEcrises [p
          t ]-
                         Additional loss in crises               0.1      Additional loss of 10% in crises
mEnon-crises [p
              t]

mEcrises [p
          t] +  ^0       Baseline default loss                  0.55      Average loss rate of 0.55



      · In our baseline calibration, we target the an average maturity of  = 7 years, which is the
        average maturity of bonds used in Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017).

      · According to Chen, Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2008), the 10-year BAA (AAA) de-
        fault rate is 4.89% (0.63%). The difference in their default rates is 4.26%. We use 4% as


                                                       25
  our target. In the model, the default rate is

                                            ¯ = 0.04
                                            

  where  ¯ is the average frequency of financial illiquidity, which is 12.8% according to our
  calibration. Therefore, we have  = 0.31.

· The total loss given default is m · pt + ^ 0 if a illiquidity shock dNt hits, where p
                                                                                      t is the
  percentage decline of capital price pt during a crisis shock. The price jump component
  pt is large during crises but close to zero otherwise. We calibrate the loss given default
  to that of BAA bonds, which from Moodys data has been 55% on average over the last
  three decades and rose by 10% during the 2008 crisis. As a result, we set m so that m · p  t
  during crises is 10% larger than other defaults. Then we set the average of losses during
  default to 55% to get  ^0.

Finally, we should note that we define our spread measures in units of standard-deviation
differences relative to the unconditional mean value of the credit spread. This is what
Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017) do in their empirical work. As a result of this normalization,
the results are relatively insensitive to the exact values of the credit-spread calibration.

   Then we proceed to estimate other parameters, including H , L , H L , LH , A           ¯, A,
 K ,  , and . We note that as long as L is close to zero, the impact of its value is negligible.
Therefore, we pick L = 0.001 directly. After experimentation with the model, we find that
the following moments to be particularly informative for each parameter:

1. Yearly frequency of bank equity crashes (fact 2): This moment maps to the frequency
   of financial illiquidity shocks and helps discipline H . From Baron and Xiong (2017),
   the probability of a equity return below -30% is 3.2% at the quarterly frequency, which
   implies an annual frequency of about 12%, i.e. 1 - (1 - 3.2%)4 .

2. Credit spread changes during a crisis (fact 3). The spike in the credit spread is 0.7 s.
   This moment helps determine LH , which affects the degree of surprise in beliefs due
   to the realizations of illiquidity shocks.

3. Half-life of credit spread recovery (fact 5). According to Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017),
   the half-life is 2.5 years. This moment primarily determines H L , since the speed of
   recovery of beliefs after a illiquidity shock is directly affected by the underlying transition
   probability.

4. Investment to capital ratio: We use the same target as He and Krishnamurthy (2019).
                                                                      ¯ and A.
   This moment mainly affects the average of productivity parameters, A

5. Average output decline during a crisis (fact 4): We target -9.1% as explained in Section
                                                                            ¯ - A.
   2. This moment is most directly related to the productivity differential A

                                               26
6. Average output growth volatility: According to Bohn's historical data, the volatility of
   real GDP growth from 1791 to 2012 for the U.S. is 4%. This moment mainly affects the
   capital volatility  K .

7. We map banks in the model to depository institutions and broker dealers in the flow of
   funds. Bank equity is defined as total bank assets minus total bank liabilities. Since
   our model only captures runnable liabilities, we define effective bank liabilities as total
   liabilities minus insured deposits. Then we calculate bank leverage as (bank equity +
   effective bank liabilities)/bank equity. Using all data available, we find that bank leverage
   is approximately 5. More details are provided in Appendix B. This moment disciplines  ,
   the transition rate from bankers to households, which affects the stationary distribution
   of leverage in the model. For example, setting  very low leads to a stationary distribution
   where almost all of the wealth is in bankers' hands and average leverage in equilibrium
   is very low.

8. The diagnostic parameter  is disciplined by fact 8. Conditioning on a crisis at year t,
   and looking at the 5 years before the crisis, Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017) show that
   credit spreads are 0.34 s below their country mean (where this country mean is defined
   to exclude the crisis and 5 years after the crisis).

   The models have different sets of estimated parameters, as represented in Table 3. For
each model, we only use moments that are related to the economics of that model. For the
Bayesian model, we use moments 1­7. For the diagnostic model, we use moments 1­8. In
this way, both models are exactly identified. For the static belief model, we use moments
1­7 (overidentified) to give it the best chance to match the data as the Bayesian model.

                Table 3: Comparison of Model Parameters to be Estimated

This table lays out the set of estimated parameters in different models. "­" denotes not
having the parameter, while " " denotes the opposite.

  Parameters     Static Belief Model   Bayesian Belief Model     Diagnostic Belief Model

       H
      LH                  ­
     H L                  ­
     ¯+A
     A
     ¯-A
     A
       K
        
                          ­                        ­



                                              27
5     Model Evaluation

This section evaluates the models we consider and explains the mechanisms that help the
models match the crisis data patterns.


5.1    Targeted Moments

We target means across crises in choosing parameters. Table 4 presents the model's fit in
hitting the targets. We re-calibrate the model parameters to best match moments for each
version of the model, thus giving each model the best chance to represent the data. Although
each version of the model is at least exactly identified (static belief model is overidentified),
because the state-space is restricted, we do not fit all of the moments accurately. The static
belief model, in particular, misses the spread change in the crisis by a wide margin. It is
possible to fit this moment if we increase the exogenous liquidation cost 0 , but we opt to
keep 0 constant across all of the models to better illustrate the mechanisms underlying the
models.


                                      [TABLE 4 HERE]


    Figure 6 plots the path of the model-generated credit spread, bank credit/GDP and GDP
around a crisis at t = 0. The credit spread and bank credit variables are plotted in units of
standard-deviations from their mean value over the sample. The figure should be compared
to the data in Figure 1. We see that the model is able to generate the jump in spreads,
contraction in credit, and drop in GDP. For both the Bayesian and Diagnostic model, the
magnitudes of the spread spike and GDP decline are also in line with the data. During a
crisis, spreads jump about 60% in the model (that is, 0.6  s) and 70% in the data. As noted
above, the magnitude of the spread spike in the static belief model is too small relative to
the data. The magnitude of the credit contraction of around 0.8 s is larger than the data
counterpart of 0.33 s. This is likely because in our model all credit is extended via banks,
while in the data, there are other intermediaries involved in the credit process. Note that
we have not explicitly targeted the credit contraction in the calibration.


                                      [FIGURE 6 HERE]


    All of the models match the sharp transition in the crisis, driven by the model's ampli-
fication mechanism, and output that is below trend for a sustained period post-crisis. The
figures also reveal how the pre-crisis patterns vary across the models. In the years before
the crisis, bank credit and GDP are rising while credit spreads are below normal in both
dynamic belief models. In the static beliefs model, spreads are slightly higher than normal,

                                               28
while credit is falling. This contrast points to the need for time-variation in beliefs to fit the
data.


5.2    Ergodic Distributions

In Figure 5, we graph the ergodic distributions of the state (wt , t ) for the three models.
Underlying movements in w are driven by three forces: the exogenous diffusion shocks to
capital shift wealth, creating paths from the center of the distribution to both right and
left; paths that go to the left are pushed back to the middle because in low w states, risk
premia are high and bankers expected wealth growth is high; the transition rate of bankers
into households,  , result in a drift in w of -w, which pushes all paths to the left. The
result of these forces is a mean-reverting w process and the single-peaked distribution. The
jump to the  process leads to a jump in beliefs, which leads to a fall in asset prices and
hence a jump in w to the left. Additionally, on such a realization, t is temporarily high so
that more jumps are realized. This creates an increased mass at low w states.

   In the diagnostic model (panels c and d), the realization of a jump leads to a large
adjustment in w, relative to the Bayesian model, because agents shift from over-optimistic
to over-pessimistic. As a result, more mass is shifted to low-w states.


                                      [FIGURE 5 HERE]


5.3    Non-targeted Moments

The success in matching the mean patterns of crises verifies that our model's mechanisms can
speak to the data. However, as we have noted, our calibration explicitly targets the means.
We next describe the model's fit in the cross-section of crises , which are non-targeted
moments. Within the sample of crises, there are smaller and larger crises. The moments
we report measure variation within these crises. We discuss the model's fit of these non-
targeted moments in this section, and delve further into the fit in the next sections. Table
5 summarizes the model's performance in matching non-targeted moments.

   Panel A reports that all of the models are able to fit the data patterns on the crisis and
its aftermath. First, in the data, episodes where credit spreads increase more are followed
by larger output contractions. The first row of Panel A reports these moments from the
models and data. Second, crises that are preceded by a run up in bank credit are also more
severe crises. The second row of Panel A reports the models' fit with data on this dimension.
In general, all three of the models are in the ballpark of the data. Note that this is true
even in the static belief model, despite the fact that this model misses on the mean spike in
credit spreads.

                                               29
   Panel B reports that all of the models are able to fit the negative data relationship
between bank credit and risk premia. The panel is not explicitly about financial crises,
but more generally about the relationship between movements in credit and risk premia.
In the data, credit growth is negatively correlated with excess equity returns (Baron and
Xiong, 2017). Periods of high credit growth are followed by low returns, and periods of low
credit growth are followed by high returns. We verify that all of the models we consider
deliver this relation. They do so via time variation in the supply of risk-bearing capacity.
The state variables of the model, such as w, capture variation in the effective risk aversion
of the banking sector. When effective risk aversion is low, banks lend more and credit
grows, while risk premia are low; the opposite pattern holds when risk aversion is high. This
mechanism thus delivers the relation between bank credit and risk premia. The fact that this
relationship holds even in the model with static beliefs bears stressing: a sentiment/belief
mechanism is not necessary to replicate the credit/risk premia relationship.

   Panels C and D consider the pre-crisis patterns where we see divergence across the
models. In Panel C, we examine whether the model can reproduce the fact that spreads are
below normal before crises. The first row considers the mean pre-crisis spread. Note that
the diagnostic model explicitly targets the mean pre-crisis spread in the calibration. Both
the diagnostic model and the Bayesian model deliver the below normal spread, while the
static belief model delivers an above normal spread. We explain this failure in further detail
below. The second row of Panel C asks whether within crises, worse crises are preceded by
even lower spreads. This is true in the data, as seen in the data column. The Bayesian
belief model is unable to match this fact, while the diagnostic model gets closer, but still
fails. We will also explain this failure later in the paper. Panel D considers the predictive
relationship between measures of credit market excess and subsequent crises. We again
see that the static belief model fails to generate a sign in keeping with the data. Both of
the belief models succeed in this dimension, with the diagnostic model coming nearer to
quantitatively matching the data moment.


                                     [TABLE 5 HERE]


5.4    Mechanism 1: Frictional Intermediation and Leverage

Figure 7 graphs the histogram of 3-year GDP growth in crises. Focus first on the black
dashed line corresponding to the static belief model. In a model with no financial amplifica-
tion and only diffusion shocks to AKt , output growth would be normally distributed. Thus,
we conclude that the left-skewed output growth distribution in line with the data can be
generated by the financial amplification mechanism.


                                    [FIGURE 7 HERE]

                                             30
    Adding beliefs to the mix, as in the diagnostic and Bayesian models, produces more left-
skew and places more mass in the left tail. The reason is that a illiquidity event not only
triggers a jump down in w and a fall in GDP, but also an increase in . The amplification
mechanism plus the change in belief drive an output distribution that is somewhat more
left-skewed than the data.

   In the data, the skewness in output growth matches the skewness of the jump in credit
spreads in the crisis (fact 7). Panel A in Table 5 evaluates the relationship between the
jump in credit spreads in this model and the fall in GDP, which is in line with the data.
The bottom row of Panel A evaluates the relation between the run-up in bank credit at the
start of the crisis and the subsequent severity of the crisis. This is a relation reported by
several empirical studies (Jord`a, Schularick and Taylor, 2013).

    We note that all of the variants of the model, even the static belief model, produces
comovements between credit spreads, bank leverage, and output growth, in line with the
data. We have also seen in Panel B of Table 5 that all of the models generate the negative
relation between bank credit and excess equity returns (risk premia). The models capture
this moment because all of the models embed variation in the supply of risk-bearing capacity
that drives both leverage and risk premia.

   These observations indicate that the frictional intermediation mechanism, which is the
only mechanism present in the static belief model, can capture the patterns of the economy
in a crisis and its aftermath. Again, it is possible to improve the quantitative fit of the static
belief model for the crisis and if its aftermath if we allow 0 to vary across models and be
determined via the estimation. We choose not to go down this path because, as we explain
next, this static belief model fails to fit the pre-crisis facts even qualitatively.


5.5      Mechanism 2: Beliefs and Leverage

We report in Table 5 Panel C that the static belief model generates a spread that is higher
than normal in the pre-crisis period, contrary to the data. The failure can be understood
as follows. The amplification mechanism of the model, which is what drives the response of
the economy to the illiquidity shock, is governed by the single state-variable w. If w is low
(and leverage is high), a negative shock triggers a large fall in GDP and a crisis. However,
since the credit spread is forward-looking, variation in the spread is also driven by w. The
economy is more vulnerable when w is low, and hence credit spreads are higher when w is
low. As a result, the static belief model generates an above normal spread before a crisis,
contrary to the data.

   The belief models are able to generate a spread with the right sign of the data.3 To
  3
      We report the results of a regression of spreads on a dummy that takes the value of one for the 5 years



                                                     31
understand the economics here, consider Figure 8. We graph the policy function of bankers,
for both Bayesian and diagnostic models, in choosing leverage as a function of the true state
 (denoted "rational" in the figure). Bankers in our model lever up to gain high returns
on capital, but at the cost of the illiquidity event where they suffer bankruptcy costs from
liquidating capital. Thus there is a risk/return tradeoff that drives their leverage decision.
When  is low, the illiquidity event is less likely, and the banker chooses high leverage;
hence, the negative slope in the curves in the figure. When  is low and leverage is high,
if a illiquidity shock dNt occurs, then its impact on GDP will be severe and more likely to
result in the large GDP decline of a crisis. This endogenous relationship between illiquidity
risk and vulnerability generates low credit spread before crises.

   The diagnostic model generates a magnitude in line with the data, but note that the
pre-crisis spread is the moment we have explicitly targeted to pin down the belief distortion
parameter . The Bayesian model gets a spread that is below normal, and about half-way
towards matching the data fact that spreads are about 0.34 s lower than normal in the pre-
crisis period. Moreover, in the data, more severe crises are preceded by even lower spreads.
The Bayesian model fails to capture this fact (see Panel C in Table 5). The reason can
be understood by examining Figure 9. Here we plot the relationship between spreads right
before an illiquidity shock triggers a crisis, and the GDP decline in the crisis. The blue line
corresponds to the Bayesian belief model. Note that the relationship is non-monotonic, and
for low spreads, the slope is negative. There are two forces driving spreads pre-crisis. One
is the belief mechanism, as reflected in Figure 8. The other is the w mechanism of the static
belief model. This latter mechanism drives a negative relation between spreads and output
growth; i.e., spreads are lower when w is higher, and hence vulnerability to an illiquidity
shock is lower. These two forces compete against each other. In our calibrated model, the
w mechanism dominates at low values of spread (the reason is that  is as low as possible,
weakening the belief mechanism).


                                           [FIGURE 8 HERE]


                                           [FIGURE 9 HERE]


   The diagnostic model strengthens the belief mechanism and helps bring the model closer
to matching the pre-crisis froth patterns. Consider the red dashed curve in Figure 8. We plot
the banker's leverage decision as a function of the true lambda ­ not the agent's perceived
diagnostic lambda. Clearly, at lambda of zero, the true and diagnostic lambda are the same.
But as lambda becomes larger than zero, the diagnostic agent chooses higher leverage than
the Bayesian agent. This is because the banker is overoptimistic and thinks lambda is lower
before a crisis. This regression also includes a control for the 5 years after the crisis so that the pre-crisis
dummy indicates the level of spreads relative to non-crises periods.


                                                      32
than it actually is. When the true lambda is larger than a threshold, the banker is on average
over-pessimistic and thinks lambda is higher than it actually is, thus choosing lower leverage.
As a result, the leverage/lambda curve steepens under the diagnostic model. Returning to
Figure 9, we see that by strengthening the leverage/lambda relationship, the diagnostic
model generates a stronger relationship between the extent of low spreads and crisis output
declines. As a result, the diagnostic model better fits the spread/output relation as reflected
in Panel C of Table 5.

    This analysis indicates a "recipe": to strengthen the pre-crisis relationship, a model needs
to steepen the leverage/lambda curve, even beyond that of the curves in Figure 8. Increasing
the belief distortion helps in this regard. But it worth stressing that other specifications
of the banker's problem ­ altering the corporate financing frictions, for example ­ can also
deliver this steepening. This is an important observation because it indicates that while the
data patterns allow us to easily rule out the static belief models, the diagnostic vs. Bayesian
belief models are not convincingly identified in the data.


5.6    Pre-crisis: Predicting a Crisis with High Bank Credit

Next, we consider the evidence that high bank credit and low spreads predict crises and not
just precede crises. To see the difference, note that the former conditions in the event of a
crisis. Table 5 Panel D presents the crisis prediction result. To replicate the predictability
regressions in Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017), we define "high froth" as the past 5-year
average of a dummy that indicates whether the credit spread is below its median value.
Similarly, we define "high credit" as the past 5-year average of a dummy that indicates
whether bank credit/GDP is above its median value.

   In the dynamic belief models, we find the variables have the right signs, although the
models are low in terms of magnitudes. The static belief model fails again, generating a
sign that is the opposite of the data. See Table 5 Panel D.

    To understand what drives the mechanism in the dynamic belief models, consider Figure
10. We plot the density of GDP growth over the next year conditional on the level of
credit/GDP today. The red lines correspond to the Bayesian model and the dashed-blue
lines correspond to the static-belief case. In panel (a) of the figure, we condition on low bank
credit/GDP, which is typically the outcome when w is low and/or  is high. This is a case
where the banker faces higher illiquidity risk and endogenously chooses lower leverage. As a
result, the economy is faced with moderate volatility of GDP but this volatility is confined
to the center of the distribution and there is little mass at the left tail. Next, consider panels
(b) and (c). In these cases, we progressively condition on higher levels of credit and hence
lower effective banker risk aversion. The dotted black vertical line on the figure indicates
the cutoff we have used to define a financial crisis. Mass is now pushed from the center of

                                               33
the distribution towards the left-tail crisis states. Effectively, the more risk-tolerant banker
is willing to take on more risk when making decisions. There is less risk at the center of the
distribution, but more mass in the tail. As a result, high credit states forecast more left-tail
events.

  The static belief model has only w as the state variable to drive effective risk aversion.
With only this state variable driving decisions, the banker chooses leverage in a manner that
crises are avoided when w and credit are higher. As shown in Panel C and D of Table 5,
the signs on the credit-crisis relationship are the opposite of that in the data. This result
reinforces a lesson of our analysis that we do need a model with two state variables to explain
the entire crisis cycle.

                                     [FIGURE 10 HERE]

   Figure 11 plots the distribution of GDP growth over the next year conditional on different
levels of credit in the diagnostic model. We plot the diagnostic's model distribution in green
dashed lines and the Bayesian model in red. We can see that the forces that work to generate
the relation between high credit and crises are similar but stronger in the diagnostic model
compared to the Bayesian model. As we go from top to bottom panel in the figure, the mass
in the left tail rises. The improvement of the diagnostic model is again due to steepening
the leverage/lambda relationship.

                                     [FIGURE 11 HERE]

    Figure 12 examines the predictive relation in a different way. In the figure, we plot the
banker's wealth return conditional on different values of credit. Recall that our banker has
log utility, so the mean and variance of this distribution are the key statistics driving banker
utility and the leverage decision. The banker's wealth volatility is highest in the low credit
case (top panel) driven by a significant mass spread between -0.2 and 0.4 at the center of the
distribution. Distress and bankruptcy costs are salient to the banker, and thus he chooses
low leverage. In the bottom panel high credit case, the output distribution is tight so that
over most of the distribution, there is little distress for the banker. While there is a tail of
wealth losses in crisis states, the banker's decision to take high leverage is largely driven by
the tight central peak of the distribution. The banker understands that the typical negative
shock will have small effects on his wealth, and is willing to gamble on avoiding the large
tail shock. Note also that the banker's wealth process is different from the economy-wide
GDP process, as should be expected in a model where banks drive systemic risk. Banker
wealth is more sensitive than GDP to small shocks, and since such shocks are more likely,
they are the drivers of the banker's leverage decision. As a result, the model produces the
surprising result that in the Bayesian model, even if illiquidity events are less likely (low ),
crises are more likely.

                                              34
                                     [FIGURE 12 HERE]


    Once one understands these mechanisms, it becomes clear that the result is more gen-
eral than our model's specific mechanisms. High credit growth occurs when bankers are
effectively less risk-averse. This leads to the relation between high credit and low expected
returns/risk premia. Additionally, the less risk-averse banker is more willing to take risks
and as a result, GDP outcomes have mass pushed out to the tails. In our model, time
variation in beliefs regarding illiquidity risk generates variation in banker's willingness to
take the risk.


5.7    Pre-crisis: Predicting a Crisis with Low Credit Spread

We next turn to the relation driving froth (low credit spreads) and crises as reflected in Table
5 Panel D. As we will explain, this relation holds for the belief models in the parameterization
we study, but need not hold generally. Figure 13 draws density plots of next-year GDP
growth for the Bayesian and static belief model conditional on different levels of the credit
spread. We can see that the static belief model gets the sign of the mass shift wrong. The
Bayesian model, on the other hand, succeeds in this dimension.


                                     [FIGURE 13 HERE]


    The logic here is more nuanced than for the high credit relation of the last section. There
are two forces driving variation in the credit spread that are salient for understanding the
mechanisms: (1) higher  means more illiquidity events and hence higher spreads; (2) worse
crises mean lower loss-given default (via p t ) and hence higher spreads. If we imagine shutting
down effect (2), then we can understand the froth relation easily. When  is low, the banker is
effectively less risk-averse, and hence the economy is more subject to large GDP downturns.
This force pushes more mass into crisis states but does not increase credit spreads ex-ante.
Hence we arrive at the positive relation between froth and crises. Now, if we add back effect
(2), the froth relation is weakened and can potentially flip the sign to resemble the static
belief model. The reason is that more crises imply larger losses given default and hence
higher ex-ante spreads. The sign of the froth relation depends quantitatively on the exact
cyclicality of recoveries in default. We have calibrated our model to the history of recoveries
on BAA bonds in the U.S., as reported by Moodys.

   Table 6 illustrates this point for the extreme case where we set 0 = 0, and hence recovery
has no fixed component. We now see that the froth relation has a negative sign and no longer
matches the data. The high credit relation continues to match the data.


                                      [TABLE 6 HERE]

                                              35
   Figure 14 draws the GDP distributions conditional on credit spreads for the diagnostic
model. We see again that the relative to the Bayesian model, the diagnostic model shifts
more mass to the left tail when spreads are low, and leverage is endogenously high. As a
result, the diagnostic model gets closer to matching the data in Table 5 Panel D.


                                          [FIGURE 14 HERE]


5.8     Conditional Risk Premium

A negative result of our analysis is that the qualitative patterns of the crisis cycle do not
allow one to distinguish between diagnostic and Bayesian belief models. We find that a
financial friction mechanism plus a belief mechanism can capture the main features of the
crisis cycle. We also learn that both the Bayesian and diagnostic belief models work in the
right direction, with the diagnostic model getting the quantitative results closer to the data.
The key to this improvement is that the diagnostic model steepens the leverage/lambda
relationship.

   Are there other data that help identify diagnostic beliefs? Bordalo, Gennaioli and Shleifer
(2018) argues for the importance of survey expectations to measure agent beliefs. Ratio-
nality requires that the frequency of financial crises be consistent with agents' beliefs, and
measuring such beliefs may allow one to discipline a non-Bayesian component of beliefs.
The difficulty with this approach is that financial crises are infrequent, and survey measures
do not cover the breadth of history and countries necessary to investigate this possibility
rigorously.

   An approach that is more in line with that of this paper in terms of matching data from
historical crises is from Baron and Xiong (2017). They observe that the expected returns
on bank equity as well as the market can be negative conditional on bank-credit growth
in the highest quartile of its distribution (see Table V and Figure III of their paper). The
statistical strength of this result is weak relative to other results in the paper. It only holds
at longer horizons and only for bank equity and not for broad equity returns. However,
let us take this as a fact since such evidence is inconsistent with any model of rationality.4
Figure 15 plots the associated figures from our model (the equivalent of their Figure III). Our
model matches the general pattern of a negative slope, but our calibration does not generate
returns that fall below zero. To be clear, this is not an impossibility result: parameters do
exist such that diagnostic expectations generate negative expected returns (see Greenwood,
Hanson and Jin (2019)). The result illustrated by the figure is in the context of our specific
model and calibration that matches parameters, as indicated in Table 3.
   4
     Note that we are discussing equity returns which have a positive  with respect to systematic risk
factors. For other assets, such as fixed income or housing, it is possible that a collateralizability premium
or convenience yield can generate a negative expected return.


                                                     36
                                     [FIGURE 15 HERE]



6    Policy Impact under Diagnostic and Bayesian Beliefs

Does it matter for policy purposes whether we live in a world with diagnostic beliefs or one
with Bayesian beliefs? Although our model is not suited for welfare analysis, it can shed
light on the impact of a policy change on economic outcomes. In this section, we run the
following experiment: we start the economy in a boom state (time t = 0) with low credit
spread and high leverage, and then consider an unexpected policy that transfers wealth from
households to bankers so that the banker wealth share w0 increases by 10%. The idea is
to recapitalize banks to "lean against the wind" so that the severity of a crisis is reduced
if an illiquidity shock dNt hits. This exercise is similar to Gertler, Kiyotaki and Prestipino
(2020). Under each version of the model, we calculate the "derivative" of the nonlinear
impulse response of quantities and asset prices with respect to the recapitalization policy.

    In our first experiment, we require that both models are calibrated to common data and
we simulate the models from an initial condition in terms of observables that is the same
across both models. In particular, we study a recap policy conditional on given initial bank
leverage and credit spread, which are both observables in the data. These observables pin
down the underlying states (w0 , 0 ) in the Bayesian model. In the diagnostic model, we also
need to know the reference belief T    0 at t = -T . Since, on average, the diagnostic belief is
equal to the rational belief, to reflect the average scenario, we assume T0 = 0 . We simulate
the model at interval dt = 1/12 (one month), and introduce dNt = 1 at the first month (but
zero otherwise). To reflect the dynamics of the other shocks, we randomly generate dBt
in the simulation and simulate each model 10,000 times. For each model, we compute the
average impulse responses across simulation runs with and without the recap policy and plot
the difference between these responses in Figure 16. That is, we are plotting the difference
of the impulse response to the recap, across both types of models. In the top-left panel, we
plot the path-difference in w. At t = 0, due to the recapitalization policy, the response is
+10% in both cases as expected. At t = dt (monthly simulation so that dt = 1/12), the
illiquidity shock dNt hits and the nonlinear amplification mechanism turns on so that the
response becomes larger than the initial 10% difference. The output recoveries (top right
panel) after the illiquidity-shock are similar across Bayesian and diagnostic models. Since
we start the economy in a boom state that features high bank credit, the additional 10%
of bank equity has little impact on output initially. Upon the illiquidity shock, in both
models, the output is higher in the recap relative to no-recap, by between 1% and 2% over
the next two years. The bottom left panel plots the credit spread response. The recap leads
to a smaller rise in the credit spread. Finally, the bottom right panel illustrates the bank
credit response. The initial response-gaps are close to zero for both Bayesian and diagnostic


                                              37
models, subsequently rising to about 15%.

   The key message from Figure 16 is that the derivative of the impulse responses to a
recapitalization policy in the Bayesian and diagnostic models are quantitatively similar.
The result arises because the initial state is the same in terms of observables, the models
are calibrated to common data, and the initial condition for the diagnostic model is near
the rational model (i.e. neither over-optimistic or pessimistic).

   In our second experiment, we probe whether knowledge of the exact divergence from
rational beliefs in the diagnostic model matters for outcomes. The question is whether
"getting into the minds of agents" is important for the impulse responses. The answer is
not obvious because we are simulating both models based on the same observable initial
conditions, e.g., credit spreads, which reflect agents' beliefs. We calculate the diagnostic
model's impulse responses in a case of overoptimism, where the initial state has the same
bank leverage and credit spread, but with      0 < 0 . Then we compare the results with
the no-belief distortion case of the diagnostic model in Figure 17. We again find that the
impulse response gaps are quite similar across these two cases. The key to this result is that
the initial condition in terms of observables is the same in this experiment. Finally, note
that the plots in Figure 17 are conditional on an illiquidity shock. It is also interesting to
examine the unconditional response. In the overoptimism case the true expected path of
the economy will differ from the agent's beliefs over this path. Figure 18 plots these average
impulse response gaps. Now we see that the recap policy has a more beneficial effect in the
overoptimism case. However, the y -axis scale in these plots is far smaller than in Figure 17.
That is, these average gaps will be hard to discern in data.

   In our last experiment, we do something closer to a pure comparative static exercise. We
set the parameters and the initial conditions of the rational model. Then we use the same
parameters and initial conditions in terms of state variables and simulate the diagnostic
model. We think this exercise is the least economically relevant, but sheds light on why
we find similar responses in our earlier exercises. Our previous experiments tie our hands
by forcing the diagnostic model's parameters and states to match the same observables.
In Figure 19, we present the results. Both the Bayesian model and the diagnostic model
have the same parameters (other than the diagnostic parameter) and the same initial state
(w0 = w,¯ 0 = 0.9  ¯ ). We also set the initial diagnostic belief to feature overoptimism at
t = 0. We see that the recapitalization policies driver larger impulse response differences.
Output is higher by about 0.3% in the diagnostic model. We conclude that with the freedom
to choose the degree of overoptimism, we can generate a larger impact of policy. However,
as noted above, this experiment is likely the least relevant in terms of informing policy.

                                      TABLE 7 HERE

   A comparison of the simulation experiments is shown in Table 7.

                                             38
7     Conclusion

We have shown that our model with a financial amplification mechanism plus belief dynam-
ics, either driven by Bayesian or extrapolative expectations, is able to generate patterns
on the crisis cycle consistent with the empirical literature on financial crises. The model
matches the pre-crisis froth and leverage build-up. It matches the sharp transition to a
crisis, the left-skewed distribution of output declines and asset price declines, and the slow
post-crisis recovery.

    We offer three main conclusions that may guide future research:

1. On the positive side, a minimal model with two state variables, one that governs financial
   frictions and one that governs beliefs, can match the crisis cycle facts. Both the Bayesian
   and diagnostic models are driven by two state variables, w, and . The dynamics of these
   variables drive the model's fit on the dimensions on which we evaluate. Our analysis shows
   that these variables can have the "right" dynamics under both Bayesian and diagnostic
   belief updating.

2. On the negative side, based on our analysis, we are not compelled that the data identifies
   a non-rational component of beliefs. Apparently, even the Bayesian model gets the broad
   patterns correct; the non-rational component just adds a kick to get these patterns closer
   to the data. Considering that our baseline model is quite minimalist, it seems premature
   to put too much weight on the success from the extra kick. Hence our conclusion is
   that the data does pose an identification challenge for sorting among models of belief
   formation.

3. Despite this identification problem, our analysis suggests that for many policy experi-
   ments it may not matter whether beliefs are Bayesian or diagnostic. The response of the
   economy to a given shock, such as a fall in bank capital, depends on observables such
   as the credit spread and leverage. Different models map these observables to different
   values of the state variables, but given the observables, impulse response of the models
   we study are quite similar.




                                             39
Figures and Tables




                                                                   20000
    10




                                                                   15000
    8
 density




                                                              density
       6




                                                              10000
    4




                                                                   5000
    2
    0




                                                                   0
           0.0         0.1       0.2      0.3      0.4                     0.110           0.115         0.120        0.125         0.130
                                  w                                                                     lambda

            (a) w density of Static Belief model                      (b)  density of Static Belief model model
    8




                                                                   50
                                                                   40
    6
 density




                                                              density
                                                                 30
   4




                                                                   20
    2




                                                                   10
    0




                                                                   0




           0.0         0.1       0.2      0.3      0.4                      0.0           0.1         0.2      0.3         0.4       0.5
                                  w                                                                      lambda

                 (c) w density of Bayesian model                                  (d)  density of Bayesian model
                                                                   30
    6




                                                                   25 20
 density




                                                              density
     4




                                                               15  10
    2




                                                                   5
    0




                                                                   0




           0.0         0.1       0.2      0.3      0.4                      0.0     0.1         0.2   0.3   0.4      0.5      0.6   0.7
                                  w                                                                     lambda

             (e) w density of diagnostic model                                    (f)  density of diagnostic model

                   Figure 5: Stationary Distribution of State Variables in Each Model




                                                         40
                                                                                                                                        0.15
         1.0




                                                Bayesian Belief                                               Bayesian Belief                                             Bayesian Belief
                                                Diagnostic Belief                                             Diagnostic Belief                                           Diagnostic Belief




                                                                                                                                        0.10
         0.8




                                                Static Belief                                                 Static Belief                                               Static Belief




                                                                           0.5
              0.6




                                                                                                                                        0.05
Credit Spread




                                                                     Bank Credit
        0.4




                                                                           0.0




                                                                                                                                   GDP
                                                                                                                                   0.00
 0.2




                                                                                                                                        -0.05
                                                                          -0.5
         0.0




                                                                                                                                        -0.10
        -0.2




                                                                          -1.0
        -0.4




                    -4   -2       0        2          4        6                   -4   -2        0        2        4        6                  -4   -2       0        2        4        6
                              years around crises                                             years around crises                                         years around crises



Figure 6: Dynamics of Different Models Around Crises. Credit spread and bank credit are
measured as standard-deviations from the mean value. For example, credit spread raising
to 0.2 means that it is larger than the value at year 0 by 0.2 s. GDP is measured in terms
of percentage deviation from the long-run mean value.




                                                          Data
                                                          Bayesian Belief
                                                          Diagnostic Belief
                                                          Static Belief
                                          6
                                      Density
                                         42
                                          0




                                                 -0.4                -0.3                    -0.2           -0.1                  0.0                 0.1
                                                                                              3 Year GDP Growth


                                                Figure 7: 3-Year GDP Growth: Model versus Data




                                                                                                  41
                                                          11
                                                                                                     Leverage Choice with Bayesian belief
                                                          10                                         Leverage Choice with Diagnostic belief

                                                            9

                                                            8

                                                            7
                        Leverage
                                                            6

                                                            5

                                                            4

                                                            3

                                                            2

                                                            1
                                                                  0     0.1       0.2          0.3          0.4       0.5        0.6          0.7
                                                                                             Rational lambda


Figure 8: Expected Distress Frequency and Bank Leverage. This figure plots the leverage
of banks as a function of the rational belief , given the same state variable w. We simulate
the diagnostic model to derive the model-implied relationship between rational  and the
diagnostic belief  , and show the corresponding leverage choice.
                                                          0.00




                                                                         Bayesian Belief
                                                                         Diagnostic Belief
                   Average Output Growth after dN Shock
                                                          -0.05
                                                          -0.10
                                                          -0.15
                                                          -0.20




                                                                       -1.0      -0.5          0.0           0.5        1.0        1.5
                                                                      Normalized Credit Spread (mean=0, sd=1) Before dN Shock


Figure 9: Average Output Growth in Year after a dNt Shock vs Pre-Shock Credit Spread




                                                                                                42
                         Bayesian
                         Static Belief




                 15
           Density
              10 5
                 0




                           -0.2            -0.1             0.0          0.1
                                           Next-Year GDP Growth
                              (a) Conditioning on Low Bank Credit/GDP


                         Bayesian
                         Static Belief
                 20 15
            Density
           10    5
                 0




                           -0.2            -0.1             0.0          0.1
                                           Next-Year GDP Growth
                           (b) Conditioning on Medium Bank Credit/GDP


                         Bayesian
                         Static Belief
                 25
                 20
           Density
              15 10
                 5
                 0




                           -0.2            -0.1             0.0          0.1
                                           Next-Year GDP Growth
                              (c) Conditioning on High Bank Credit/GDP

Figure 10: Density of Next-Year GDP Growth in Static Belief and Bayesian Models Condi-
tional on Bank Credit/GDP. Cutoffs are 30% quantile and 90% quantile of bank credit/GDP.

                                                 43
                         Bayesian
                         Diagnostic




                 15
           Density
              10 5
                 0




                          -0.2         -0.1           0.0         0.1   0.2
                                          Next-Year GDP Growth
                             (a) Conditioning on Low Bank Credit/GDP


                         Bayesian
                         Diagnostic
                 20 15
            Density
           10    5
                 0




                          -0.2         -0.1           0.0         0.1   0.2
                                          Next-Year GDP Growth
                           (b) Conditioning on Medium Bank Credit/GDP


                         Bayesian
                         Diagnostic
                 25
                 20
           Density
              15 10
                 5
                 0




                          -0.2         -0.1           0.0         0.1   0.2
                                          Next-Year GDP Growth
                             (c) Conditioning on High Bank Credit/GDP

Figure 11: Density of Next-Year GDP Growth in Bayesian and Diagnostic Models Condi-
tional on Bank Credit/GDP. Cutoffs are 30% quantile and 90% quantile of bank credit/GDP.

                                                44
             7
                          Bayesian
                          Static Belief




             6
             5
         Density
         3   2
             1
             04




                   -0.6        -0.4       -0.2       0.0        0.2       0.4   0.6
                                            One-Year Bank Equity Return
                                   (a) Conditioning on Low Bank Credit


                          Bayesian
             8




                          Static Belief
             6
         Density
          4  2
             0




                   -0.6        -0.4       -0.2       0.0        0.2       0.4   0.6
                                            One-Year Bank Equity Return
                                (b) Conditioning on Medium Bank Credit


                          Bayesian
             8




                          Static Belief
             6
         Density
          4  2
             0




                   -0.6        -0.4       -0.2       0.0        0.2       0.4   0.6
                                            One-Year Bank Equity Return
                                   (c) Conditioning on High Bank Credit

Figure 12: Density of Bank Equity Return in Three Models Conditional on Bank
Credit/GDP. Cutoffs are 30% quantile and 90% quantile of bank credit/GDP.

                                                     45
                       Bayesian
                       Static Belief




                25
                20
          Density
            15  10
                5
                0




                         -0.2              -0.1             0.0          0.1
                                           Next-Year GDP Growth
                                (a) Conditioning on Low Credit Spread
                30




                       Bayesian
                       Static Belief
                2520
          Density
           15   10
                5
                0




                         -0.2              -0.1             0.0          0.1
                                           Next-Year GDP Growth
                            (b) Conditioning on Medium Credit Spread
                20




                       Bayesian
                       Static Belief
                15
          Density
            10  5
                0




                         -0.2              -0.1             0.0          0.1
                                           Next-Year GDP Growth
                                (c) Conditioning on High Credit Spread

Figure 13: Density of Next-Year GDP Growth in Three Models Conditional on Credit
Spread. Cutoffs are 30% quantile and 90% quantile of credit spread.

                                                 46
                       Bayesian




                30
                       Diagnostic




                2520
           Density
            15  10
                5
                0




                        -0.2            -0.1           0.0          0.1   0.2
                                           Next-Year GDP Growth
                               (a) Conditioning on Low Credit Spread


                       Bayesian
                25




                       Diagnostic
                20
                 15
             Density
           10   5
                0




                        -0.2            -0.1           0.0          0.1   0.2
                                           Next-Year GDP Growth
                           (b) Conditioning on Medium Credit Spread


                       Bayesian
                       Diagnostic
                15
           Density
              105
                0




                        -0.2            -0.1           0.0          0.1   0.2
                                           Next-Year GDP Growth
                               (c) Conditioning on High Credit Spread

Figure 14: Density of Next-Year GDP Growth in Bayesian and Diagnostic Models Condi-
tional on Credit Spread. Cutoffs are 30% quantile and 90% quantile of bank credit/GDP.

                                                 47
Average Realized Bank Equity Excess Return




                                                                                                           Average Realized Capital Excess Return
                                                                                  Bayesian belief                                                                                        Bayesian belief
                                                                                  Diagnostic belief                                                                                      Diagnostic belief
                               0.12




                                                                                                                                       0.020
                    0.08




                                                                                                                           0.015
         0.04




                                                                                                               0.010
0.00




                                             20         40            60            80         100                                                  20         40            60            80         100
                                                  bank_credit_ratio quantile percentages (%)                                                             bank_credit_ratio quantile percentages (%)

(a) Bank Credit and Bank Equity Excess Return                                                                                       (b) Bank Credit and Capital Excess Return

                                                                      Figure 15: Bank Credit and Risk Premium




                                                                                                      48
                                    w                                                   output
        20%                                                        2.5%
                                            Bayesian                                                 Bayesian
                                            Diagnostic               2%                              Diagnostic

        15%
                                                                   1.5%


        10%                                                          1%

                                                                   0.5%
         5%
                                                                     0%

         0%                                                        -0.5%
               0   2           4        6     8          10                0   2    4            6     8          10



                            credit spread                                          bank credit
       -0.5%                                                        20%
                       Bayesian                                                                      Bayesian
                       Diagnostic                                                                    Diagnostic
        -1%                                                         15%



       -1.5%                                                        10%



        -2%                                                          5%



       -2.5%                                                         0%
               0   2           4        6     8          10                0   2    4            6     8          10


Figure 16: Impulse Responses of Experiment 1. In this figure, we show the impulse responses
to a recapitalization policy at t = 0 that increases banker wealth share w by 10%, in order
to "lean against the wind" and avoid future losses in a liquidity distress. The starting state
is a "boom state", solved by matching a normal bank leverage but a credit spread 5% below
its average. In the diagnostic model,   0 = 0 so that the diagnostic belief is correct at the
beginning. Both the Bayesian and the diagnostic models are the calibrated versions as in
Table 4. The impulse responses are percentage deviations between with and without the
recapitalization policy. In both cases, we introduce a dNt = 1 shock at the first month
(t = 1/12), but set dNt = 0 otherwise. The Brownian shocks dBt are randomly generated.
We simulate the model by 10000 times and show the average impulse responses in the graph.




                                                              49
                                     w                                                                 output
        20%                                                                     2%
                          Diagnostic (no belief distortion at t=0)                            Diagnostic (no belief distortion at t=0)
                          Diagnostic (overoptimism at t=0)                                    Diagnostic (overoptimism at t=0)

        15%                                                                    1.5%



        10%                                                                     1%



         5%                                                                    0.5%



         0%                                                                     0%
               0   2           4           6            8            10               0   2        4            6           8            10




                             credit spread                                                        bank credit
       -0.5%                                                                   20%
                   Diagnostic (no belief distortion at t=0)                                   Diagnostic (no belief distortion at t=0)
                   Diagnostic (overoptimism at t=0)                                           Diagnostic (overoptimism at t=0)
        -1%
                                                                               15%

       -1.5%
                                                                               10%
        -2%

                                                                                5%
       -2.5%


        -3%                                                                     0%
               0   2           4           6            8            10               0   2        4            6           8            10


Figure 17: Impulse Responses of Experiment 2. Experiment 2 is identical to experiment 1
except for   0 > 0 (overoptimism) in simulating the diagnostic model. Specifically, both
Bayesian and diagnostic models have the same credit spread and bank leverage at t = 0, but
the true frequency of distress in the diagnostic model is higher than the believed frequency.
More descriptions are provided in Table 7 and footnotes of Figure 16.




                                                                          50
                                    w                                                           output
        11%                                                              0.3%
                           Bayesian                                                     Bayesian
        10%                Diagnostic (overoptimism at t=0)             0.25%           Diagnostic (overoptimism at t=0)

                                                                         0.2%
         9%
                                                                        0.15%
         8%
                                                                         0.1%
         7%
                                                                        0.05%

         6%                                                               0%

         5%                                                         -0.05%
               0   2           4         6         8          10                0   2       4            6      8          10



                            credit spread                                                 bank credit
       -0.5%
                                                                          3%
                       Bayesian                                                         Bayesian
                       Diagnostic (overoptimism at t=0)                                 Diagnostic (overoptimism at t=0)
        -1%                                                               2%


       -1.5%                                                              1%


        -2%                                                               0%



       -2.5%                                                             -1%
               0   2           4         6         8          10                0   2       4            6      8          10


Figure 18: Expected Impulse Responses of Experiment 2. In this figure, we illustrate the
expected impact of the recapitalization policy in experiment 2, by simulating dNt according
to the underlying process instead of setting dNt = 1 at t = 1/12. More descriptions of
experiment 2 are provided in Table 7 and footnotes of Figure 16 and 17.




                                                                   51
                                w                                                                    output
        25%
                       Bayesian                                                             Bayesian
                       Add Diagnostic (overoptimism at t=0)             2.5%                Add Diagnostic (overoptimism at t=0)
        20%
                                                                         2%

        15%
                                                                        1.5%

        10%
                                                                         1%


         5%                                                             0.5%


         0%                                                              0%
               0   2       4          6           8           10               0   2             4            6          8            10




                         credit spread                                                          bank credit
       -0.5%                                                            25%
                       Bayesian                                                        Bayesian
                       Add Diagnostic (overoptimism at t=0)                            Add Diagnostic (no belief distortion at t=0)
                                                                        20%
        -1%

                                                                        15%
       -1.5%
                                                                        10%
        -2%
                                                                         5%

       -2.5%
                                                                         0%


        -3%                                                             -5%
               0   2       4          6           8           10               0   2             4            6          8            10


Figure 19: Expected Impulse Responses of Experiment 3. Experiment 3 shows the typical
evaluation of the diagnostic belief in the literature, by keeping the Bayesian component
fixed (same parameters and same starting states) but introducing the diagnostic element.
In experiment 3, unlike experiment 1 and 2, the t = 0 observables including credit spread
and bank leverage could be different across the Bayesian and diagnostic model (refer to Table
7). All impulse responses are with respect to a recapitalization policy at t = 0 that increases
banker wealth share w by 10%, in order to "lean against the wind" and avoid future losses
in a liquidity distress. The starting state is a "boom state", with (w0 , 0 ) matched to the
same values as the rational model in experiment 1 (refer to Table 7). The diagnostic belief
features overoptimism so that     0 < 0 . The impulse responses are percentage deviations
between with and without the recapitalization policy. In both cases, we introduce a dNt = 1
shock at the first month (t = 1/12), but set dNt = 0 otherwise. The Brownian shocks
dBt are randomly generated. We simulate the model by 10000 times and show the average
impulse responses in the graph.




                                                                   52
                   Table 4: Comparison of Calibrated Model Moments

                                                  Data   Static Belief   Bayesian   Diagnostic

1. Frequency of financial distress                13%        13%           12%         13%
2. Avg credit spread change in crises             70%        15%           63%         67%
3. Half-life of credit spread recovery (years)    2.5        2.3           3.2         2.6
4. Investment/capital ratio                       14%        14%           18%         14%
5. Avg 3-year output drop in crises               -9%        -8%           -8%        -11%
6. Output growth volatility                       4%         3%            4%          5%
7. Average bank leverage                          5.0        5.2           4.8         5.2
8. Pre-crisis credit spread                       -34%                                -32%




                                             53
                     Table 5: Model Simulation and Data: Non-targeted Moments
Panel A: Credit Spread, Bank Credit, and Crisis Severity

                                                   Dependent variable: GDP Growth from t to t + 3
                               Static Belief               Bayesian                    Diagnostic                          Data
                               (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)         (7)                  (8)
credit spreadt crisist        -6.19                      -4.07                    -3.94                     -7.46
                                                                                                            (0.16)
( bank credit
     GDP      )t crisist                   -1.40                      -2.61                     -3.72                         -0.95
                                                                                                                              (0.30)
Observations                                                                                                 641                  641
 Note : Model and data regressions are normalized so that the coefficients reflect the impact of one sigma
 change in spreads, and bank credit/GDP.

Panel B: Bank Credit and Risk Premia
                                            Dependent variable: Average realized excess return                       t+1

                           Static Belief                 Bayesian                  Diagnostic                               Data
( bank credit
     GDP      )t              -0.02                       -0.01                         -0.01                              -0.02
                                                                                                                           (0.01)
Observations                                                                                                                867
 Note : Model excess return is defined as the return to capital minus the risk-free rate. Data excess return is
 from Online Appendix Table 3 of Baron and Xiong (2017). To ensure comparability, the model return to
 capital has been normalized to equal the standard deviation of returns reported by Baron and Xiong (2017).
Panel C: Credit Spread Before Crises

                                                            Dependent variable: credit spreadt
                           Static Belief             Bayesian                     Diagnostic                               Data
                               (1)                 (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)          (6)                   (7)
pre-crisis indicator           0.22               -0.14                         -0.32                       -0.34
                                                                                                            (0.15)
mild crisis                                                      -0.16                        -0.31                               -0.27
                                                                                                                                  (0.15)
severe crisis                                                    -0.09                        -0.33                               -0.45
                                                                                                                                  (0.18)
Observations                                                                                                 634                   634
 Note : regression is: st =  +  · 1{t is within 5-year window before a crisis} + controls. For both model and
 data, controls include an indicator of within 5 years after the last crisis. Data regression has more controls
 such as country fixed effect.

Panel D: Predicting Crises
                                                           Dependent variable: crisist+1 to t+5
                               Static Belief                    Bayesian                 Diagnostic                         Data
                              (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)          (7)               (8)
HighFroth     t             -0.76                          0.06                        0.38                     1.76
                                                                                                               (0.91)
HighCreditt                                -0.90                         0.09                     0.38                              0.55
                                                                                                                                   (0.46)
Observations                                                                                                    528                 549
 Note : HighFroth measures if spreads have been abnormally low in the last 5 years. HighCredit measures if
 credit growth has been abnormally high in the last 5 years.


                                                                 54
                Table 6: Predicting Crises when ^0 = 0 in the Bayesian Model


                                          Dependent variable: crisist+1 to t+5

                                 Model simulation                         Data
                                 (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)
       Frotht                   -0.14                            1.76
                                                                (0.91)
       High Creditt                             0.14                               0.55
                                                                                  (0.46)
       Observations                                              528               549
        Note : HighFroth measures if spreads have been abnormally low in the last 5 years.
        HighCredit measures if credit growth has been abnormally high in the last 5 years.



                                 Table 7: Policy Experiments


                        Experiment 1              Experiment 2                Experiment 3
                            Same                 Same Parameters,            Same Parameters
                          Observables              Overoptimism                 and States

 Initial States of the Bayesian Model ( = 0)
Bank Leverage0                 4.2
Credit Spread0                 0.95                    same as                     same as
                                                     experiment 1                experiment 1
       w0                     0.239
       0                      0.112
       0                      0.112

 Initial States of the Diagnostic Model ( = 1.38)
Bank Leverage0                 4.2                        4.2                         4.2
Credit Spread0                 0.95                      0.95                        0.85
       w0                     0.234                     0.234                       0.239
       0                      0.117                     0.168                       0.112
       0                      0.117                     0.117                       0.034

 Note : This table compares the initial states of the three simulation experiments. In experiment
 one and two, the Bayesian model and diagnostic model are both calibrated to the same set
 of moments, and they have the same bank leverage and credit spread at the beginning of the
 simulation. In experiment one, the diagnostic belief is correct at t = 0, but in experiment two,
 the diagnostic belief features overoptimism as the underlying 0 >       0 . In experiment 3, both
 the Bayesian and the diagnostic model have the same parameters as the calibrated Bayesian
 model, and same starting states (w0 , 0 ). However, the behavioral belief       0 is below 0 and
 there is overoptimism.


                                                55
References
Baron, Matthew, and Wei Xiong. 2017. "Credit expansion and neglected crash risk."
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(2): 713­764.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. 2018. "Diagnostic expecta-
 tions and credit cycles." The Journal of Finance, 73(1): 199­227.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and S Terry. 2019. "Real Credit
 Cycles." Harvard University.

Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel, and Maria Soledad
 Martinez-Peria. 2001. "Is the crisis problem growing more severe?" Economic policy,
 16(32): 52­82.

Bordo, Michael D, and Christopher M Meissner. 2016. "Fiscal and financial crises."
 In Handbook of macroeconomics. Vol. 2, 355­412. Elsevier.

Borio, Claudio EV, and Philip William Lowe. 2002. "Asset prices, financial and
 monetary stability: exploring the nexus."

Brunnermeier, Markus K, and Yuliy Sannikov. 2014. "A macroeconomic model with
 a financial sector." American Economic Review, 104(2): 379­421.

Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta Chaman Saxena. 2008. "Growth Dynamics: The Myth of
 Economic Recovery." The American Economic Review, 98(1): 439­457.

Chen, Long, Pierre Collin-Dufresne, and Robert S Goldstein. 2008. "On the relation
 between the credit spread puzzle and the equity premium puzzle." The Review of Financial
 Studies, 22(9): 3367­3409.

Claessens, Stijn, M Ayhan Kose, and Marco E Terrones. 2010. "The global finan-
  cial crisis: How similar? How different? How costly?" Journal of Asian Economics,
  21(3): 247­264.

Diamond, Douglas W, and Philip H Dybvig. 1983. "Bank runs, deposit insurance,
 and liquidity." Journal of political economy, 91(3): 401­419.

Di Tella, Sebastian. 2017. "Uncertainty shocks and balance sheet recessions." Journal of
 Political Economy, 125(6): 2038­2081.

Egan, Mark, Ali Horta¸     csu, and Gregor Matvos. 2017. "Deposit competition and
 financial fragility: Evidence from the us banking sector." American Economic Review,
 107(1): 169­216.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D, Edouard Schaal, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel.
  2017. "Uncertainty traps." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4): 1641­1692.

Farboodi, Maryam, and P´
                       eter Kondor. 2020. "Rational Sentiments and Economic
  Cycles."

Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2010. "Financial intermediation and credit
 policy in business cycle analysis." In Handbook of monetary economics. Vol. 3, 547­599.
 Elsevier.

                                           56
Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2015. "Banking, liquidity, and bank runs in
 an infinite horizon economy." American Economic Review, 105(7): 2011­43.

Gertler, Mark, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Andrea Prestipino. 2020. "A macroeco-
 nomic model with financial panics." The Review of Economic Studies, 87(1): 240­288.

Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordonez. 2014. "Collateral crises." American Economic
 Review, 104(2): 343­78.

Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordonez. 2020. "Good booms, bad booms." Journal of
 the European Economic Association, 18(2): 618­665.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Rodrigo Valdes, Oscar Landerretche, et al. 2001.
 "Lending Booms: Latin America and the World." Econom´
                                                     ia Journal, 1(Spring 2001): 47­
 100.

Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G Hanson, and Lawrence J Jin. 2019. "Reflexivity in
 credit markets." National Bureau of Economic Research.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2013. "Intermediary asset pricing." American
 Economic Review, 103(2): 732­70.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2019. "A macroeconomic framework for quan-
 tifying systemic risk." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 11(4): 1­37.

Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. 1997. "Financial intermediation, loanable funds,
 and the real sector." the Quarterly Journal of economics, 112(3): 663­691.

Jord`   `
     a, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M Taylor. 2011. "Financial crises, credit
  booms, and external imbalances: 140 years of lessons." IMF Economic Review, 59(2): 340­
  378.

Jord`   `
     a, Oscar,  Moritz Schularick, and Alan M Taylor. 2013. "When credit bites
  back." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 45(s2): 3­28.

Judd, Kenneth L, Lilia Maliar, Serguei Maliar, and Rafael Valero. 2014. "Smolyak
  method for solving dynamic economic models: Lagrange interpolation, anisotropic grid
  and adaptive domain." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 44: 92­123.

Kindelberger, Charles P. 1978. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial
 Crises.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. "Credit Cycles." Journal of Political
 Economy, 105(2): pp. 211­248.

Kozlowski, Julian, Laura Veldkamp, and Venky Venkateswaran. 2020. "The tail
 that wags the economy: Beliefs and persistent stagnation." Journal of Political Economy,
 128(8): 000­000.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Tyler Muir. 2017. "How credit cycles across a financial
 crisis."

Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. 2013. "Systemic banking crises database." IMF
  Economic Review, 61(2): 225­270.


                                           57
Liptser, Robert, and Albert N Shiryaev. 2013. Statistics of Random Processes: II.
  Applications. Vol. 5, Springer Science & Business Media.

Li, Wenhao. 2019. "Public Liquidity and Financial Crises." Available at SSRN 3175101.

Maxted, Peter. 2019. "A Macro-Finance Model with Sentiment." Tech. rep.

Moreira, Alan, and Alexi Savov. 2017. "The macroeconomics of shadow banking." The
 Journal of Finance, 72(6): 2381­2432.

Muir, Tyler. 2017. "Financial crises and risk premia." The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 132(2): 765­809.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009a. "The Aftermath of Financial
 Crises." American Economic Review, 99(2): 466­72.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009b. This time is different: Eight
 centuries of financial folly. Princeton, NJ:Princeton University Press.

Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M Taylor. 2012. "Credit booms gone bust: Mone-
  tary policy, leverage cycles, and financial crises, 1870-2008." American Economic Review,
  102(2): 1029­61.

Simsek, Alp. 2013. "Belief disagreements and collateral constraints." Econometrica,
  81(1): 1­53.

Taylor, Alan M. 2015. "Credit, financial stability, and the macroeconomy." Annu. Rev.
  Econ., 7(1): 309­339.

Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp. 2006. "Learning asymmetries in real
 business cycles." Journal of monetary Economics, 53(4): 753­772.




                                            58
A      Model Solutions

A.1     Proof of Lemma 1

We will derive the Bayesian belief process t in two different ways. The first method is
by applying the theorem in Liptser and Shiryaev (2013). The second one is by taking
the continuous-time limit of a discrete-time process. The reason that we show the second
method is because we will use the connection between discrete-time and continuous-time
processes to prove the results for the diagnostic belief in Lemma 2.

    Method 1

    We can represent the Poisson process of bank-run as
                                      t                                t
                                                        L                            H
                           Nt =               1~ s =L dNt +                1~ s =H dNt = At + Mt
                                  0                                0


where NtH and NtL are two independent Poisson processes, Mt is a martingale, and At is a
previsible process
                                                       t
                                      At =                 ( 1~ s =L L + 1~ s =H H )dt
                                                   0

Denote FtN =  {Ns , 0  s  t}, ~ = 1~
                                   t =H , and


                                          t = E [~t |F N ] = P (~ t = H |F N )
                                                      t                   t


Then according to Theorem 18.3 of Liptser and Shiryaev (2013), the compensator of Nt that
is measurable with respect to FtN is
                    t                                                                 t
         ¯t =
         A              E [(1~ s =L L + 1~ s =H H )|Fs- ]ds =
                                                     N
                                                                                          ((1 - s- )L + s- H )ds
                0                                                                 0


Moroever, the compensator of t is
                                      t
                                              1~ s =H (-H L ) + 1~ s =L LH ds
                                  0


and the FtN
          - measurable version is

                                          t
                                              (s- (-H L ) + (1 - s- )LH )ds
                                  0


Finally, the martingale component of ~t is independent from the jumps in Nt . Thus we can




                                                                  59
apply Theorem 19.6 of Liptser and Shiryaev (2013) to get

          dt = (t- (-H L ) + (1 - t- )LH ) dt + E [~ t ( dAt - 1)|F N ]d(Nt - A
                                                                              ¯t )
                                                          ¯t       t-
                                                         dA

                                                     1~ t =L L + 1~ t =H H
= (t- (-H L ) + (1 - t- )LH ) dt+E [1~ t =H (                              -1)|FtN
                                                                                 - ](dNt -((1-t- )L +t- H
                                                     (1 - t- )L + t- H
                                         t- (1 - t- )(H - L )
= (t- (-H L ) + (1 - t- )LH ) dt +                            (dNt - ((1 - t- )L + t- H )dt)
                                         (1 - t- )L + t- H
                                                                      t- (1 - t- )(H - L )
= (t- (-H L ) + (1 - t- )LH - t- (1 - t- )(H - L )) dt +                                   dNt
                                                                      (1 - t- )L + t- H
Denote t = E [~ t |F N ]. We can get the motion of t from
                    t


                                   ~ t =H |Ft ]H + E [1~ t =L |Ft ]L
                                            N                   N
                           t = E [1

                                                  t - L
                                         t =
                                                 H - L
which results in

                (L - t- )H L + (H - t- )LH                        (t- - L )(H - t- )
      dt =                                                 dt +                      dNt
                     -(t- - L )(H - t- )                                 t -


   Method 2

   Consider a discrete time Markov process         ~ k with two states H and L . We define
t    ~ k as the probability of a financial distress shock within a single period. The transition
probability from high to low is H L t, and the transition probability from low to high
is LH t. Agents observe the realizations of financial distress shocks, and update their
beliefs. Denote the crash realization process as Nk  {0, 1}, and the filtration as Fk =
 {N1 , N2 , · · · , Nk }. Denote the updated belief at period k as k = E[   ~ k |Fk ], with ~ k the
state of the hidden Markov process. In each period, the financial distress shock first realizes,
and then the agent updates belief for that period.

   Suppose that the belief on the probability at high state H is k at period k . Then the
relationship between k and k is as follows:

                                    k = k H + (1 - k )L

Observing Nk+1 = nk  {0, 1}, the belief k+1 is

                            k+1 = P (~ k+1 = H |Nk+1 = nk+1 , k )




                                                60
                              P (Nk+1 = nk+1 |  ~ k+1 = H , k )P (~ k+1 = H |k )
=
    P (Nk+1 = nk+1 |~ k+1   = H , k )P (~ k+1 = H |k ) + P (Nk+1 = nk+1 | ~ k+1 = L , k )P (~ k+1 = L |k )

Note that the probabilities P (~ k+1 = H |k ) and P (~ k+1 = L |k ) can be calculated from
the Markov one-step transition
             T                                                                                  T
      k            1 - H L t   H  L  t                    k (1 - H L t) + (1 - k )LH t
                                                      =
    1 - k            LH t    1 - LH t                     k H L t + (1 - k )(1 - LH t)

which results in

                   P (~ k+1 = H |k ) = k (1 - H L t) + (1 - k )LH t


and
                    P (~ k+1 = L |k ) = k H L t + (1 - k )(1 - LH t)

Therefore, the belief k+1 is

             ((nk+1 H t + (1 - nk+1 )(1 - H t))(k (1 - H L t) + (1 - k )LH t))
 k+1 =
             (nk+1 H t + (1 - nk+1 )(1 - H t))(k (1 - H L t) + (1 - k )LH t)
             +(nk+1 L t + (1 - nk+1 )(1 - L t))(k H L t + (1 - k )(1 - LH t))

Now it is easier to separately discuss nk+1 = 0 and nk+1 = 1. Suppose that no financial
distress shock happens (nk+1 = 0), then we have

                            (1 - H t) (k (1 - H L t) + (1 - k )LH t)
                 k+1 =
                            (1 - H t)(k (1 - H L t) + (1 - k )LH t)
                            +(1 - L t)(k H L t + (1 - k )(1 - LH t))

Suppose that a financial distress shock happens (nk+1 = 1), then we have

                               H t (k (1 - H L t) + (1 - k )LH t)
                   k+1 =
                               H t(k (1 - H L t) + (1 - k )LH t)
                               +L t(k H L t + (1 - k )(1 - LH t))

                              H (k (1 - H L t) + (1 - k )LH t)
                      =
                              H (k (1 - H L t) + (1 - k )LH t)
                              +L (k H L t + (1 - k )(1 - LH t))

   Note that taking t  0 will result in k+1 = k when nk+1 = 0. This is reasonable,
because this is like calculating t dt for the t process in continuous time, which is a small
order term. An appropriate way to derive the time limit is to calculate

                                         k+1 - k
                                      lim        |nk+1 =0,Fk
                                      t0   t

                                                 61
                                                               
                     (1 - H t) (k (1 - H L t) + (1 - k )LH t)
                 1                                             
           = lim    -k (1 - H t)(k (1 - H L t) + (1 - k )LH t) 
             t0 t
                    -k (1 - L t)(k H L t + (1 - k )(1 - LH t))

               1       (1 - k )(1 - H t) (k (1 - H L t) + (1 - k )LH t)
         = lim
            t0 t          -k (1 - L t)(k H L t + (1 - k )(1 - LH t))

     1           (1 - k ) (k - k H L t + (1 - k )LH t - H k t)
= lim                                                                     (removing t2 terms)
  t0 t          -k (k H L t + (1 - k )(1 - LH t) - L (1 - k )t)
                     = -k H L + (1 - k )LH - (H - L )k (1 - k )

Therefore, we have

           k+1 - k
     lim           |nk+1 =0,Fk = -k H L + (1 - k )LH - (H - L )k (1 - k )          (34)
     t0      t

   To build an exact connection to k , we can write k in terms of k as

                                                k - L
                                          k =                                      (35)
                                                H -  L

Then the limit of t  0 expressed with k is

   1   k+1 - k                  k - L        H - k              k - L H -  k
               |nk+1=0 ,Fk = -        H L +        LH -(H -L )
 H - L   t                      H - L       H -  L              H -  L  H - L

which can be simplified as

         k+1 - k
   lim           |nk+1=0,Fk = (L - k )H L + (H - k )LH - (k - L )(H - k ) (36)
  t0       t

  Suppose that a financial distress shock happens (nk+1 = 1). By taking t  0, the
updating is
                                                H k
                         k+1 |nk+1 =1,Fk =
                                           H k + L (1 - k )
Using (35), the updating is
                                      1          L 1 - k
                                           =1+
                                     k+1         H  k
                               H ( k -  L )       (H + L )k - H L
                     k+1 =                  + L =
                                   k                     k
which implies

                                   (  H +  L ) k -  H  L       (H - k )(k - L )
           k+1 - k |nk+1 =1,Fk =                         - k =
                                             k                       k




                                                62
   Finally, we express the above with the continuous-time notation dNt and dt to get

                (L - t- )H L + (H - t- )LH                           (H - t- )(t- - L )
       dt =                                                   dt +                      dNt
                     -(t- - L )(H - t- )                                   t -

which is the same as method 1.


A.2     Proof of Lemma 2

To prove Lemma 2, we start with discrete time process and then take the continuous-
time limit. The discrete-time distress frequency process       ~ t is the same as Section A.1.
Specifically, the process has two states H and L , with transition probability from high
to low as H L t, and the transition probability from low to high as LH t. Agents
observe the realizations of financial distress shocks, and update their beliefs. Denote the
crash realization process as Nk  {0, 1}, and the filtration as Fk =  {N1 , N2 , · · · , Nk }.
Denote the updated belief at period k as k = E[     ~ k |Fk ], with  ~ k the state of the hidden
Markov process. Also denote the probability k = P (     ~ k = H ), which implies


                                    k = k H + (1 - k )L


   We choose the period length t so that T (t) = t0 /t is an integer, where t0 is the
"look-back period" for the diagnostic belief. Then we denote the reference probability for
the diagnostic belief at period k as

                                  T
                                  k = P (~ k = H |k-T (t) )


    We already know from method 2 of Section A.1 that when t  0, the continuous-
time limit of the Bayesian belief process results in (8). Our task now is to prove that the
discrete-time diagnostic belief process converges to a continuous-time process as in (11). By
definition, the diagnostic belief at period k is

                                                     k  1
                                       
                                       k = k · (     T
                                                       )
                                                     k   Zk

                                                         1 - k  1
                               1 - k
                                   
                                     = (1 - k ) · (            )
                                                         1 - k
                                                             T
                                                                 Zk
with
                                                     1
                             Zk =                                        
                                          k                   1-k
                                    k · (  T ) + (1 - k ) · ( 1- T )
                                          k                          k




                                                63
which implies
                                     k             1
                           k = k (   T
                                       )                         
                                     k k ( T
                                           k
                                             ) + (1 - k )( 1-T
                                              
                                                 k
                                                             k
                                                               )      1-k

                                                       1
                               = k                                        
                                                           T
                                     k + (1 - k )( 1-k / k )
                                                      T 1-k    k

               T               
Therefore, if k  < k , then k    > k , leading to an overreaction. Now we can replace the
probability with t . Define the expected  ~ k under the diagnostic belief as  . Then we have
                                                                             k


                                                     ( H -  k ) + (  k -  L )
                   k - L = (  k - L )
                                                         
                                          T
                                          k -L  k -L
                                        ( H -T
                                               / H -  k
                                                        ) (H       - k ) + (k - L )
                                             k



where
                                    k = k H + (1 - k )L
                                    T   T          T




                                k under the limit of t  0 while keeping t = k t constant.
                        T
   The key is to derive k and T
Using the probability transition matrix, we get
                                                                                      T
           P (  k =  H | k
                         T
                           )            k-T                 1 - H  L  t   H L t
                                =
           P (k = L |k ) T
                                      1 - k-T                 LH t      1 - LH t

where the notation denotes transpose of a matrix. The limit of the above expression with
t  0 is effectively the transition of a continuous time Markov chain, with rate matrix

                                          -H L H L
                                Q=
                                           LH -LH

A decomposition reveals that the two eigenvalues of this matrix are 0 and -(a + b), where
a = H L and b = LH . The associated eigenvector formed matrix is


                                        ¯=           1 -a
                                        Q
                                                     1 b

with the inverse
                                    ¯ -1 =    1             b a
                                    Q
                                             a+b           -1 1
Then we can decompose
                                  ¯          0                     ¯ -1
                                Q=Q                                Q
                                                 -(a + b)




                                                 64
Then the transition for t units of time is

              ¯       1                   ¯ -1 =          1         b + ae-(a+b)t a - be-(a+b)t
              Q                           Q
                           e-(a+b)t                      a+b        b - be-(a+b)t a + be-(a+b)t

Using the t notation (t = k  t), and taking the limit t  0 while keeping t unchanged,
we have
                                            T                      T
                          P (  k =  H | k
                                        T
                                          )       P (t = H |t-t0 )
                   lim                        =
                  t0      P (k = L |k   T
                                          )       P (t = L |t-t0 )
                                              T
                             t-t0                  1           b + ae-(a+b)t0 a - be-(a+b)t0
                  =
                           1 - t-t0               a+b          b - be-(a+b)t0 a + be-(a+b)t0
                                                                                   T
                                                  aH t-t0 + aL (1 - t-t0 )
                                      =
                                                  bH t-t0 + bL (1 - t-t0 )
where
                          a H bH               1           b + ae-(a+b)t0 a - ae-(a+b)t0
                                          =                                                        (37)
                          aL b L              a+b          b - be-(a+b)t0 a + be-(a+b)t0
Therefore, the intensity process follows

                                                                (H - t ) + (t - L )
                  t - L = (  t -  L )
                                                                          
                                                                                                   (38)
                                                        T
                                                        t -L    t -L
                                                    (   H -T
                                                               / H -t
                                                                      )      (H - t ) + (t - L )
                                                           t



where
                             t - L = aH (t-t0 - L ) + aL (H - t-t0 )
                             T                                                                     (39)

                             H - T
                                 t = bH (t-t0 - L ) + bL (H - t-t0 )                               (40)

When the total transition rates a + b are low, we have aH  1, aL  0, bH  0, and bH  1.
Then we have T     t  t-t0 . When t > t , i.e., the likelihood of a crisis is decreasing, then
                                      T

the subjective probability is even lower, with                       T
                                                   t < t . When t < t , i.e., the likelihood
of a crisis is increasing, then the subjective probability is even higher, with   t > t . These
predictions are perfectly consistent with the spirit of the diagnostic expectations. The extent
of such extrapolation is larger as  becomes larger, and we have        t = t when  = 0.




A.3     Wealth Dynamics

To solve the model, we start with deriving the wealth dynamics of households and bankers.
In order to simplify notations, we omit the subscripts t and t-.

   First, from (24) and (22), we get the following equation that links consumption, produc-




                                                               65
tion and investment:

                                             AH + (1 -  )AL - i
                          b + (1 - w)c
                         wc          h =                        .                         (41)
                                                     p

Second, from (21) and (22), we get the following portfolio equation on capital

                                   xK w + y K (1 - w) = 1.                                (42)

Third, we can rewrite (17) as a function of state variables and portfolio choices, i.e.

                                         xK w
                               =                    = xK w,                               (43)
                                    x w + y (1 - w)
                                     K     K


where the first equality is by definition and the second equality is by (42).

   To proceed, we need to express the evolution dynamics of state variable w. Define

                                                             (K )
                             R = p -  + K +  K  p -                                       (44)
                                                              p

Return on banker wealth is

   dwb  b
     b
        =  dt +  b dB - b
                        t- dN
   wt -
                           AH
          = rd + xK (R +      - rd ) + xf (rf - rd ) -  dt + xK ( K +  p )dB - b
                                                                               t- dN
                            p
                                                                                   (45)

The jump component is
                                        xK  p +   x                                       (46)

where
                                    x = (xK + xf - 1)+                                    (47)

The return on household wealth is

            dwh  h
              h
                 =  dt +  h dB - ht- dN
            wt -
                                                                                          (48)
                                 AL
                 = rd + y K (R +     - rd ) -  dt + y K ( K +  p )dB - h
                                                                       t- dN
                                  p

where
                                       h = y K p - f s




                                              66
A.4     Proof of Lemma 3

According to the equilibrium market clearing condition for the interbank market, we have

                                           xf = 0

in equilibrium. As a result, in equilibrium,

                                      x = (xK - 1)+

Suppose that in equilibrium, xK < 1. This implies that x = 0. Then we can easily derive
the first order condition for households and bankers holding capital as

                             ¯
                             A                               1
                       R +     - rd = ( K +  p )2 xK + p
                             p                           1 - xK  p

                             A                                1
                       R +     - rd = ( K +  p )2 y K + p
                             p                            1 - y K p
which together imply that

                ¯-A
                A                            (p )2
                                    p 2
                    =         K
                            ( +  ) +                            ( xK - y K )         (49)
                  p                  (1 - xK p )(1 - y K p )

The first bracket on the right hand side is always positive, since the nonnegative wealth
constraint implies xK p < 1 and y K p < 1. However, due to the budget constraint

                                   wxK + (1 - w)y K = 1

and the assumption of xK < 1, we must have

                                          y K > xK

which implies that the right-hand side of (49) should be negative. This is a contradiction
since the left-hand side of (49) is positive.

   Importantly, all of the above derivations go through regardless of whether we use the
Bayesian Bayesian belief or the diagnostic belief, as long as bankers and households have
the same belief.

   In summary, we have xK  1 in equilibrium.




                                               67
A.5       Equilibrium Solutions

Optimal investment rate is
                                               p-1
                                       K =         +                                        (50)
                                                
The resulting optimal investment is

                                               (p - 1)2 p - 1
                            i(p) = (K ) =              +      +                             (51)
                                                  2       

Then we can apply Ito's lemma on the definition of wealth share in (12) and get the dynamics
of w as

              dw  w
                 =  dt +  w dB - w
                                 t- dN
              w
                                        2                     2
                 = (1 - w) b - h + ( h ) -  b  h - w( b -  h ) -  dt
                                                                                            (52)
                                                                    1-b
                                                               1-     t-
                                                                    1-h
                     + (1 - w)( b -  h )dB - (1 - wt- )               t-
                                                                    1-b
                                                                               dN.
                                                                      h - 1)
                                                          1 + wt- ( 1-t -
                                                                      t-



With dynamics of the state variable w, we apply Ito's lemma on price function p(w) to get
               
                              1
                p = pw ww + pww (w w )2 + p  ()
                              2
               
                 = pw w(1 - w)( b -  h )
                p
                                                                                            (53)
                                        1 - b
                p
                t- = 1 - p(wt-
                                               t-
                                                           , t ))/p(wt- , t- ).
                               1 - t - - w t - ( b
                                   h
                                                 t- - t- )
                                                      h



   To fully characterize the economy, we also need to know the dynamics of aggregate capital
quantity K , although it is not a state variable since everything else is scalable with respect
to K . Denote the Ito process for K as

                                 dK
                                     = K  dt - dt +  K dB,                                  (54)
                                 Kt-

With (46), (45), (48), and (53), we get a system of equations for other jumps:
                     
                      b = x K  p +   x
                      h = y K p - f s
                                                                                            (55)
                      f s = x 1-  w
                                   w
                      p = 1 - p(w      1-b
                                                 ,  +  ())/p(w, )
                                   1-h -w(b -h )



   From (45), (48), and (53), we get the relation between capital price volatility and volatility



                                               68
of the banker's return on wealth as follows:
                              
                                = pw w(1 - w)( -  )
                                   p                 b h

                                  h = y K ( K +  p )                                                                            (56)
                               b
                                  = xK ( K +  p ).


   Denote fire sale benefits for each unit of household wealth as fs , which is net wealth
transfer from bankers to households due to the temporary market pressure. By market
clearing, we have

                                                                                 x
           (1 - w)         · fs =      IB        ·       w          ·                                 ·          0 pt
                                                                              (1 - 0 )pt
         total household            bankruptcy       total banker                                         wealth transfer for
              wealth                 indicator          wealth                                              each unit sale
                                                                        fire sale quantity for each
                                                                           unit of banker wealth

                                                                          w
                                                  fs = x                                                                        (57)
                                                                         1-w

   Then we have the following household first order condition:

                     A                                  p
             R +       - r d  ( K +  p )2 y K +                 , equality if y K > 0                                           (58)
                     p                           1 - y K p + fs

In equation (58), the left hand side is the excess return on productive capital over bank debt,
while the right hand side includes the cost of the additional risks from productive capital
compared to bank debt. When the excess return is lower than the cost, households do not
hold productive capital and set y K = 0.

   On the other hand, the first order condition on bank productive capital holding is

                                 ¯
                                 A                                 p + 
                           R +     - r d = ( K +  p ) 2 xK +                                                                    (59)
                                 p                            1 - xK  p -   x

since banks always hold a positive amount of productive capital.5 The excess return of pro-
ductive capital over debt consists of three components: volatility, endogenous price decline
and fire sale losses in case of financial distress shocks.

   Combining (58) and (59), we have

           ¯-A
           A                                       p +                  p
                (  K +  p ) 2 ( xK - y K ) +                  - 
             p                                1 - xK  p -   x    1 - y K p + fs

where the equality holds when y K > 0.
    5
      Suppose not, then banks are not subject to financial distress shocks by increasing its productive cap-
ital holding from 0 to a small positive number, but increases profit strictly. Thus we easily arrive at a
contradiction.




                                                              69
   Next, the bank first order condition over inter-bank lending is

                                                       
                                  rf - rd =                                               (60)
                                               1-   xK  p   -  x

which implies that the bank debt interest rate is lower than bank risk-free rate, because
bank debt funding is runnable.

   Combining (59) and (60), we arrive at the excess return expression for the productive
capital in normal time as:

                             ¯
                             A                                   p
                    R +        - r f = ( K +  p ) 2 xK +                                  (61)
                             p                            1 - xK  p -   x

We note that productive capital is also subject to the losses of p xK during a distress, which
arrives at intensity . As a result, the full excess return expression should be

                      ¯
                      A                                 xK  p +   x
                R +     - p - rf = ( K +  p )2 xK + p                                     (62)
                      p                               1 - xK  p -   x

Intuitively, equation (62) implies that the excess return of productive capital above the risk-
free rate is compensating the volatility of the productive capital, as well as the potential
price drop. Note that we did not attribute the x component to xK , since it is related
to the amount of shot-term debt funding. Another way to look at the above problem is to
rewrite the bank welath dynamics in terms of xK and xd , which leads to

           dwb                       ¯
                                     A
               =    rf + xK (R +       - p - rf ) - xd (rd - rf ) - xd dt - c
                                                                            ^dt
            wb                       p

                               +xK ( K +  p )dBt - b (dNt - dt)

   Diagnostic Beliefs

   When we solve the equilibrium jumps upon dNt with diagnostic beliefs, additional ad-
justments are needed to accomodate the distortions induced by the Diagnostic beliefs. As
we have assumed, households believe that they have Bayesian beliefs and make decisions
with the Bayesian policies. However, the realizations during a crisis will be different from
their expectations, which may cause additional disruptions. There are two steps to clear the
market during a jump with diagnostic belief:

· First, the agents interpret   t as the Bayesian belief. After a crisis shock dNt , the market
  price of capital switches to the level under this "Bayesian belief".

· The realization of belief, however, is different from the Bayesian expectation, because
  the diagnostic belief formation. Now additional price adjustment is needed to clear the
  market under the diagnostic belief.

                                               70
A.6     Other Measures of Risk Premium

In this subsection, we discuss other measures of the risk premium. In the main text, we
use the credit spreads of long-term bonds as a measure of risk premium, mainly because
of the data availability of the same measure. In this part, we show several other measures
of risk premium. The first one is the bank equity excess return. we show that although
bank equity is not tradable in the model, the excess returns are still positive under Bayesian
expectations. The second one is Sharpe ratio. We show how to adjust the definition to
accommodate jumps in the model.

   Bank Equity Excess Returns

   We note that bank equity return is not simply dwb /wb , since this wealth growth term
also incorporates banker consumption, which should be interpreted as a dividend payment.
Formally, the expected return of bank equity is

                                               ¯
                                               A
                    re = rf + xK (R +            - rf - p ) - xd (rd - rf ) - xd
                                               p

Expressing the right-hand terms with (27) and (28), we have

                                 2               xK p +   x                                  xK p +   x
  re - rf = xK ( K +  p ) xK + p                                           +       xd
                                               1 - xK  p -   x                             1 - xK  p -   x
                total risk compensation for holding productive capital         total risk compensation for taking debt


where two terms of risk compensations appear. The first term is the total risk compensation
for holding productive capital, including the risk premium of volatility and the decline in
wealth due to financial distress shocks. The second term is the total risk compensation for
raising short-term debt. Alternatively, we can write the risk compensation as the following

                                                      2                                      (xK p + x)
 re - rf =           xK              ·   (  K +  p ) xK         + (xK p + xd ) ·
                                                                                             1 - xK  p -   x
             exposure to dBt shock compensation to dB shock        exposure to dNt shock
                                                     t
                                                                                           compensation to dNt shock



   As a result, in this Bayesian model, the bank equity excess return should always be above
zero.

   For the Diagnostic model with diagnostic expectations, there is a "surprise" element in
the realized excess returns during a crisis, due to the additional jumps in the price of capital.
We just need to take into account the impact on the excess return by the additional jumps.

   Sharpe Ratio

   Another measure of the risk premium in the economy is the Sharpe ratio. However, since
we have Poisson jumps in a continuous time economy, it is not enough to only incorporate


                                                          71
the Brownian terms to measure risk. For any bank-held assets with process

                                  dRt = dt + dBt - dNt

we denote the Sharpe ratio as

                                E [Rt+t - Rt ] - rf t   -  - rf
                        SR =                                                          (63)
                                   var(Rt+t - Rt )     ( )2 + ||

where we have taken the perspective of t being small but positive. For productive capital,
the modified Sharpe ratio is
                                                  ¯
                                           R +    A
                                                  p
                                                      - p - rf
                                SR(K ) =
                                           ( p +  K )2 + p

According to (29), the numerator is positive. Therefore, the model implied Sharpe ratio for
productive capital is always positive.


A.7      Credit Spread

In this section, we derive the jump differential equation for the credit spread and provide
the solution methodology.

   HJB Equations

   From Ito's lemma, we have

                          v (w, )                      1  2 v (w, ) 2 w 2
             dv (w, ) =           (ww dt + w w dBt ) +             w ( ) dt
                            w                          2 w2

                     v (w, ) 
                 +           ()dt + (v (w + w,  + ) - v (w, ))dNt
                       
Denote
                             dv (w, )
                                      = v dt +  v dBt - v dNt
                              v (w, )
Matching the coefficients, we have

                          v (w, ) w 1  2 v (w, ) 2 w 2 v (w, ) 
            v (w, )v =           w +            w ( ) +        ()
                            w        2 w2                

                                             v (w, ) w
                                  v (w, ) v =         w
                                                w
                          v (w, )v = v (w, ) - v (w + w,  + )




                                             72
From banker's perspective, the optimization problem is

       dwt b
                           dvt vt- - (1 - ^t)                          vt- - (1 - ^t) 
         b
             = ... + xv
                      t- (      -             t dNt - v
                                                      t- (1 - t )dNt +               dNt )
        wt                 vt -     vt -                                    vt -

with  t = 1/ - t , t  {0, 1}, P (t = 1) =  , and {t } is an i.i.d. process that is
independent from everything else. The jump v   t- is the amount of decline of bond price
upon the distress shock if the bond does not mature during the financial distress shock.

     Rewriting the above, we have

             dwb                             AH
                 =       rf + xK (R +           - rf ) + xd (rf - rd ) + xv (v - rf ) -  dt
             wb                               p

                                              v - (1 - p -   ^0) v                    v-1 
+ xK ( K +  p ) + xv  v dBt -(xK p +xd +xv                      +x (1- )v )dNt -xv          dNt
                                                      v                                 v
where I have omitted the subscripts t and t- for simplicity. To solve the price of the safe
bond v                                             ¯, and set the term p and 
      ¯, we can simply replace the notation v with v                            ^ 0 both to
zero.

     The first order condition over xv is
                         v -(1-p -^0 )                                                                   v -1
                                                                                     v
 -r -
 v     f                       v
                                                 -(1- )                                            - 
                                                                                                           v
             1-                        p -
                  (xK p + xd + xv v-(1-v  ^0 )
                                               )        1                    - (xK p + xd + xv v )    1 + xv v -
                                                                                                               v
                                                                                                                 1



              -                       (  v ) 2 xv                      -      xK  v (  K +  p )          =0
                  compensation for change in risk - bearing capacity       compesnation for covariance

Given that in equilibrium xv = 0, we have

                    1 v - (1 - p - ^0)            1        v-1
     v - rf =                          + (1 -  )      v +      + xK  v (  K +  p )
                   1- b       v                  1- b       v

with
                                                 1
                                                   - 
                                                     =
                                                 
Therefore, the excess return has three components: (1) the compensation for losses during
a distress shock, (2) the compensation for losses (negative losses mean positive benefits)
in a maturity event without distress shock, and (3) the compensation for exposure to the
volatility risk dBt , where the price of risk is xK ( K +  p ). This equation together with the
matched coefficients form an HJB equation for the value of bonds,

               v      1  2 v 2 w 2 v                           v
                 ww +      2
                             w ( ) +     - rf v = xK ( K +  p ) w w
               w      2 w                                      w                                              (64)
                    1                                 1
               +        v - (1 -  - 
                                  p
                                     ^ ) + (1 -  )
                                      0
                                                          v +  (v - 1)
                                                          v
                  1 - b                            1 - b



                                                          73
   Solution Methods

  We will use the "false time derivative" method, by introducing a time dependence of v .
Define such a function as v
                          ~(w, , t). Following a similar derivation as (64), we can get the
HJB equation for v~ as

            v
            ~     1                                  1
              =       v - (1 - p - ^ 0 ) + (1 -  )       v v +  (v - 1)
            t    1- b                              1 - b

                             v                 v
                                               ~      1  2v
                                                          ~ 2 w 2 v ~ 
            +xK ( K +  p )              ~-
                               w w + rf v        ww +     2
                                                            w ( ) +  
                             w                 w      2 w           

   We can start with a function v
                                ~ that satisfies v
                                                 ~(0, , T ) = v (0, ), and v
                                                                           ~(1, , T ) = v (1, ),
and has linear interpolation in other regions. By taking T large enough, we are going
to have convergence before t reaches 0, i.e., two iterations have close to zero differences.
Denote the converged solution as v ~(w, , 0). From the property of convergence, we must
have  v~(w, , t)/t|t=0 = 0. As a result, v  ~(w, , 0) satisfies the original PDE of v (w, ),
which implies that v (w, ) = v
                             ~(w, , 0).

   Next, we show how to solve the boundary conditions at w = 0 and w = 1.

   Boundary Conditions

   We note that w = 0 and w = 1 are two absorbing boundaries. At both w = 0 and w = 1,
                 ¯ forever, and w =  w = p = 0. Thus, we can simplify the HJB equation
we have p = p or p
(64) into

         v (w, )                                1
                 () - rf (w, )v (w, ) =                 v (w, ) - (1 - ^0)
                                            1 -  (w, )
                                                b
                                                                                           (65)
                       1
         + (1 -  )             v (w, )v (w, ) +  ()(v (w, ) - 1), w  {0, 1}
                   1 - b (w, )

Suppose that v = 0 when  =  (defined as  ( ) = 0). Then we get

                                   1-b (
                                       1
                                         w, )
                                              (1 - ^ 0 ) +  ( )
               v (0) (w,  ) =                                     ,   w  {0, 1}
                                  1-b (
                                      1
                                        w, )
                                             + rf (w,  ) +  ( )

Denote the value function at iteration k as v (k) (w, ). Then for w = 1 or w = 0, the
algorithm works as follows:


· Step k: Solve for the jump v v = v (w, ) - v (w + w,  + ) using v = v (k) . Denote this
  value as v (k) . With such jump solved, we translate the jump equation (65) into an ODE
  of v (w, ), w  {0, 1} as a function of . The ODE solution starts with the initial value
  v (w,  ) = v (k) (w,  ), w  {0, 1}. Solve this ODE and denote the solution as v (k+1) .



                                              74
· Stop if
                        H
                            |v (k+1) (w, ) - v (k) (w, )| d < ,   w  {0, 1}
                        L

  for a small  > 0.

   Finally, we notice that once the  =  , it will not go up or down unless there is a dNt
shock. Once we know the jump component, we can solve v (w,  ) along the w dimension as
an ODE. The ODE is

                          1-1
                             b
                               (v - (1 - p - ^ 0 )) + (1 -  ) 1-1
                                                                 b
                                                                   v v
                 2v     + (v - 1) + xK ( K +  p ) wv
                                                     w w + rf v - wv
                                                                     ww
                    =
                w2                               w (  w )2
                                               1 2
                                               2


for w = 0, 1.



B     Leverage Target

Here we provide more details about the calculations of moment target for bank leverage. We
use the Flow of Funds data to calculate average bank leverage from runnable (non-insured)
deposits. As shown in Figure 20, bank leverage based on non-FDIC insured bank deposits
is slightly below 5. We use Egan, Horta¸
                                       csu and Matvos (2017) estimate that the fraction of
FDIC-insured deposits is 0.5.




                                               75
                                                        (BD and CB non-FDIC-insured Assets)/(BD and CB equity)




                                           6.0
                                           5.5
               Financial Sector Leverage
                                           5.0
                                           4.5
                                           4.0




                                                 2002     2004     2006   2008   2010    2012     2014   2016    2018

                                                 (a) Bank Leverage (using data on FDIC-insured deposits)


                                                        (BD and CB non-FDIC-insured Assets)/(BD and CB equity)
                                           7.0
                                           6.5
               Financial Sector Leverage
                                           6.0
                                           5.5
                                           5.0
                                           4.5




                                                 1970            1980        1990          2000          2010           2020

                                                  (b) Bank Leverage (FDIC-insured deposits are inferred)

Figure 20: Bank Leverage in the Flow of Funds Data. This figure illustrates the time
series of bank leverage in the U.S. using flow of funds data. We map banks in the model
to "private depository institutions" and "security broker dealers" in flow of funds. Bank
equity is measured as total bank assets minus bank liabilities. Since the model only captures
banks' runnable liabilities liabilities, we measure effective bank liability as total liability
minus FDIC-insured deposits, and calculate bank leverage as (effective bank liability +
bank equity)/bank equity. The data on FDIC-insured deposits are only available after 2002,
so the data sample starts from 2002 in panel (a). An alternative way is to assume a constant
fraction of FDIC-insured deposits over total deposits (here we assume a half). In panel (b),
we show the results under this alternative method.



                                                                                 76
