                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  THE VALUE OF TIME:
                          EVIDENCE FROM AUCTIONED CAB RIDES

                                          Nicholas Buchholz
                                             Laura Doval
                                             Jakub Kastl
                                            Filip Mat jka
                                             Tobias Salz

                                        Working Paper 27087
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27087


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2020




We thank Liftago for providing the data. We thank Juan Castillo Camillo, Gabriel Kreindler, Rob
Porter, Stephen Redding, and seminar participants at FTC, Maryland, MIT, Ohio State, Penn,
Princeton, Stanford, UCL, WashU and IO2 for useful comments. We are grateful for the financial
support from the Transportation Economics in the 21st Century Initiative of the NBER and U.S.
Department of Transportation. Kastl is grateful for the financial support of the NSF
(SES-1352305). All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nicholas Buchholz, Laura Doval, Jakub Kastl, Filip Mat jka, and Tobias Salz. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Value of Time: Evidence From Auctioned Cab Rides
Nicholas Buchholz, Laura Doval, Jakub Kastl, Filip Mat jka, and Tobias Salz
NBER Working Paper No. 27087
May 2020, Revised August 2020
JEL No. L0

                                          ABSTRACT

We recover valuations of time using detailed data from a large ride-hail platform, where drivers
bid on trips and consumers choose between a set of rides with different prices and waiting times.
We estimate demand as a function of prices and waiting times and find that price elasticities are
substantially higher than waiting-time elasticities. We show how these estimates can be mapped
into values of time that vary by place, person, and time of day. We find that the value of time
during non-work hours is 16%lower than during work hours. Most of the heterogeneity in the
value of time, however, is explained by individual differences. We apply our estimates to study
optimal time incentives in highway procurement. Standard industry practices, which set
incentives based on a uniform value of time, lead to mis-priced time costs by up to ninety percent.


Nicholas Buchholz                                Filip Mat jka
Princeton University                             CERGE-EI
nbuchholz@princeton.edu                          Filip.Matejka@cerge-ei.cz

Laura Doval                                      Tobias Salz
California Institute of Technology               MIT Deparatment of Economics
Pasadena, CA 91125                               77 Massachusetts Avenue, E52-404
laura@laura-doval.com                            Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                 and NBER
Jakub Kastl                                      tsalz@mit.edu
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
jkastl@princeton.edu
1    Introduction
Allocating time is an important aspect of many economic decisions. Since Becker
(1965), economists have debated the extent to which the labor-leisure trade-off can
be used to measure people's value of time. Credible measures of the value of time are
useful for a variety of important policy decisions. For instance, they are a critical input
to infrastructure planning, particularly in the transportation sector. A unique empirical
challenge in measuring the value of time is that in many economic settings -- unlike
in labor markets -- time is not always directly priced. In this paper we use data from
auctioned cab rides to overcome this empirical challenge, allowing us to estimate how
the value of time varies across individuals, across places, and across time-of-day within
a large urban area.
    Transportation markets are inherently ones in which consumers express their value
of time: consider, for instance, the various decisions involved in the daily commute from
home to work (Domencich and McFadden, 1975). In this context commuters might
trade off cheaper-yet-slower off-peak trains against more expensive express trains; choose
to leave earlier than their work requires to beat the rush hour; or choose between dif-
ferent service tiers in a ride-hailing platform, which involve different waiting times and
prices. The choices made when faced with such trade-offs are therefore informative
about the value of time, or the opportunity cost of time spent traveling.
    We use detailed consumer choice data from Liftago, a large European ride-hailing
application to measure the value of time. This platform uses a unique mechanism to
allocate each ride through a rapid auction process in which nearby drivers bid on ride
requests. Requesting consumers then choose between bids based on various character-
istics. Most importantly, bids often involve trade-offs between price and waiting time,
or the time it would take the taxi to pick up the customer. This is in contrast to plat-
forms like Uber and Lyft, which employ "surge" pricing to equilibrate demand and
supply. Under such mechanisms, consumers do not get to directly express preferences
over prices and waiting times. We observe both consumers' individual choice sets as
well as their ultimate selection for 1.9 million ride requests and 5.2 million bids.
    Our first contribution is to provide a direct and clean measurement of consumers'
willingness-to-pay to reduce waiting times. We use the variation in choice sets and
choices to estimate a demand system that depends on both prices and waiting times.
Demand measures of this form are of first-order importance for the provision of public
transportation infrastructure. They are also critically important for the ride hail industry,
where price and waiting time are the two key variables on which firms compete. As we
elaborate below, our setting allows us to overcome some of the empirical challenges in


                                             2
simultaneously measuring preferences over both prices and waiting-time.
    Our second contribution, building on the work of Small (1982), is to provide a con-
ceptual framework for interpreting the disutility of waiting, and to demonstrate how the
willingness-to-pay for waiting-time reductions can be used to recover the value of time.
When consumers choose a shorter waiting time over a lower price, they reveal that the
value of their time at the destination is greater than the value at the origin location. Intu-
itively, the willingness to pay for lower waiting times is simply the difference between
the value of time at the destination and the value of time at the origin. In keeping with
this interpretation we refer to the willingness to pay for waiting time reductions as the
net value of time (abbreviated as nvot). We formalize this mapping, demonstrate that
the average value of time by place, individuals and time-of-day is identified, and show
how it can be recovered with a simple moment-based estimator. Rich geographic detail
allows us to further decompose the value of time and interpret the prevailing patterns.
    Our demand results show that consumers respond substantially to changes in both
price and waiting time. Price elasticities are four to ten times as large as waiting-time
elasticities. We find that on average the net value of time, expressed as an hourly quan-
tity, is $13.47. However, there is large variation in these measures within the day and
across space. From the overnight hours to the mid-day, the willingness to pay for lower
waiting times approximately doubles. Geographic differences are estimated to have an
order of magnitude difference from one extreme to another. Because our data includes
panel identifiers for both passengers and drivers, we are able to credibly identify the
individual-specific heterogeneity in both the elasticities and the implied nvot. We rank
individuals by their relative sensitivity to prices and wait times and find that the top
quartile have nvot measures about 3.5 times higher than the bottom quartile.
    We use our estimates to investigate how much of the overall variation in the value
of time is driven by differences across people, locations, and time of day. Our approach
for this investigation is similar to a branch of the labor literature that decomposes dif-
ferences in wage into firm and worker specific variation (Abowd et al. (1999)). Based
on this decomposition we can then define high-value of time places and high-value of
time people. This exercise provides a number of important insights. First, we find that
almost eighty percent of the variation in the value of time is driven by differences across
people. Once individual-specific variation is taken into account, the differences across
places are relatively small. We also find that people who express a higher vot are not
necessarily doing so for the same places. In fact, the relationship between high value of
time people and high value of time places is slightly negative.
    We also conduct a small survey of passengers to corroborate our measurements,
which reveals that the estimated value of time during the beginning of a typical work


                                              3
day is very close to the mean wage in the survey sample. This finding provides a link
between our results and the widely used wage measure, enabling us to better understand
and extrapolate from wage-based value of time estimates.
    To demonstrate the applicability of our results in a policy context, we use our value
of time estimates as opportunity cost of traffic delays in order to inform the use of time
incentives in a road infrastructure procurement setting. This exercise builds on existing
literature studying the impact of time incentives in highway procurement (Lewis and
Bajari, 2011) by demonstrating the importance of accounting for heterogeneity in the
underlying social costs of road closures. In the setting of Prague weekdays, we show
that using a uniform value of time to determine optimal time incentives will lead cities
to mis-price the social cost of closures by up to ninety percent depending on the loca-
tion and time of road closures. These quantities account for traffic flows along a road
segment being composed of many different origins and destinations. However, closures
impacting some specific origin-destination pairs impose social costs up to eight times
higher than would be predicted by a uniform standard.

Related literature The paper contributes to four strands of literature, which we de-
scribe below.
    The first strand is the literature on the opportunity cost of time. While the standard
labor-leisure choice model implies that an extra hour of leisure should be valued at the
shadow wage, the literature starting from the seminal work of Becker (1965) recognizes
that an agent's time is also an input to other non-market activities. Recent papers in this
literature have used a variety of widely available micro-data to study the trade-off be-
tween market goods and time (see, for instance, Aguiar and Hurst (2007); Aguiar et al.
(2012); Nevo and Wong (2019)). Though these studies utilize rich and comprehensive
datasets of consumption behavior (for example, household scanner data), they are only
able to indirectly measure the opportunity cost of time through other market transac-
tions. A related question is how much workers value flexible work schedules. Mas and
Pallais (2017) investigate preferences for flexibility in an experiment with call-center
workers, Bloom et al. (2015) study work-from-home preferences and performance dif-
ferences among workers in a large travel agency, and Chen et al. (2017) study the value
of work flexibility among Uber drivers.1 Our work contributes to this literature in a
number of ways. First, we extend the analysis of the opportunity cost of time outside
of the workplace and study how this value varies across individuals, space, and time.
Second, our data allows us to directly measure consumers' opportunity costs of time

     1 The taxi industry has long provided a laboratory for empirical work on flexible work hours. See, e.g., Camerer et al. (1997),

Farber (2005), Farber (2008), Crawford and Meng (2011),Thakral and T^   o (2017).


                                                                 4
and to disaggregate these measures along various dimensions.
    The second strand is the emerging literature that utilizes high resolution spatial data
to shed light on urban economic activity (Athey et al., 2019; Davis et al., 2017; Cou-
ture et al., 2019; Kreindler and Miyauchi, 2019; Almagro and Dominguez-Iino, 2019).2
Kreindler and Miyauchi (2019) use individual level commuting flows to estimate a grav-
ity model where consumers choose where to work, as a function of where they live and
wage values. Their model yields estimates of the relative desirability of locations. They
then show that the implied values from the estimation correlate well with the empirical
distribution of wages and night lights in the city. In contrast, since we directly observe
how people trade-off waiting time and monetary savings when choosing to move from
one location to another, we can obtain a direct measure of their value of spending time
at a specific location. Our approach allows us to quantify the intensity of preferences
over locations in a way that cannot be accomplished with GPS data alone.
    The third strand is the literature in transportation economics and industrial organiza-
tion, dating to the pioneering work of Daniel McFadden (McFadden, 1974; Domencich
and McFadden, 1975), on the value of travel time savings. The studies in this strand
measure the benefits of travel time savings through surveys or revealed preference anal-
ysis based on mode choice. Our data allow us to directly measure consumers willing-
ness to pay for reductions in waiting time based on choices on the platform. Small
(2012) reviews the travel time literature and presents stylized facts suggesting that the
value of personal travel time is about 50% of the gross wage rate, and that the value
of travel time increases less than proportionally with income/hourly wage -- with elas-
ticity estimates ranging from 0.5 to 0.9. Couture et al. (2018) study the determinants
of driving speed and the deadweight loss of travel, where hours in traffic are valued
at half the average wage. Bento et al. (2020) use commuter tollway choices to infer
consumers' urgency from their willingness-to-pay for travel time savings. Hall (2018)
analyzes the benefits of choice over toll and non-toll lanes.3 Finally, a recent literature
      2 Although it does not use high resolution spatial data, Su (2018) is also related to this strand. The author studies the causal

link between the value of time and gentrification. He argues that the increase in the value of time of high-wage workers led them
to seek living areas with shorter commuting times, which then leads to gentrification of former poor, but close to downtown, areas.
      3 There are a host of other studies. For example, the US department of transportation distinguishes in its guide on Valuation of

Travel Time between `on-the-clock' business travelers and personal travel (Belenky, 2011). The department of transportation uses
the nationwide median gross compensation based on the 2015 BLS National Occupational Employment Wage Estimates as the
value of time in their calculations. For personal travel, estimates are based on survey results from Miller (1989). Like Miller (1989)
many studies that estimate time valuations belong to the transportation literature and are largely based on stated preference reports
(see Abrantes and Wardman (2011) for the UK and Cirillo and Axhausen (2006) for Germany). Jara-Diaz et al. (2008) combines
detailed data (travel diaries and interviews) from Chile, Germany and Switzerland with a theoretical model in the spirit of Becker
(1965) to estimate people's value of leisure time. They find that the marginal valuation of leisure is 65.9% of the average hourly
wage in Chile, 119.8% in Germany and 87.8% in Switzerland. Borjesson et al. (2012) study two identical surveys given to car
commuters in Sweden in 1994 and 2007 and find that people with below median income have elasticity of travel time with respect
to income indistinguishable from zero, and those with above median income have elasticity close to 1. Lam and Small (2001) use
a survey of California commuters on Route 91, which includes free lanes and tolled "express lanes." The value of time is estimated
at $22.87, or 72% of the average wage. Fosgerau et al. (n.d.) study data collected from interviews with over 6,000 Danish people
and obtain estimates of the value of time at 67% of the mean after-tax wage. Significance Quantitative Research (2007) find that
the value of time in the Netherlands is about e 8.76, with business trips valued at e 24 per hour. Kreindler (2018) evaluates the


                                                                  5
studies equilibrium outcomes resulting from transportation infrastructure. This line of
research includes studies that analyze the impact of new roads on driving behavior (Du-
ranton and Turner, 2011), the impact of transit on urban development and spatial sort-
ing (Heblich et al., 2018), the welfare effect of transportation improvements (Allen and
Arkolakis, 2019), and the design of optimal transportation networks (Fajgelbaum and
Schaal, 2017). Our study complements this literature by showing how transportation
options and choices are related to the opportunity cost of time, an important component
of the overall welfare of transit infrastructure. We then show how these measures can
be used to more accurately set time incentives in a highway procurement setting.
    The fourth strand is the literature that studies taxi and ride hail markets. Recent pa-
pers analyze the supply side in ride-hail markets. Buchholz (2018) quantifies the impact
of uniform pricing regulation and search frictions on the spatial allocation of drivers and
passengers in the NYC taxi market; Frechette et al. (2018) assess the effect of entry re-
strictions and market thickness on efficiency in the NYC taxi market.4 In these papers,
the demand for taxis is estimated either as a function of prices (Buchholz (2018)) or
waiting times (Frechette et al. (2018)).5 Cohen et al. (2016) and Castillo (2019) es-
timate demand for rides on the Uber platform, and in particular Castillo (2019) also
estimates the demand for both waiting-time and price. His paper has a different focus
and quantifies the benefit of surge pricing, whereas we provide a conceptual framework
linking the disutility of waiting-time to the spatial distribution of the value of time. In
our setting, we observe a direct and salient choice that includes a price waiting-time
trade-off and also a panel-structure for riders, which provides a convincing way to esti-
mate population heterogeneity.
    The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional set-
ting and our data. Section 3 describes the conceptual framework that motivates our
analysis. Section 4 lays out the model of consumer choice and the details of iden-
tification and estimation. We present the results of our estimation in Section 5, the
application to highway procurement in Section 6 and conclude in Section 7.




welfare effect of congestion pricing using both travel behavior data and a field experiment.
     4 In a similar vein, Liu et al. (2019) and Hall et al. (2019) study various aspects of the design of DiDi and Uber, respectively.

These papers, however, do not estimate demand.
     5 Brancaccio et al. (2017) and Brancaccio et al. (2020) study closely related models in the context of the oceanic bulk shipping

industry.


                                                                  6
2       Setting and Data

2.1       A Unique Approach to Matching and Price Discovery
Liftago is a ride-hail platform, which was founded in 2015 and services rides through
licensed taxi drivers. In Prague, all taxis need to be operated by licensed drivers. More-
over, taxis need to be equipped with a physical meter, which captures the number of
kilometers traveled in the "occupied" mode and the billed amount.6 A licensed driver
may find fares by searching for street-hail passengers or by choosing to participate in
a dispatch service. Among dispatch options, there are traditional telephone-based dis-
patch services and, more recently, the app-based ride-hail platform that we study. Note
that this regulatory environment is different from most U.S. municipalities, in which
there is nearly free entry into the ride-hail market through firms such as Uber and Lyft.7
    Drivers pay a percentage fee for each ride that is booked through the platform. By
tracking both the taxi's GPS and the time of the trip, it provides an approximate fare
before the trip begins and a final fare after its completion. While the platform has a
strong presence in the Czech Republic, it is less well known in other countries. Because
Liftago is not well known internationally few riders are tourists, making it easier to
interpret our estimates in light of local economic quantities.8
    Importantly, drivers and passengers are matched by a combination of a dispatch
algorithm and an auction. Whenever a passenger requests a ride, the system looks for
nearby available cars and sends requests to a certain number of them, typically four, to
elicit an offer. A cab driver who receives a request observes the details of the trip --
the location of the passenger, the destination, passenger rating and payment via cash
or credit. A taxi driver who is interested in performing the job submits a bid that he
chooses from a set of pre-programmed tariffs.9 A tariff consists of a flag fee, a per-
minute waiting fee and a per-kilometer fee with a regulatory cap at CZK 36 ( $1.41).
The platform takes tariff bids and combines them with a query to Waze, a real-time
traffic mapping service and Google subsidiary, which provides estimates of the taxi
arrival time (or equivalently the customer waiting time), the trip time and trip distance.
The tariff bids are then translated into a single expected price for a trip. The passenger

      6 Licensing requires both a fee and an exam. Meters needs to be certified every two years by a state agency. Each meter

records the aggregate numbers of kilometers billed together with the revenues.
      7 Uber has also been present in Prague since 2014, but its presence is not as large as in a typical US city of similar size,

partially since it is still fighting several legal battles due to various licensing and taxation issues. Since an EU court's decision in
December 2017, Uber is viewed as a transportation company and hence its drivers need to be properly licensed.
      8 This is also reflected in the relatively small fraction of airport rides, which comprise about 2 percent of total trips.
      9 When starting the ride, the driver selects a tariff among the options he has pre-programmed on the meter. This is also why

the bidding is not completely unrestricted: a typical driver has only about 5 fare combinations on his meter, but there are notable
exceptions. Some drivers who specialize in Liftago trips have over 20 different tariffs. Note that neither the passengers nor the
other drivers observe tariffs that were not chosen.


                                                                   7
then observes bids as final trip prices together with other bid-specific attributes: the
waiting time until the taxi arrives, the make and model of the car, and the driver's
rating. Importantly, these non-price attributes are automatically attached to each of the
bids; in each auction, drivers only have control over the tariff. The passenger may select
one of the bids, in which case the ride occurs, or may decline all bids. When the ride
is completed, the passenger pays the fare shown on the meter.10 Figure 11 shows the
interface that riders see on the app before the request and after the request arrives.
    A noteworthy consequence of Liftago's mechanism is that it allows for variation in
both prices and waiting times: a driver with a high ETA may submit a lower bid than a
driver with a low ETA, and vice-versa. Contrast this market clearing mechanism with
traditional taxi services, where prices are fixed so that the market clears through adjust-
ments in waiting time, and with other ride-hail platforms, where prices are adjusted to
keep waiting times stable.


2.2       Data
Our dataset covers 1.9 million trip requests and 1.1 million actual trips on Liftago be-
tween September 30, 2016 and June 30, 2018. For each request, we observe the time
of the request, the pick-up and drop-off location, trip price bids and estimated waiting
times from each driver, and which bid the passenger chose, if any. In addition, we ob-
serve a unique identifier for each driver and passenger. There are 1,455 unique drivers
and 113,916 unique passengers over the sample period.
    For each ride request we complement the data with geospatial and public transporta-
tion data from the Google Transit Matrix API, based on the GPS addresses for each
origin and destination in the Liftago data. The API data provide us with alternative
public transit times for each origin-destination pair. Furthermore, we use hourly rain-
fall data to attach prevailing weather characteristics to each ride.11 Finally, we use data
on GPS-specific land values from GIS coded data.12
    Table 1 summarizes daily activity on the platform. There are on average about 3, 000
trip requests each day, of which 61% become rides. The average bid is $11.66 and the
average waiting time is 7 minutes. In addition, about one third of the drivers in the
sample were active each day. The average number of drivers bidding in each auction is
2.8, and except in rare cases there are no more than four bids.13

     10 The app and an email receipt from Liftago only display an estimated amount. However, if the actual amount differs from the

estimated amount, customers are encouraged to report the discrepancy. Drivers can be banned from the platform if they are found
regularly overcharging.
     11 We obtain this from https://www.noaa.gov/.
     12 We obtain municipal GIS data from http://www.geoportalpraha.cz.
     13 We discard auctions with more than four bids, representing only 0.33% of the sample.




                                                                8
                            Table 1: Bid, Order, and Daily Summary Statistics

          Variable                                                      P10         Mean            P90           S.D.
          Panel A: Order Summary (N = 1, 874, 409)
          Price of Trip (USD, across-auction) 5.65 11.66                                           19.75         6.261
          Wait Time (minutes, across-auction) 3.00  6.8                                            12.00         3.816

          Panel B: Bid Summary (N = 5, 229, 724)
          Number of Bids (within-auction)      1.00                                   2.79         4.00          1.087
          Price of Trip (USD, within-auction ) 5.04                                   9.85         16.16         1.059
          Wait Time (minutes, within-auction) 3.50                                    6.85         11.25         1.856

          Panel C: Daily Summary (N = 638)
          Number of Requests              1961                                      2938.3         4098         956.67
          Number Rides                    1160                                      1786.2         2470         557.15
          Number Drivers                   411                                      499.23          585         97.372
          Note: This table shows summary statistics at the bid level (Panel A), the auction level (Panel B) and for en-
          tire days (Panel C). P10 refers to the 10th percentile and P90 to the 90th percentile of the respective variable.


    Another important feature of the platform is the ability to schedule trips exactly 15
minutes in advance. Scheduled trips represent 7.8 percent of all orders on the platform.
While these types of orders do not feature variable waiting times and are not included
in our analysis, they suggest that the orders we analyze represent a timely need for trips.


2.3     Preferences over Time and Money: Intra-daily Patterns
In this section we provide descriptive evidence for the spatial and inter-temporal pat-
terns in prices, waiting times, and choices. In these dimensions we document large and
interpretable heterogeneity in consumer choices, which provides important identifying
variation for our model.. Figure 1, panels (a) and (b) show the average trip price and
wait times by day of the week and time of the day. Prices are lower during weekday
afternoons and higher during weekends, while wait times tend to be substantially higher
during the day compared with overnight hours.
   Consumers in our data often face a non-trivial trade-off between price and waiting
time when choosing among bids. A trade-off implies that there exist options such that
one has a lower waiting-time but a higher price and vice-versa. Depending on the time
of day about 58­70 percent of auctions involve a trade-off between waiting less and
paying more.14
   Figure 2 shows how consumers solve the trade-off between time and monetary costs

   14 Figure   12 in Appendix A shows how the fraction of auctions with a trade-off varies by hour of day.


                                                                 9
                                      Figure 1: Prices and Waiting Times by Hour and Day
              13




                                                                                      10
                   12.5




                                                                                      9
                                                                              Avg Wait (min.)
     Avg Price ($)
             12




                                                                                        8
    11.5




                                                                               7
              11




                                                                                      6
                          01AM - 05AM
                          06AM - 09AM
                          10AM - 15PM
                           16PM - 18PM
                           19PM - 23PM
                          01AM - 05AM
                          06AM - 09AM
                          10AM - 15PM
                           16PM - 18PM
                           19PM - 23PM
                          01AM - 05AM
                          06AM - 09AM
                          10AM - 15PM
                           16PM - 18PM
                           19PM - 23PM
                          01AM - 05AM
                          06AM - 09AM
                          10AM - 15PM
                           16PM - 18PM
                           19PM - 23PM
                          01AM - 05AM
                          06AM - 09AM
                          10AM - 15PM
                           16PM - 18PM
                           19PM - 23PM
                          01AM - 05AM
                          06AM - 09AM
                          10AM - 15PM
                           16PM - 18PM
                           19PM - 23PM
                          01AM - 05AM
                          06AM - 09AM
                          10AM - 15PM
                           16PM - 18PM
                           19PM - 23PM




                                                                                                01AM - 05AM
                                                                                                06AM - 09AM
                                                                                                10AM - 15PM
                                                                                                 16PM - 18PM
                                                                                                 19PM - 23PM
                                                                                                01AM - 05AM
                                                                                                06AM - 09AM
                                                                                                10AM - 15PM
                                                                                                 16PM - 18PM
                                                                                                 19PM - 23PM
                                                                                                01AM - 05AM
                                                                                                06AM - 09AM
                                                                                                10AM - 15PM
                                                                                                 16PM - 18PM
                                                                                                 19PM - 23PM
                                                                                                01AM - 05AM
                                                                                                06AM - 09AM
                                                                                                10AM - 15PM
                                                                                                 16PM - 18PM
                                                                                                 19PM - 23PM
                                                                                                01AM - 05AM
                                                                                                06AM - 09AM
                                                                                                10AM - 15PM
                                                                                                 16PM - 18PM
                                                                                                 19PM - 23PM
                                                                                                01AM - 05AM
                                                                                                06AM - 09AM
                                                                                                10AM - 15PM
                                                                                                 16PM - 18PM
                                                                                                 19PM - 23PM
                                                                                                01AM - 05AM
                                                                                                06AM - 09AM
                                                                                                10AM - 15PM
                                                                                                 16PM - 18PM
                                                                                                 19PM - 23PM
                          Sun   Mon     Tue    Wed     Thu   Fri   Sat                          Sun   Mon   Tue    Wed    Thu    Fri   Sat


                                      (a) Average Prices                                                (b) Average Wait Times



at different times of the day. At all times of day, consumers are more likely to pick
the minimum price option than the minimum waiting time option. The elasticities that
we back out from our model are very much in line with this observation. Moreover,
the magnitudes of these differences vary throughout the day. During work hours, there
is a a significant dip in the likelihood of choosing the lowest price option and an even
larger increase in the likelihood of choosing the lowest wait option.15 This pattern
can be attributed to some combination of preference heterogeneity across customers as
well as within-customer heterogeneity throughout the day. Since we observe customer
identifiers, our model leverages the variation across consumers in the timing of trips
and the choices within trips.




    15 Note that those two do not have to add up to one since a consumer might, for example, choose a driver with the highest rating

even if that driver offers neither the lowest price nor provides the lowest wait time.


                                                                         10
                                                  Figure 2: Trade-offs and Choices by Hour


                          .5        .45
            Probability Mininum Chosen
            .3      .35   .25 .4




                                          0   2    4    6      8    10     12    14   16   18    20   22      24
                                                                          Hour

                                                            Prices                    Wait Times
                                                            95% CI (Price)            95% CI (Wait)



Note: This graph shows the mean probability that a customer who faces trade-offs between price and waiting time chooses either
                                          the lowest price or lowest waiting time.



    We next show how choices differ by locations. To partition Prague into smaller
regions, we use a data driven approach. We employ a clustering approach using exact
GPS locations of trip origins and destinations. The partitioning is done according to a
simple k-means procedure on latitude and longitude with the number of locations set to
A = 30. We choose this value to balance modeling the richness of spatial preference
heterogeneity against sacrifices due to sample size. The resulting map is shown in
Figure 18.
    Figure 3 compares choices over price and wait times by location. The figure shows,
within each pickup location, the probability that customers choose the lowest price
and/or wait time among all available bids, computed only within auctions that feature
a tradeoff between prices and waiting times. Locations are sorted by the probability of
choosing the lowest price. Like Figure 2, Figure 3 demonstrates that consumers exhibit
preferences for lower prices and waiting times. It shows that minimum prices are cho-
sen about 2­3 times more often than minimum waiting times, but there is substantial
heterogeneity across locations. These differences eventually allow us to infer the dif-
ferent values that riders assign to different locations. We also decompose how much
of this variation is coming from place-innate characteristics and how much is driven
by differences across people who travel between different locations. We would like to


                                                                         11
                                                 Figure 3: Choices and Bids by Pickup Location


                          .5
            Probability Mininum Chosen
                 .3       .2    .4




                                         0   2     4   6   8     10 12 14 16 18 20            22   24    26   28   30
                                                                  Pickup Locations (sorted)

                                                               Prices                    Wait Times
                                                               95% CI (Price)            95% CI (Wait)



Note: This figure shows the mean probability that a customer who faces trade-offs between price and waiting time chooses either
      the lowest price or the lowest waiting time. The locations are sorted by the probability of choosing the lowest price.



emphasize that these differences are computed over the entire sample of trips. Although
situational factors might play an important role in passengers' decisions to make a trip,
Figure 3 indicates that there are long-run differences in preferences over waiting times
across locations.


3      Conceptual Framework
We now describe our conceptual framework, which shows how the choices that we
observe are related to the underlying value of time at different locations. A consumer's
day is characterized by an allocation of time to various activities in different locations.
Those activities (e.g., leisure or family time at home versus production at work) have
different productivities or different intensities of pleasure at different times. Comparing
her options at any given point in time, a consumer thus decides whether to move to a
different location and spend her time there. Moving between locations is costly, both in
terms of money and time, and a consumer has a choice between various transportation
options. Liftago's auction mechanism allows us to observe a particularly clean set of
decisions about these transitions.
    A consumer is defined by a pair of valuations (voto , votd ) : [0, T ]  R2 , which


                                                                          12
denote their utility from spending time t at either the origin, O, or the destination, D.
This specification assumes that the value of the time spent on the ride is 0; alternatively,
this means that voto represents the value of spending time at the origin, net of the value
of the ride, while votd represents the value of spending time at the destination, net of
the value of the ride. Further, these functions will depend on the locations a  A of the
origin and the destination, which we denote by voto   a , vota
                                                             d
                                                             ^ if location a is the origin and
^ is the destination.
a
    The consumer starts at time t = 0 at the origin. However, moving from the origin
to the destination involves some travel time and the time waiting for the ride. Once en
route, it takes  periods to arrive at the destination. If the consumer asks for a ride at
q  0 with an estimated time of arrival of w and a price of p, her payoff is given by
                                        q+w                      T
                  u(q, w) - p =               vot (t)dt +
                                                 o
                                                                        votd (t)dt - p.           (1)
                                    0                            q+w+




             Figure 4: Origin Destination Trade-Off in Waiting Time Choice

                    Origin                       Ride                     Destination

         1




                         Origin                           Ride               Destination

         2
                     q        q + w1      q + w2           q + w1 +         t + w2 +       Time


   Figure 4 illustrates how the decision to accept a particular bid affects the time allo-
cation between the origin and the destination. Suppose that when consumer requests a
ride at time q she receives two bids. Since both drivers are supposed to take the same
optimal route, the time from the pickup to the destination is the same and given by .
The two bids differ in the estimated time of arrival of the driver. The second bid leads
to a longer wait time w2 . By accepting bid 1, the passenger decides to spend w2 - w1
less time at the origin and w2 - w1 more time at the destination.
   Let a and a ^ denote the origin and destination's locations, respectively. When consid-
ering the two trip options, the consumer compares voto                             d
                                                         a · (w2 - w1 ) against vota
                                                                                   ^ · (w2 - w1 ),
up to an approximation. Letting the difference between w2 and w1 be one unit (for ex-
ample, one minute), the willingness to pay for waiting time reductions, which we call

                                                     13
the net value of time, can be expressed as

                                                    ^ = vota
                                                           ^ - vota .
                                                           d      o
                                               nvotaa                                                                           (2)

    Different people may assign different values to places, and they may assign differ-
ent values to the same places at different times. Going forward, the objects that we
describe above have i and t subscripts to reflect that we recover a time-of-day and lo-
cation dependent distribution of the value of time (votd                       o
                                                                 ^ ,t,i and vota,t,i ), which gives rise
                                                                 a
to a distribution of the net value of time (nvotaa     ^ ,t,i ). Our data also allows us to incor-

porate non-linear relationships in waiting time preferences, as a result of unobserved
plans or deadlines. For instance, arriving ten minutes late to an appointment could be
more than twice as damaging as arriving five minutes late. In Section 4.2 we discuss the
interpretation of our model and estimates in the context of these trip-specific qualities.
    Since our empirical setting entails choices over trips, we are able to observe distri-
butions of the net value of time but we do not directly observe the underlying value of
time. In Appendix C we formally derive the conditions under which the distributions
of voto               d
        a,t,i and vota,t,i are identified from observed distributions of the net value of time.
The result requires one location normalization, either for the origin or the destination.
We rely on known deconvolution techniques for non-parametric identification, and for
parametric identification (normal distribution) we use a straightforward rank condition.
    An important consideration for our measurement is that time at a destination might
be more valuable per-se than time at an origin. Such differences might arise from plan-
ning and other coordinated activities. For example, people may travel to a particular
"destination" location to be productive and then exit the location when their productive
task is completed, so that the location becomes an "origin". While we are unable to
directly observe plans, our decomposition allows us to estimate the value of time at a
location both when it serves as an origin and when it serves as a destination. We are
able to do this because we observe riders going in both directions and can thus recover
both nvotaa      ^ and nvota  ^ a . With this data we can construct a measure that captures

differences in productivity of time use across origin and destination.16 To this end, let




     16 In the empirical specification we use additional data that is informative about the extent of planning. We obtained the exact

location of the customer when a ride was ordered. This allows us to address how much a trip was planned in advance, since we can
distinguish, for example, if a customer is standing outside when they place their order and thus has less value for extra time at the
origin.


                                                                14
us rewrite the relationship between the nvot and vot as:

                                               votd
       ^ = vota
              ^ - vota = vota
              d      o      d                     a
  nvotaa                    ^ -                     · voto
                                                         a
                                               votd
                                                  a

                                                        = votd
                                                             ^ - a · vota = vota
                                                             a
                                                                        d
                                                                               ^ - a · vota . (3)


   This measure is denoted as a and given by the ratio of voto    a
                                                                           d
                                                                           ^ . Following
                                                                   ^ to vota
Equation 3, we interpret vota as the inherent location value and a as a depreciation
                               d

factor due to less (or more) productive time use at the origin. Hereafter we drop super-
scripts o and d.
   Finally, when a consumer requests a ride is a choice in and of itself. We discuss in
Appendix 4.3 how to interpret our estimates under a model of optimal request times.


3.1    Model of Travel Choice
So far, we have treated nvotaa       ^ as directly observed. This section describes how to re-

cover nvotaa      ^ from a standard discrete choice framework that models indirect utilities

over trips. In the next section we describe how to decompose a set of origin-destination
nvots into location-specific vots.
    There is a set of locations A = {1, ..., A} indexed by a and a set of consumers
I = {1, . . . , I }, indexed by i. When presented with a menu of bids (or offers) for a
ride between a and a     ^ , the consumer makes a discrete choice between J options. Each
alternative j  J = {1, . . . , J } is characterized by a tuple consisting of price, wait time,
route-characteristics such as distance, characteristics of the car (model, year, color),
driver (ratings and name) and a stochastic part i, j,t . We capture observable trip differ-
ences with xi, j,t . We also have to account for an additional term, a,a     ^ ,t , that captures

unobserved conditions affecting demand on a particular route, such as large sporting
events or transit delays. We discuss endogeneity concerns in the estimation section.
With this setup, the indirect utility from option j can be written as

                  ui, j,t = w       ^ · w j,t + i,ht · p j,t + i,ht · xi, j,t + a,a
                            i,ht ,a,a
                                                p              x
                                                                                  ^ ,t +   i, j,t ,   (4)

where ip,ht and w  i,ht reflect preferences over waiting time and price; the subscripts ht , a,
and a ^ in · indicate that we allow preferences over waiting time to vary with the hour of
            w

the day as well as by origin and destination. Finally, the coefficient ix,ht captures pref-
erences for other bid-specific characteristics (distance, driver's rating, car type, etc.) as
well as environmental conditions common to all j: hour-of-day, public transit availabil-
ity, traffic speeds, trip distance and time, rainfall, origin and destination neighborhoods,


                                                      15
and whether the order is placed on the street or in a building. Note that the environmen-
tal variables allow us to richly condition on many determinants of the outside option.
    We can then map the preference parameters in Equation 4 into nvots for different
locations and different times of day. These nvot's are obtained via the following equal-
ity, which compares the utility of choice j with the utility of some hypothetical option
 j that adds a single minute to waiting time, but otherwise has the same characteristics.
The price difference p j,t - p j ,t that solves the equation reflects the additional units of
money needed to make consumers, on average, indifferent between paying or waiting
more:
                    ip,ht · p j,t + w
                                    i,ht · w j,t = i,ht · p j ,t + i,ht · (w j,t + 1).
                                                   p               w
                                                                                          (5)

This implies that a minute of time at destination a      ^ relative to its value at the origin a is
valued as
                                                              wi,ht ,a,a
                                                                       ^
                          nvotaa  ^ ,ht ,i = p j,t - p j ,t = p          .                      (6)
                                                              i,ht ,a,a^

Equation 6 demonstrates that individual estimates of the net value of time can be recov-
ered directly from the estimated demand model by taking a ratio of coefficients.


4     Estimation
This section discusses the details of our estimation procedure, which involves two steps.
Based on observing the individual choices over bids on the app, we first estimate a like-
lihood based model. To capture time- and location-specific heterogeneity in time values,
we interact all waiting time parameters with time of day fixed effects, and separate fixed
effects for each origin and destination. To capture individual-specific heterogeneity, we
leverage the panel structure of our data to compute random coefficients on both price
and waiting-time using an MCMC procedure. We then use the coefficient estimates
from the first step to estimate the nvot, as we outline above, and a moment-based esti-
mator to separately recover the time and location dependent distribution of the value of
time (vota,ht ,i ). To allow better interpretation of this heterogeneity, the analysis hereafter
utilizes weekday data only.


4.1    Mixed Logit Discrete Choice Model
Under the assumption that i, j,t are independently and identically distributed according
to a Type I extreme value distribution, choosing the maximum among J alternatives
with utilities given by Equation 4 reduces to the standard logit. The probability that an



                                                16
alternative j will be chosen depends on its relative mean utility and is given by

                                               exp(w       ^ · w j,t + i,ht ,a,a
                                                   i,ht ,a,a
                                                                       p
                                                                               ^ · p j,t + i,ht · xi, j,t )
                                                                                           x
    l(w j,t , p j,t , xi, j,t ; ) =                                                                                         .     (7)
                                      exp(-a,a
                                             ^ ,t ) +        j                              ^ · p j,t + i,ht · xi, j,t )
                                                                     i,ht · w j,t + i,ht ,a,a
                                                                 exp(w              p                   x



       Endogeneity concerns: For bid-specific attributes we as the econometricians are
on almost equal footing with consumers because we observe all relevant bid attributes
up to the drivers' names and photos. These unobserved features are therefore part of
  i, j,t . However, because drivers might condition their bids on a,a     ^ ,t , bids could still be

correlated with unobservable demand conditions and thereby bias the price coefficients.
To deal with this concern, we exploit persistent differences in bids among different
drivers.17 These differences might, for example, come from pre-programmed bid incre-
ments in the meter. However, a straightforward GMM implementation is not feasible
since our model relies on individual choice data and is likelihood-based. This prevents
us from using standard inversion techniques to isolate a,a     ^ ,t and directly instrument. To

get around this we concentrate a,a   ^ ,t out using a control function approach (Petrin and

Train, 2010). This step consists of a simple regression of trip prices on a set of driver
fixed effects, from which we recover a residual that enters the likelihood as a control.
In Figure 13 in Appendix A we show the resulting distribution of fixed effects, which
demonstrates that there is large and persistent variation in driver bids. The interquartile
range is $1.90 or 20% of the average fare, and the range from the 10th to the 90th per-
centile is $4.00 or 43% of the average fare. Without the control function we find smaller
price and waiting time elasticities resulting in an overall mean nvot that is 19% lower.
   Control variables: We specify ht as follows: the price coefficient is allowed to vary
between work hours (defined to be 9am­6pm) and non-work hours. The waiting time
coefficient is allowed to vary across five blocks of time. The omitted category is the
midnight hour, 12am to 1am. The remaining blocks are 1am to 5am, 6am to 9am, 10am
to 3pm, 4pm to 6pm, and 7pm to 12am. We also control for drivers' quality ratings, car
type, traffic speed and trip distance. In Equation 4, ix,ht captures preferences for other
ride- j-specific characteristics, which are the distance, the driver's rating, the car type,
and environmental conditions common to all j.
   Outside option: We allow the outside option to vary spatially at the level of each
specific order in the data. We control for origin and destination locations, hourly rainfall
and whether the trip was ordered from within a building or outside on the street. We also
incorporate detailed public transit data including the time-of-day-specific availability of

      17 This approach is similar to a literature that exploits different leniency standards of judges, known as the judge design. See,

e.g., Waldfogel (1995).


                                                                   17
public transit within walking distance between each individual order's origin and desti-
nations points. These characteristics impact the value of the outside option available to
consumers, which they earn by choosing no alternative from J . We normalize the value
of the outside option to zero during 12pm and 1am at a location without any nearby pub-
lic transit option, when it is not raining and when the order is placed inside a building.
Note that this specification allows for spatial (across different origin-destination pairs)
and time-of-day variation in the outside option.
    Estimation details MCMC: Our estimation exploits the panel structure of our data
to capture the full heterogeneity in values of time in a tractable way. In particular, we
opt for a hierarchical Bayes mixed-logit model to obtain individual specific estimates
for the disutilities of both waiting and money. We use an MCMC method using data
augmentation of latent variables as in Tanner and Wong (1987). In this approach the
unobserved random coefficients are simulated and then these simulations are treated
as data. This method sidesteps the need to evaluate multidimensional integrals by in-
stead sampling from a truncated Normal distribution. Following techniques described
in Rossi and Allenby (2003), Rossi et al. (2005) and Train (2009), we now explain the
particular version of the Gibbs sampler that we construct.
    We assume that the waiting time and price coefficients for each individual are ad-
ditive in time of day, location, and an individual specific shifter that is normally dis-
tributed:
                               w        ^ = i + a + a
                                i,ht ,a,a
                                            w   w
                                                    ^ + ht ,
                                                    w
                                                                                       (8)


                               ip,ht ,a,a
                                        ^ = i + a + a
                                            p   w
                                                    ^ + ht .
                                                    w
                                                                                         (9)

    Suppose that i  N (µ, ), where i = (w       i , i ), the vector of coefficients that vary
                                                     p

at the individual level. The matrix  denotes the variance of the individual specific
components of the coefficients as well as their covariance. The covariance w, p tells us
whether people who are more elastic to waiting times are also more elastic to price. We
would expect this to be true since the utility of income should be related to opportunity
costs. However, one can also imagine segments of the population who are wealthy and
yet have an abundance of disposable time, such as individuals who may be well-off and
retired.
                                                  
                                                          
                                             w      w , p
                                    =
                                                          
                                                                                         (10)
                                          w, p  p
                                                          

   We assume that µ  N (µ0 , 0 ), where 0 is a diffuse prior (unboundedly large
variance). We assume that the hyper-parameters of the variance are Inverse-Wishart,
0  IW (v0 , S 0 ). One can then iteratively update the i -coefficient vector, the mean

                                             18
of the coefficients as well as their standard deviations. The specific assumptions we
make about the priors lead to conjugate distributions where the posterior mean of i is
itself normal and the variance is again in the family of inverse gamma distributions. To
describe the updating algorithm, let µl be the sample mean of coefficients of iteration l
in the chain, and let S l be the sample variance of the Inverse-Wishart.
    The key simplification exploited in the Gibbs sampler is that one does not have to ob-
tain an analytical expression for the posterior distribution of the i 's, which instead only
needs a proportionality factor that can be easily computed at each step. In particular,
we have
                       K (i | µl , l , yi )  T
                                             t l(yti ; i ) · (i | µ ,  ),
                                               i                   l  l
                                                                                        (11)

where yi is the vector of choices and covariates observed for passenger i with T i obser-
vations and l(yti ; i ) is the likelihood contribution of a particular choice. The iterative
updating is then given by the following steps:

  1. Draw a new posterior mean µl for the distribution of coefficients from N (µl-1 , W
                                                                                      N
                                                                                        ).
                                                  K ·I +N ·S 1
  2. Draw l from IW (K + N, S l ), where S l =       K +N
                                                               ,   and S 1 =   1
                                                                               N
                                                                                   ·   i (i
                                                                                       N l-1
                                                                                               - µl-1 ) ·
     (li-1 - µl-1 ) .

  3. For each i, draw li according to the Metropolis Hastings algorithm, with new
     proposal ipl starting from li-1 using density (i |µl , l ).

   Such an MCMC procedure is known to be slow for a large dimensional parameter
space. To avoid slow convergence we first estimate the model without the random
coefficients using standard maximum likelihood and then employ the Gibbs sampler to
obtain the distribution of random coefficients separately, starting from the maximum
likelihood estimates.


4.2    Value of Time: Estimation Details
From the logit model above we obtain the nvot as the ratio of the price and waiting
time coefficients. To decompose the nvot into the value of time, an additional estima-
tion step is required. Appendix C provides conditions for identification and shows that
we need one location normalization. While our framework allows us to identify the
individual-specific vot at arbitrarily fine geographic and temporal resolutions, practical
data limitations require us to recover these measures at coarser partitions that aggregate
to our locations as defined in Figure 18, at hourly intervals, and in five-percentile bins
of individual-specific price versus waiting time preferences, ip /w i . We use a moment




                                            19
estimator that is based on the simple relationship between the observed nvoti,ht ,aa
                                                                                   ^ and

the unknown pairs of voti,a ^ ,ht and i,a,ht · voti,a,ht :



                                       ^ = voti,a
                            nvoti,ht ,aa        ^ ,ht - i,a,ht · voti,a,ht + i,ht ,aa
                                                                                    ^,   (12)

where we interpret i,ht ,aa^ as orthogonal measurement error. For each i and ht there

are 2 · Na - 1 parameters after normalizing one origin value. For each pair of (i, ht ) we
           2
observe Na   equations.
   Denoting the collection of vot's as votand requiring that all VOT are positive, we
can write our optimization problem as18

                          minimize               2
                                                 i,ht ,aa
                                                        ^
                               vot

                          subject to 0  voti,a,ht , i, ht , a and i,1,h1 = 0 i.

We also normalize the origin vot of location one to zero, consistent with the 12am, lo-
cation one reference category normalization imposed in Equation 4. The normalization
is inconsequential because Na is large and the system is over-identified. In fact, we get
very similar values for almost all normalizations in which an origin value is set to zero.


4.3        Optimal Query Times and Interpretation
Our estimation uses the consumer's choice amongst available trips to estimate the value
of time. It does not rely on how these choices came to be; in particular, it does not rely
on the query times. Furthermore, in contrast to the model in Small (1982), we have not
introduced the notion of an optimal arrival time and have only distinguished between
productive time use at the destination and less productive time use at the origin through
a simple depreciation factor . And yet, given that the decision to move from the origin
to the destination reveals that time at the destination has become more valuable than
time at the origin, it is natural to ask how our framework which only considers choices
over trips connects to the transportation literature, which focuses on optimal scheduling.
The rest of this section provides an informal overview of this interpretation; we relegate
the formal details to Appendix B.
    To illustrate how the consumer chooses when to request a ride, consider the example
in Figure 5. In this example, the value of time at the origin is constant, whereas the
value at the destination jumps up at t , reflecting that the destination becomes more
valuable at t , for instance, due to an upcoming appointment. Assume also that the trip
duration from the origin to the destination is . If the consumer queries the app at time
   18 To   estimate the model we use JuMP (Dunning et al. (2017)).


                                                              20
q, she observes at that time the realized waiting times and bids for each of the available
rides. For instance, in Figure 5, the consumer has a choice between two trips. Trip 1 has
waiting time w1 , so that the consumer departs at q + w1  tO
                                                           1
                                                             and arrives at q + w1 +  tD1
                                                                                          ,
whereas trip 2 has a longer waiting time of w2 > w1 . Given the realized waiting times
and bids, the consumer chooses the best available ride, the utility of which is evaluated
using Equation 1. The consumer chooses the optimal query time before observing the
estimated waiting times and bids. Instead, she forms an expectation of the trip choices
she will face, and chooses her query time to maximize her expected utility.

                              Figure 5: Optimal query times and trip choices

                  $

                                                             trip1: extra time at destination
                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                        vota
                                                                                                           ^



                        trip 1: less time at origin

                                                                                                        votO
                                                                                                           a




                                    1
                                   tO      2
                                          tO                    t       1
                                                                       tD       2
                                                                               tD                        Time

  Note: This graph shows the differences in value that two trips create. It also shows how the destination value changes after t .



   In Appendix B we elaborate on the identification of a model in which query times are
optimally chosen. We are able to show that t is identified under a variety assumptions.
Key to this identification is that, even though the consumer optimizes on the time at
which the ride is requested, they still face uncertainty over the waiting times and prices
they will face. This allows us to infer when a ride would make the consumer late, so
that they are willing to pay for shorter ETAs, and when it would make them arrive
too early, so that they are willing to pay for longer ETAs.19 Furthermore, we show that,
even though the observed trip choices reveal preferences about local deviations from the
optimal departure time, all parameters of the model are identified under two versions of
the model in Equation 1.20 The simplest way for observed choices over local deviations
    19 Using  the language of Equation 1, we can infer when a ETA w is to the left or to the right of the ideal arrival time, t .
    20 In Appendix B we assume that the consumer can finely tune his query time. This is a stylized assumption. However,
any friction that prevents the consumer from fully optimizing over the request time would only make our identification argument
stronger since it would allow us to measure the consumer's willingness to pay for reductions in waiting times when the value at the
origin and the destination are further apart.


                                                                21
to inform us about the value of time more generally is to assume that an individual's
underlying values of time at the origin and the destination is constant over some time
interval. This assumption would imply that the value expressed over small deviations
from the optimal arrival time is linear in time and therefore fully informative about the
value of time further away from the optimal arrival time. This is, for instance, what
Small (1982) implicitly assumes by letting preferences be linear in the distance to the
optimal arrival time.21 A look at the data can help us discern whether linearity is a
good assumption. Figure 14 in Appendix A shows the likelihood of picking a particular
trip as a function of the waiting time, and the likelihood of choosing the inside option
as a function of the minimum wait time. While more explicit conditioning on t is
possible, we interpret our distinction between origin- (voti,a,ht ) and destination-values
(i,a,ht · voti,a,ht ) of time as a reduced form that captures the decline in value attributable
to activities being started (at destinations) and concluded (at origins).


5       Results
We first present the results from the logit-demand model and the implied elasticities for
both waiting time and price. We then present the results on the value of time.


5.1       Logit Model Results
Table 2 shows the coefficients and standard errors that we obtain from the demand
model. The dis-utility of money is higher than the dis-utility from waiting time, and it
is almost identical across working and non-working hours. The intra-daily coefficients
on waiting time vary over time-of-day, increasing in absolute magnitude (becoming
more negative) into the mid-day peak and declining into the evening. In addition, there
is a large amount of origin- and destination-specific heterogeneity in utility. Due to the
large number of coefficients, we show the full set of location estimates separately in
Figure 20.
    The outside option is chosen about 33% of the time. Several coefficients measure
an interaction effect between waiting time and additional factors related to the outside
option: public transit availability, whether the trip is ordered on the street, and the
presence of rain in the hour the trip was ordered. Since the last two trip-specific features
interact with waiting time, their net effects are not immediately apparent. We compute
marginal effects to see the impact: rainfall confers a 0.59% increase in the probability
    21 Note that linear preferences in the distance to the optimal arrival time does not necessarily imply that preferences over wait

times are linear. Instead, in Small (1982) the consumer exhibits risk aversion over wait times. We illustrate this in Figure 16 in
Appendix B.


                                                                22
                      Table 2: Model Coefficient Estimates

Description                                                      Coefficient Std Error
Price 6pm-6am                                                        -1.183                 0.002
Price 6am-6pm                                                        -1.175                 0.003

Waiting        Time     1am-5am                                      -0.018                 0.011
Waiting        Time     6am-9am                                      -0.081                 0.011
Waiting        Time     10am-3pm                                     -0.089                  0.01
Waiting        Time     4pm-6pm                                      -0.062                  0.01
Waiting        Time     7pm-11pm                                     -0.031                  0.01

Waiting × On-Street Order                                            -0.036                 0.002
Waiting × Raining                                                     0.015                 0.004
Waiting Time Squared                                                 -0.006                  0.0

Driver Rating                                                        11.063                 0.097
Car: Mid Quality                                                      0.248                 0.005
Car: High Quality                                                     0.708                 0.009
Trip Speed                                                           -0.051                 0.002
Alt. Transit Available                                                0.044                 0.007
Order on Street                                                       0.211                 0.014
Rain                                                                 -0.148                 0.034
Trip Distance                                                         5.65                  0.071
Waiting × Pickup Location FE 1-30
Waiting × Dropoff Location FE 1-30
Pickup Location FE 1-30                                           Omitted - See Figure 20
Dropoff Location FE 1-30
Hour FE
Note: This table shows coefficient estimates and standard errors from the logit demand model for each
consumer type. The final 120 rows are omitted for exposition. These parameter estimates comprise out-
side option shifters and waiting time preference interactions with each of 30 pickup and dropoff locations
as defined in Section D.1. The omitted results are instead depicted graphically in Figure 20.




                                                  23
of choosing the outside option. On-street ordering leads to a 0.16% increase. Within
the auction, consumers prefer drivers with higher ratings and better cars. They prefer to
use the platform for longer distance trips.
   Table 3 shows the elasticities of price and waiting time, computed as the percent
change in selecting the bid with respect to a percent change in price and waiting time,
respectively.

                                          Table 3: Estimated Elasticities

                                                            Bid Level Elasticities Order Level Elasticities
 Time of Day Individual Type
                                                            Price Waiting Time Price Waiting Time
                    Overall                                 -4.37           -1.01             -3.9              -0.89
                    H Price, H Wait Sensitivity             -8.59           -1.81            -7.36              -1.53
 Daytime
                    H Price, L Wait Sensitivity             -2.86           -0.85             -2.8              -0.76
 6am-6pm
                    L Price, H Wait Sensitivity              -5.1           -1.04            -4.47              -0.96
                    L Price, L Wait Sensitivity             -2.03           -0.52            -2.06              -0.51

                    Overall                                 -5.49            -0.5             -4.9              -0.49
                    H Price, H Wait Sensitivity             -8.72            -0.8            -7.48              -0.75
 Evening
                    H Price, L Wait Sensitivity              -3.4           -0.37            -3.43              -0.37
 6pm-6am
                    L Price, H Wait Sensitivity             -6.16           -0.52            -5.39              -0.52
                    L Price, L Wait Sensitivity             -2.49           -0.22            -2.63              -0.24
 Note: This table shows the demand elasticity of price and waiting time across daytime and evening hours and individual type
                                                                                                          p
 groupings. We distinguish as high (H) price sensitivity individuals who have below median values for i and low (L) price sen-
                                                              p
 sitivity individuals as those with above median values for i , and similarly for waiting time sensitivity. The first two columns
 show these elasticities among competing bids, reflecting the change in demand due to a 1% change in price or waiting time on
 a single bid. The second two columns show the elasticities with respect to choosing the outside option, reflecting a change in
 demand due to a 1% change in price or waiting time on all bids.


    The table shows a set of bid-level elasticities, which measure the competitiveness of
alternative bids, as well as a set of order-level elasticities, which measure the competi-
tiveness of the outside option. We see a general pattern that consumers are much more
price elastic than waiting-time elastic: price elasticities range from four to eleven times
higher, with starker differences in the evening.
    In column 2 we use the estimated joint distribution of random coefficients to cate-
gorize four types of individuals as high (H) and low (L) sensitivity to price and waiting
time. High price-sensitivity individuals have below median ip , meaning they experi-
ence the highest disutility from price. Likewise, high waiting-time-sensitivity individu-
als have below median w   i . Consumers have highly heterogeneous elasticities: between
the two extreme groups, both price and waiting time elasticities differ by about a factor
of four. We estimate a modest positive correlation between the sensitivity to price and
waiting times: more price-sensitive passengers are also more waiting time sensitive,
and vice-versa.


                                                               24
   These elasticity estimates convey that both price and waiting time are important
factors in the consumer's decisions, and that waiting time elasticities vary throughout
the day in ways that reflect the varying value of work and non-work tasks.22
   The estimated model fits the data well. In Section E.3, we provide details on how
our model fits to both aggregate moments and specific choices.


5.2       The Net Value of Time
We now present results for the willingness-to-pay for waiting time reductions implied
by our estimates, which we refer to as the net value of time (nvot), scaled to USD per
hour. nvot represents the difference between the value of time attainable at a destina-
tion from the value of time attainable at the trip origin, given the activities and features
of each location at each time for each person. We compute the nvot using the coeffi-
cients in Table 2 together with Equation 6, where we account for all trip-specific and
environmental factors that affect valuations for the trip and the outside option, such as
public transit and rainfall.
    Table 4 summarizes the nvot results. The overall mean nvot across all trips is
$13.47 per hour. This means that an average person faced with the option to save
five minutes would be willing to pay $13.47  (5/60) or $1.12. There are three im-
portant sources of heterogeneity underlying this average: individual-, time-of-day- and
location-specific heterogeneity. The most prominent source of heterogeneity is between
individuals. We again report four groups of individuals, those with above- and below-
median random coefficient estimates on both price and waiting time preferences. The
low price sensitivity and high waiting time sensitivity group exhibits nvot nearly twice
the overall average at $23.39 per hour, while individuals with low sensitivity to price
and high sensitivity to waiting time have an average nvot of $5.00 per hour. All groups
have similar time-of-day patterns, with the highest values in the morning between 6am
and 9am. Our value of time estimates are approximately 50% higher in the late morn-
ing and mid-day hours than in the evening and overnight. Finally, we divide Prague's
spatial regions into core and non-core, where core regions are the locations including
and adjacent to regions 11 and 20 as depicted in Figure 18. In Table 4 we label as urban
core trips any trip that involves one of these regions as either origin or destination. We
find that the nvot for trips in core regions is on average 41% higher than for non-core
trips.


    22 We can also decompose elasticities by trip origins and destinations as with Table 9 and Table 10. Broadly similar patterns

between demand types are revealed, though we see that there are large differences in each elasticity measure from one location to
another. In general, price elasticities are more variable than waiting time elasticities.


                                                              25
                                  Table 4: Net Value Of Time Estimates

                                                         Net Value of Time (NVOT)
Subsample
                                                12a­6a 6a­9a 10a­2p 3p­6p 7p­12a All Hours
All Types                                       12.56 16.38 16.63 13.91 10.96     13.47

H   Price,     H Wait Sensitivity                14.44 17.29 17.46                   15.53       13.52          15.03
H   Price,     L Wait Sensitivity                 4.34 6.76 7.08                      5.19        3.82           5.0
L   Price,     H Wait Sensitivity                22.51 26.21 26.44                   23.96       20.01          23.39
L   Price,     L Wait Sensitivity                 8.99 12.41 12.91                    9.85        2.33          10.02

Urban Core Trips                                 12.96 17.1 17.31                    14.37        11.4          13.97
Non-Core Trips                                    9.93 11.78 9.61                    10.57         7.6          9.94
Note: This table shows nvot estimates implied by the logit demand model. All estimates are presented in US dollars.


    To interpret our results in finer detail, we note that even a given rider may have
a higher or lower nvot when the circumstances surrounding a ride are more or less
urgent. We can therefore view any nvot estimate that fixes an individual, time-of-
day and location to be an average across the circumstances that individual faces. In
Section E.6 we demonstrate that our data can be used to recover different nvot estimates
between trips with a drop-off time close to the start of a new hour, which are more likely
to involve deadlines, and those at different times. This analysis provides an example of
how we might recover different types of trip-specific heterogeneity that is otherwise
averaged in the results reported in Table 4.
    These results provide insight into the interpretation of geographic (GPS) time-use
data, such as cellphone location data. In several studies, authors use this type of data
and interpret aggregate location decisions as a measure of place-specific amenities or
productive capacity (see, e.g., Kreindler and Miyauchi (2019); Athey et al. (2019)).
    Our analysis is, to our knowledge, the first to pair highly granular spatial data, which
records where people go within a city, with direct nvot measures, which capture the
relative attractiveness of locations as per our illustration in Figure 4. A natural question
is, therefore, how close location values that are derived from GPS tracking are to our
direct measures of the relative attractiveness of locations. To answer this question we
correlate our WTP for waiting time reductions when going from a to a      ^ with the fraction
of all trips that go from a to a
                               ^ . The two measures line up well. Figure 6 shows a scatter
plot of the nine hundred different directional data points as well as the binscatter points
on top. As the plot illustrates, the two measures are highly significantly correlated with
a correlation coefficient of 0.56 and a t-statistic of 20.46. This correlation is highest
during the middle of the day and lowest at midnight.


                                                            26
    These results convey that travel flows appear to be a good but not perfect measure
of time valuations. The variation in the correlation between our vot measure and travel
flows throughout the day gives further guidance on when travel flows align better with
place-specific values of time. When available, value of time estimates based on revealed
preferences in transportation markets provide a sharper quantification of the relative
attractiveness of locations than the use of travel flows alone. In the next section, we
explore this idea further by estimating the model outlined in Section 3, which micro-
founds the expressed willingness to pay to reduce waiting times through place-specific
values of time.

                                      Figure 6: Relationship between Travel Flows and the nvot

                                1.4
      Route Flow (% of Total)




                                1.2

                                1.0

                                0.8

                                0.6

                                0.4

                                0.2

                                0.0
                                       -10             0                10                     20
                                                NVOT for origin-destination pair (per Hour)

Note: This graph shows the scatter (transparent round dots) and binscatter (white diamonds) relationship between the nvot for an
                        origin-destination pair and the respective traffic flow (as a fraction of the total).




5.3                         The Value of Time
Equation 2 expresses how a transportation-specific measure ­ the willingness to pay for
waiting time reductions, or nvot ­ is related to the value of time. A measure of the
value of time (vot) is useful outside the context of transportation and can be seen as a
summary measure of the value that a person expresses for the set of activities at a place
and time of day. In this section we highlight several stylized facts about the distribution
of vot across places, time, and individuals.
   Figure 7 shows the unconditional distribution of the value of time (USD/hour) that
we back out. The histogram reveals large variation. The interquartile range goes from
$6.80 per hour to $16.30 per hour. The tenth percentile of the distribution is $3.70 per
hour and the ninetieth percentile is $21.30 per hour.


                                                                 27
                                      Figure 7: Histogram of vot

      0.06



      0.04



      0.02



      0.00
             $0                   $10                    $20                   $30                    $40
                                    Location Value of Time $/Hour

             Note: This graph shows the unconditional distribution of the values of time that we back out.



Spatial Heterogeneity Figure 8 shows vot heterogeneity by location, measured as
the average across people and time of day of all vot estimates for this location. Go-
ing from the lowest-value location to the highest-value location implies a difference of
$10.83 in the hourly value of time, or an increase of 51.96%. However, the interquar-
tile range is already substantially smaller with a difference of $2.89, or 17.78%. This
relatively flat distribution suggests that location heterogeneity is not the main driver of
variation in the value of time.
    These results offer a direct measure of the short-run monetary value that people
assign to spending time at different places. This distribution is different from other
measures studied in the literature. For example, economists have devoted considerable
attention to measuring the long run effect of place of residence on individual outcomes
(Chetty et al., 2018; Couture et al., 2019). However, place of residence might be an im-
perfect measure of the extent to which people benefit from the resources that different
places have to offer. For instance, a study of "experienced segregation" based on GPS
data reveals that time use across different spatial regions is less segregated than resi-
dential locations (Athey et al., 2019). Another example is Davis et al. (2017) who use
Yelp data to show that restaurant consumption is only half as segregated as residences.
Our vot measure encompasses the valuations stemming from the full set of activities
of individuals in our sample.
    To explore how our value of time measures compare to other quantities that capture
spatial differences in economic activity, we correlate our vot estimates with real estate
values. We use a binscatter plot to show this relationship in Figure 9. There is a strong
positive relationship between real estate prices and our vot measures. However, the


                                                         28
                                                                             Figure 8: Map of vot Estimates in Prague
29




                                                                                                                                                                                     Core / Periphery
                                                                                                                                                                                     Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                 Value of Time (USD/hr)
                                                                                                                                                                                     9.60 - 12.90
                                                                                                                                                                                     12.90 - 13.20
                                                                                                                                                                                     13.20 - 13.70
                                                                                                                                                                                     13.70 - 14.20
                                                                                                                                                                                     14.20 - 15.00
                                                                                                                                                                                     15.00 - 15.60
                                                                                                                                                                                     15.60 - 16.10
                                                                                                                                                                                     16.10 - 21.00

     Note: This figure depicts each GPS destination point in the Liftago data shaded by the average value of time in that destination, or votda across places a  {1, . . . , 30} within the city limits of Prague. White
                                                  lines depict the city's street map. The bold black line delineates the boundaries that we specify as the urban core.
"returns" to higher land values are diminishing. From a regression of log-vot on log
land-values we measure an elasticity of 0.25 ( p < 0.001). So for every 1% higher land
value we measure a value of time that is 0.25% higher. On the one hand, this strong
positive relationship validates our measures since we have not used land values at any
point in the estimation. On the other hand, we find that with an R2 of less than 0.02,
real estate prices can only explain a very small percentage of the variation in vot. This
finding highlights how our value of time measures serve as a unique short-run analog
to other widely available long-run measures of economic value across space. Such
measures are important when policies target short-run decision making. We illustrate
this in our application on procurement incentives.

                                Figure 9: Location-specific vot and Land Values


                          $15
 Value of Time per Hour




                          $14


                          $13


                          $12


                          $11

                                   $500                       $1,000                         $1,500
                                                  Land Value per sq-meter

Note: This figure presents a binscatter plot of the value of time in each location compared to the average land values within each
location. The x-axis orders the thirty locations by their average land value. The y-axis shows the average value of time in each of
                                                           these locations.




Time-of-day and Person Heterogeneity For clarity of exposition, we group time of
day into two categories ­ work-hours, defined as the hours 6am­6pm, and non-work-
hours. Table 5 gives an overview of means and standard deviations of the vot estimates
across these times of day for the four different groups of passengers. During both work
and non-work hours, the (L Price, H Wait) group expresses a vot that is almost three
times that of the (H Price, L Wait) group. Within type, however, the difference between
work-hours and non-work-hours is modest. Across all groups the ratio of non-work-
hours to work-hours vot ranges from 74% to 87%. Those ratios are ordered in terms of
the average vot of these groups with (L Price, H Wait) types having the highest and (H
Price, L Wait) types the lowest.

                                                               30
                              Table 5: Summary Statistics of Value of Time

                                      Work Time (USD)             Non Work Time (USD)                Non Work Time vot /
                                      Mean     STD                Mean       STD                      Work Time vot (%)
Location Values (vi,a,ht )
All                                   17.15          10.29         14.02            10.39                        0.82
H Price, H Wait Sensitivity           19.18            7.0         15.95            7.05                         0.83
H Price, L Wait Sensitivity           9.79            4.82          7.25             6.24                        0.74
L Price, H Wait Sensitivity           27.05          12.43         23.45            12.73                        0.87
L Price, L Wait Sensitivity           12.66           4.64          9.83            5.85                         0.78
Note: This table shows summary statistics on the estimated value of time overall and across four groups
of individuals. We separate estimates by the work hours from 6am­6pm and non work hours from
6pm­6am. The last column shows value of non-work time as a percentage of the value of work time.


5.3.1      Variance Decomposition

Our estimates also allow us to study whether different strata of society value different
places differently. We exploit the fact that our data contain a panel of riders, so we can
observe the same rider making decisions about time allocations across many different
places. If most of the variation in the value of time is driven by places and not people,
this would suggest that place-specific factors provide equal benefit to different people.
For example, there might be differences in the provision of public goods across places,
which are equally available to all people. On the other hand, differences in the value
of time in different places might be predominantly driven by differences across people.
This would be true, for example, if people with high value of time derive utility from
places solely because their workplaces are there, and otherwise derive no amenity value
from public services.
    We perform a variance decomposition to separate these two sources of variation and
investigate their relationship in more detail. A variance decomposition also allows us
to investigate whether people with high average vot spend more time in places with
high average vot.23 The measurement of such sorting effects has been of long standing
interest in the economics of marriage markets (Becker (1973)), labor markets, (Abowd
et al., 1999; Eeckhout and Kircher, 2018; Shimer and Smith, 2000) and, more recently,
housing markets (Couture et al. (2019)). Our approach is similar to the strand of labor
economics literature that decomposes wages into firm specific components and worker
specific components, most importantly Abowd et al. (1999). For the variance decom-




     23 The location specific estimates should not necessarily be interpreted as deep structural parameters that are inherent to a

location. They could capture certain agglomeration effects, such as the taste for meeting certain people who typically can be found
at a given location.


                                                               31
position we derive an accounting equation from the following regression model:

                                                voti,a,ht = i + ht + a +               i,t ,                                     (13)

where i is a person fixed effect, ht is a time-period fixed effect, a is a location fixed
effect, and i,t is a residual. Due to the curse of dimensionality, we run this specification
by replacing individual values with percentile means, so i becomes an indicator of the
percentile bin.24 This regression then gives rise to the following variance decomposi-
tion:

   Var(vot) = Var() + Var() + Var()+
                                               2 · Cov(, ) + 2 · Cov(, ) + 2 · Cov(, ) + Var( ). (14)

Table 6 shows the results from this exercise. At 78%, by far the largest contributor to
the observed variance of the vot are differences across people. In comparison, location-
specific variance is small and accounts for 10% of the total. Intra-daily changes in the
vot contribute another 9%.

                            Table 6: Variance Decomposition of the Value of Time

         Var(i )        Var(ht )      Var(a )       2 · Cov(i , a )      2 · Cov(i , ht )      2 · Cov(a , ht )       Var(   i,t )

         27.7              3.25          3.5              -0.4                 -0.1                   0.3                1.6
         0.78              0.09          0.1             -0.01                -0.002                 0.008              0.04
         Note: The first row of this table shows the variances of each of the components of the model
         in Equation 13. The second row shows the variance of each of the components divided by the
         total variance, which can loosely be interpreted as fractions of the total variance.


   Moreover, the covariances show that high vot people do not spend more time in high
vot locations. With a covariance of -0.4, we observe a slightly negative sorting effect.
Similarly, there is a negative correlation between people who express a high value of
time and the times of day with higher average vot.25

5.3.2           Discrepancy between Value of Time at Origin and Destination

We next discuss our estimates of differentially effective time use at origin and destina-
tion, as measured by i,a,ht . Table 7 gives an overview. Across the entire population,

       24 Our   panel is not long enough to observe a given individual in all possible combinations of origin, destination and time of
day.
     25 To address the concern that our results could be driven by specific aspects of the decomposition, we have repeated this same

exercise with the nvot as opposed to vot. Location fixed effects in this exercise are defined over directional pairs since the net
value of time is defined over those pairs. Under this alternative exercise, we come to a very similar conclusion. Most of the variation
is driven by differences across people instead of differences across places.


                                                                   32
unplanned time at the origin is only 31% as valuable as time at the destination during
work hours, while it is 36% as valuable during non-work hours. Holding the location
fixed, meetings and other types of work-required planning therefore lead to a larger
discrepancy in the value of planned and unplanned time. Moreover, there is a large
difference in  within the population. Not surprisingly, people that are more waiting
time sensitive (H Wait Sensitivity) have a larger discrepancy in the value of planned
and unplanned time. This shows that higher willingness to pay for lower waiting times
is driven both by a larger inherent value of time at any given location and also a bigger
discrepancy between the value of planned and unplanned time.

                          Table 7: Summary Statistics for i,a,ht

                                                     Work Time      Non Work Time
                                                     Mean STD       Mean    STD
     Origin Depreciation Factors (i,a,ht ) in USD
     All                                             0.18    0.17     0.2       0.24
     H Price, H Wait Sensitivity                     0.14    0.11    0.12       0.11
     H Price, L Wait Sensitivity                     0.32    0.34     0.5       0.79
     L Price, H Wait Sensitivity                     0.14    0.12    0.14       0.12
     L Price, L Wait Sensitivity                     0.18    0.18    0.21       0.25
     Note: This table shows summary statistics for our estimates that capture how much
     less productive time at the origin is relative to the destination.




To summarize our results, we find large differences in the value of time across indi-
viduals and also large differences in differentially productive time use across locations.
Most of the variation in the value of time comes from person-specific heterogeneity
as opposed to location-specific heterogeneity. Interestingly, these results suggest that
in the short run, different places do not confer benefits that are equally valued by ev-
eryone. These results are also an important short-run complement to the recent debate
around the importance of place-specific factors for long-run outcomes. Another inter-
esting implication lies in the finding that the value of time for high types can, in part, be
explained by a greater need for planning as measured by the origin depreciation factor
. This suggests that high vot types depend to a larger extent on complementary inputs
that require coordination. For example, high skilled work places might require more
meetings and coordination with others to use time productively.




                                             33
6      Application: Highway Procurement
The value of time and its heterogeneity impacts many markets in a variety of ways, but
nowhere is its impact more direct than in the transportation sector, as a central goal of
roads and transit infrastructure is to generate time savings.
    In this section, we consider the problem of using time-incentives in a highway pro-
curement setting. By design, repairing and maintaining highways entails closures which
slow down traffic and may induce substantial congestion. Some state and local author-
ities use time-incentives as part of procurement procedures, which enable contractors
to earn higher payments for faster completion or require them to pay fines for delays.
This problem was introduced to the economics literature by Lewis and Bajari (2011),
where the authors examine CalTrans data to study the welfare gains associated with pro-
curement auctions that incorporate bidding on both time to completion and price into a
scoring auction framework. The authors find that such procurement mechanisms used
by CalTrans raised social welfare by 30% of project costs by generating time savings
despite higher project prices.
    To quantify the social cost of traffic delays due to construction, the authors apply a
uniform $12 per hour value of time. This value is derived from engineering estimates
and accounts for the possibility of multiple passengers in the same car.26 Since our
approach allows us to recover economic estimates of time valuation, we re-consider
the problem of highway procurement and calculating the social costs of road work.
Beyond quantifying average time costs, we use our estimates to further explore how
optimal time-incentives are impacted by underlying heterogeneity in the value of time.
By examining the impact of road closures in different areas of the city and, potentially,
at only certain times of day, we show that the social cost of these closures can vary
considerably. This result underscores the importance of incorporating value of time
heterogeneity into optimal time incentives.
    As in Lewis and Bajari (2011), the social cost of a delay associated with a project j
can be written as


                         social cost j = delay j · traffic volume j · time value j .


   Repair projects cause delays due to reduced travel speeds. The delay depends on
the nature of road repairs, for example the number of lanes that are closed and the
length of the closure. Although road work often creates delays by lowering speed limits
    26 CalTrans does not specify the source of the underlying calculation. Updated estimates from the same source now

put this value at $13 per hour. See https://dot.ca.gov/-/media/dot-media/programs/maintenance/documents/
office-of-concrete-pavement/life-cycle-cost-analysis/value-of-user-time-2013-a11y.pdf.


                                                        34
and reducing lanes, the realized traffic volumes and speeds should still be regarded as
equilibrium quantities; some travelers will re-optimize plans and activities in the face of
delays. Since we do not observe specific roadways or construction projects, we follow
Lewis and Bajari (2011) in considering a hypothetical setting where the equilibrium
impact of a closure results in three minutes of added delay, which is roughly equivalent
to a decline in speed from 55mph to 35mph for five miles.
    To map delays to time costs, we first use our vot measures by origin and destination.
When delays are unanticipated, travelers will not plan ahead, leading to a late arrival
at the cost of time at the destination, or vot. Conversely, anticipated delays will lead
to early departure, at the cost of time at the origin, i.e.,  · vot. By examining overall
averages we derive that anticipated delay costs to travelers on our platform at 9am are
equal to $0.15 per trip while unanticipated costs are equal to $0.76 per trip. At 9pm,
however, these costs drop to $0.09 and $0.54. Underlying these averages, there are
important spatial differences. On some routes, the average cost per trip is as high as
$2.50. How much construction delays are anticipated by drivers will vary according to
several factors, such as how long the delays are in effect, how many drivers are repeated
users of the road, and how many check traffic conditions before driving. Hereafter
we assume that half of drivers face expected congestion and half do not. This split is
motivated by the proportion of trips during an average weekday in Prague that occur
during the commuting times of 6a­10a and 2p­7p, which are 51 percent of total traffic
volume.
    To extrapolate from our setting to the population of Prague drivers, we need to ad-
dress the selection of users in our platform. The population within Prague from which
our estimates are drawn (i.e., taxi passengers) is likely to be selected on high-vot indi-
viduals compared with the average Prague commuter. In order to extrapolate from our
hourly congestion cost estimates, we first adjust these costs to reflect the opportunity
cost of car commuters who are not on the Liftago platform.
    We take advantage of the fact that the value of time that we measure at 9am is
very close to the wage rate of those individuals as measured by a small survey that we
conducted among passengers together with Liftago. We find that the mean wage rate
among survey participants is $15.23, very close to our measurement of the vot during
work hours, which is $15.44. This time period also most plausibly captures the value
assigned to work related activities. We therefore assume that at 9:00am, a typical work-
day starting time, our vot estimate is equal to users' average wage. The mean wage
among Prague residents, however, is $9.15 per-hour. We specify an adjustment factor
 = 9.15/15.44 = 0.59 and scale all vot results by . Combining these assumptions
allows us to infer, for example, that at 5pm when Liftago riders face an unanticipated


                                            35
congestion cost of $1.50 per trip, the average car commuter would face a cost of $0.89
per trip. Finally, we also scale by the average occupancy rate of cars in Prague, which is
1.3 as reported by the 2018 Prague Transportation Yearbook. The final scaling factor is
therefore 0.59 · 1.23 = 0.767. The average scaled per-trip delay costs due to lost origin
and destination vot are $0.098 and $0.51, respectively.

                    Table 8: Estimated Per-Trip Closure Costs by Time of Day

                                                           Time-of-Day
                                    3:00am 6:00am 9:00am 12:00pm 3:00pm 6:00pm 9:00pm 12:00am
     A. Uniform Cost Baseline
     Uniform Price            $0.30              $0.30     $0.30      $0.30      $0.30     $0.30     $0.30      $0.30
     B. All Routes with Time Variation
     All Routes                $0.31             $0.29     $0.36      $0.36      $0.37     $0.34     $0.27      $0.24
     % change                   0.02             -0.05     0.17       0.19       0.21      0.12       -0.1       -0.2
     All, Volume Weighted      $0.05             $0.06     $0.51      $0.52      $0.54     $0.56     $0.33      $0.12
     % change                  -0.83              -0.8      0.68       0.71       0.77      0.85      0.08       -0.6
     C. Routes by Destination and Time
     Highest-VOT Destination $0.26     $0.31               $0.42      $0.35      $0.35     $0.39     $0.36      $0.26
     % change                   -0.13   0.01                0.38       0.16       0.15      0.28      0.19      -0.14
     Median-VOT Destination     $0.20  $0.20               $0.26      $0.27      $0.30     $0.32     $0.27      $0.24
     % change                   -0.35  -0.35               -0.13      -0.12       -0.0      0.07      -0.1       -0.2
     Lowest-VOT Destination     $0.07  $0.02               $0.11      $0.08      $0.13     $0.11     $0.13      $0.12
     % change                   -0.78  -0.93               -0.65      -0.73      -0.58     -0.62     -0.58      -0.59

 Note: This table summarizes estimates of per-trip costs of three-minute delays by time of day. Each column aggregates results
                into three-hour bins so that, for example, 3:00am refers to the period between 12:01am-3:00am.



    Table 8 summarizes the heterogeneity in travel costs after scaling by . Panel A
displays the baseline cost as the mean value of time for a three minute delay with fifty
percent weights on both vot and  · vot, or $0.30 per trip. This value represents our best
estimate of the average cost per-trip of any delay, equivalent to $6 per hour, or around
60 percent of mean wages in Prague. Panel B shows the average costs, which we now
allow to vary by time-of-day. Costs during the middle of the day are around 20 percent
higher than in our uniform cost baseline, and costs in the evening are 20 percent lower.
The second row of Panel B re-weights trip-costs by the overall share of Prague traffic
volume by time-of-day, which we obtained from the Prague Transportation Yearbook.
This row takes into account that traffic volume is very different during different hours,
and thus if Prague were to apply time-of-day rules or incentives to construction, the
hours from 9pm­6am would only cost 10­20% of the short-run welfare lost to a similar
delay in mid-day. Panel C further decomposes costs into different routes. It reports the
mean cost of trips ending in the highest-, median-, and lowest-VOT destinations. The
highest-VOT destination trips are 2­4 times as expensive as the lowest-VOT destination
trips, which would lead the uniform baseline to over-estimate by nearly double (93%) in


                                                             36
some times-of-day and locations and under-estimate by up to 40 percent in other times-
of-day and places. Panels B and C thus illustrate that there could be significant saving
from timing road closures optimally, and from tailoring fines and rewards to projects
based on their locations and the hours of closure.
                           Figure 10: Estimated Per-Trip Closure Costs by Route

                   150




                   100
       Frequency




                   50




                    0
                         0.0         0.5               1.0           1.5                  2.0               2.5
                                                     Trip Cost by Route (usd)

 Note: This histogram shows route-specific estimates of mean per-trip costs of a three-minute delay across each of 900 distinct
                                                          routes.



    While Table 8 summarizes the importance of the underlying heterogeneity and of
time in particular, costs are borne on a route-by-route basis. Since we estimate valua-
tions over 30 origins and destinations, Figure 10 shows the mean per-trip costs of delays
across each of 900 routes. In this figure we report weighted averages over time of day
and person-specific variation. This is the appropriate metric for measuring delay costs
when closures cannot be conducted during selected times of day. Even projects that
require closures throughout the day, such as road re-paving, exhibit substantial hetero-
geneity in the social cost imposed on road users. To maintain the right incentives and
avoid lengthy closures that would result in high delay costs, procurers might need to
impose fines that vary according to the impacted routes.
    Using information on the average daily traffic flows across a few key routes in the
city, we can derive some illustrative examples. We pair reported traffic flows with our
estimated delay cost in locations connected by each route and compute the weighted
average vot over the associated trips. For example, a hypothetical three-minute delay
along the Zlichovsky tunnel, which sees an average of 84,000 cars per day, would im-
pose social costs from $31, 600 to $35, 500 per day depending on the composition of

                                                              37
the direction of travel. A delay along the nearby Brusnicky tunnel, which sees 77,000
cars per day, would impose social costs from $29, 600 to $31, 800 per day. In contrast,
by assuming a uniform average value of time of $0.30 per car trip, the costs of these
two hypothetical delays are $25, 200 and $23, 100 respectively. The differences could
lead the city to under-price time-savings related to construction on these specific routes
by up to 40%, or about $300,000 for a 30-day span.
    These results underscore the importance of using economically relevant VOT mea-
surements when designing procurement incentives. The ability to draw insights from
market behavior to quantify the costs of delays can be valuable for local policy mak-
ers and regulators. In order to determine what incentives to offer, our method could
be used to measure the costs of delays due to each additional day of construction, as
long as anticipated delay time estimates for the particular project are available. Our cost
estimates can also be used in determining the value of new infrastructure, such as the
benefits from adding a new lane to a road, upgrading an intersection, or adding pub-
lic transportation services. In each of these cases we would need to have information
about the specific project to explicitly characterize its impact on traffic speeds and any
spillover effects to nearby roads, but an equilibrium analysis quantifying the costs and
benefits would require the same type of time valuations that we have obtained with our
approach.


7    Conclusions
The trade-off between time and money is at the heart of many important economic
decisions. In this paper we use data from a large European ride share platform that offers
menus with explicit trade-offs between time and money. We use this unique feature to
estimate a demand model based on choices from these menus. This estimation allows
us to recover riders' preferences and demand elasticities over time and money as well
as their implied willingness-to-pay to reduce waiting time. We provide a framework to
translate the estimates from this demand model into the implied value of time across
different locations, times-of-day, and types of individuals.
    Our demand model reveals noteworthy patterns in how individuals value time and
money. Consumers are substantially more price elastic than waiting time elastic. There
is large variation in the willingness to pay for waiting time reductions in the population
of riders. We show how these differences vary throughout the day; for instance, we
show that the willingness to pay is higher during work hours. We find that our nvot
measures are highly correlated with travel flows across routes, justifying the use of
travel flows to measure the relative attractiveness of different places.

                                            38
    We decompose the demand model estimates to quantify the value of time. We again
find substantial heterogeneity by location, time-of-day, and individuals. A variance
decomposition reveals that 79% of the overall heterogeneity is driven by individual
differences. Once individual differences are accounted for, only a small fraction of the
variation is due to location and time of day. In contrast with the literature on residential
sorting, our results suggest that people with a higher value of time do not sort into
locations with a higher value of time. This suggests that the valuation of places in the
short-run may be more egalitarian than that implied by long-run decisions in housing
markets.
    By highlighting the underlying heterogeneity in the value of time, we show how our
method can be used to target optimal procurement incentives in a more fine-grained
way than standard industry practice. By combining our estimates with information
from Prague's 2018 Transportation Yearbook, we show that using a uniform, city-wide
measure of vot to infer the costs associated with road closures would mis-price delays
by up to ninety percent along some routes.
    Although our approach relies in part on unique features of our platform, we believe
that it could be adapted to conduct a similar study within the US, for example with data
from Uber or Lyft. Our approach shows that data generated by ride hail companies
and other private transportation services can be exploited to better understand urban
infrastructure and urban economic activity more broadly.




                                            39
Bibliography
Abowd, John M, Francis Kramarz, and David N Margolis, "High wage workers and
 high wage firms," Econometrica, 1999, 67 (2), 251­333.

Abrantes, Pedro AL and Mark R Wardman, "Meta-analysis of UK values of travel
 time: An update," Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 2011, 45
 (1), 1­17.

Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, "Life-cycle prices and production," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 2007, 97 (5), 1533­1559.

  , , and Loukas Karabarbounis, "Recent developments in the economics of time
  use," Annu. Rev. Econ., 2012, 4 (1), 373­397.

Allen, Treb and Costas Arkolakis, "The welfare effects of transportation infrastructure
  improvements," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

Almagro, Milena and Tom´  as Dominguez-Iino, "Location Sorting and Endogenous
  Amenities: Evidence from Amsterdam," 2019.

Athey, Susan, Billy Ferguson, Matthew Gentzkow, and Tobias Schmidt, "Experi-
  enced Seggregation," 2019.

Becker, Gary S, "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," The Economic Journal, 1965,
  pp. 493­517.

  , "A theory of marriage: Part I," Journal of Political economy, 1973, 81 (4), 813­846.

Belenky, Peter, "Revised departmental guidance on valuation of travel time in eco-
  nomic analysis," US Department of Transportation. Washington, DC, 2011.

Bento, Antonio, Kevin Roth, and Andrew R Waxman, "Avoiding traffic congestion
  externalities? the value of urgency," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research 2020.

Bloom, Nicholas, James Liang, John Roberts, and Zhichun Jenny Ying, "Does
  working from home work? Evidence from a Chinese experiment," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (1), 165­218.

Bonhomme, St´  ephane, Thibaut Lamadon, and Elena Manresa, "Discretizing un-
  observed heterogeneity," University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Eco-
  nomics Working Paper, 2017, (2019-16).

                                          40
Borjesson, Maria, Mogens Fosgerau, and Staffan Algers, "On the income elasticity
  of the value of travel time," Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice,
  2012, 46 (2), 368 ­ 377.

Brancaccio, Giulia, Myrto Kalouptsidi, and Theodore Papageorgiou, "Geography,
  Search Frictions and Endogenous Trade Costs," 2017.

  , , , and Nicola Rosaia, "Search Frictions and Efficiency in Decentralized Trans-
  port Markets," Technical Report, mimeo, Harvard University 2020.

Buchholz, Nicholas, "Spatial Equilibrium, Search Frictions and Dynamic Efficiency in
  the Taxi Industry," 2018.

  , Laura Doval, Jakub Kastl, Filip Matejka, and Tobias Salz, "Supplement to "The
  Value of Time: Evidence From Auctioned Cab Rides"," 2020. Click here.

Camerer, Colin, Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Richard Thaler, "Labor
  supply of New York City cabdrivers: One day at a time," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 1997, pp. 407­441.

Castillo, Juan Camilo, "Who Benefits from Surge Pricing?," Available at SSRN
  3245533, 2019.

Chen, M Keith, Judith A Chevalier, Peter E Rossi, and Emily Oehlsen, "The value
 of flexible work: Evidence from uber drivers," Technical Report, National Bureau of
 Economic Research 2017.

Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R Jones, and Sonya R
 Porter, "The opportunity atlas: Mapping the childhood roots of social mobility,"
 Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Cirillo, Cinzia and Kay W Axhausen, "Evidence on the distribution of values of travel
  time savings from a six-week diary," Transportation Research Part A: policy and
  practice, 2006, 40 (5), 444­457.

Cohen, Peter, Robert Hahn, Jonathan Hall, Steven Levitt, and Robert Metcalfe,
  "Using big data to estimate consumer surplus: The case of uber," Technical Report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.

Couture, Victor, Cecile Gaubert, Jessie Handbury, and Erik Hurst, "Income growth
  and the distributional effects of urban spatial sorting," Technical Report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

                                         41
  , Gilles Duranton, and Matthew A Turner, "Speed," Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 2018, 100 (4), 725­739.

Crawford, Vincent P and Juanjuan Meng, "New york city cab drivers' labor sup-
  ply revisited: Reference-dependent preferences with rationalexpectations targets for
  hours and income," The American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (5), 1912­1932.

Davis, Donald R, Jonathan I Dingel, Joan Monras, and Eduardo Morales, "How
  Segregated is Urban Consumption?," 2017.

Domencich, Thomas A and Daniel McFadden, "Urban travel demand-a behavioral
  analysis," Technical Report 1975.

Dunning, Iain, Joey Huchette, and Miles Lubin, "JuMP: A modeling language for
 mathematical optimization," SIAM Review, 2017, 59 (2), 295­320.

Duranton, Gilles and Matthew A Turner, "The fundamental law of road congestion:
 Evidence from US cities," American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (6), 2616­52.

Eeckhout, Jan and Philipp Kircher, "Assortative matching with large firms," Econo-
  metrica, 2018, 86 (1), 85­132.

Engelson, Leonid and Mogens Fosgerau, "The cost of travel time variability: three
  measures with properties," Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 2016,
  91, 555­564.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D and Edouard Schaal, "Optimal transport networks in spatial
  equilibrium," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Farber, Henry S., "Is Tomorrow Another Day? The Labor Supply of New York City
  Cabdrivers," The Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113 (1), 46­82.

Farber, Henry S, "Reference-dependent preferences and labor supply: The case of
  New York City taxi drivers," The American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3), 1069­
  1082.

Fosgerau, Mogens, Katrine Hjorth, and St´ ephanie Vincent Lyk-Jensen, "The Dan-
  ish Value of Time Study," Technical Report, Danmarks Transportforskning, Report
  5, 2007.

Frechette, Guillaume R, Alessandro Lizzeri, and Tobias Salz, "Frictions in a com-
  petitive, regulated market: Evidence from taxis," Technical Report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research 2018.

                                         42
Hall, Jonathan D, "Pareto improvements from Lexus Lanes: The effects of pricing a
 portion of the lanes on congested highways," Journal of Public Economics, 2018,
 158, 113­125.

Hall, Jonathan V, John J Horton, and Daniel T Knoepfle, "Pricing Efficiently in
 Designed Markets: The Case of Ride-Sharing," 2019.

Heblich, Stephan, Stephen J Redding, and Daniel M Sturm, "The making of the
 modern metropolis: evidence from London," Technical Report, National Bureau of
 Economic Research 2018.

Jara-Diaz, Sergio R., Marcela A. Munizaga, Paulina Greeven, Reinaldo Guerra,
  and Kay Axhausen, "Estimating the value of leisure from a time allocation model,"
  Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 2008, 42 (10), 946 ­ 957.

Kreindler, Gabriel E, "The welfare effect of road congestion pricing: Experimental
 evidence and equilibrium implications," Unpublished paper, 2018.

Kreindler, GE and Y Miyauchi, "Measuring commuting and economic activity inside
 cities with cell phone records," Technical Report, Working paper 2019.

Lam, Terence C. and Kenneth A. Small, "The value of time and reliability: measure-
  ment from a value pricing experiment," Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
  and Transportation Review, 2001, 37 (2), 231 ­ 251. Advances in the Valuation of
  Travel Time Savings.

Lewis, Gregory and Patrick Bajari, "Procurement contracting with time incentives:
  Theory and evidence," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (3), 1173­
  1211.

Liu, Tracy, Zhixi Wan, and Chenyu Yang, "The efficiency of a dynamic decentralized
  two-sided matching market," Available at SSRN 3339394, 2019.

Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais, "Valuing alternative work arrangements,"
 American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (12), 3722­59.

McFadden, Daniel, "The measurement of urban travel demand," Journal of public
 economics, 1974, 3 (4), 303­328.

Miller, Ted R, The Value of Time and the Benefit of Time Saving: A Literature Synthesis
 and Recommendations on Values, Urban Institute, 1989.



                                          43
Nevo, Aviv and Arlene Wong, "The elasticity of substitution between time and market
  goods: Evidence from the Great Recession," International Economic Review, 2019,
  60 (1), 25­51.

Petrin, Amil and Kenneth Train, "A control function approach to endogeneity in con-
  sumer choice models," Journal of marketing research, 2010, 47 (1), 3­13.

Research, John Bates Services Significance Quantitative, "Values of time and relia-
  bility in passenger and freight transport in The Netherlands," Technical Report 2007.

Rossi, Peter E. and Greg M. Allenby, "Bayesian Statistics and Marketing," Marketing
  Science, 2003, 22, pp. 304­329.

  ,   , and Rob McCulloch, Bayesian Statistics and Marketing, Wiley, 2005.

Shimer, Robert and Lones Smith, "Assortative matching and search," Econometrica,
  2000, 68 (2), 343­369.

Small, Kenneth A, "The scheduling of consumer activities: work trips," The American
  Economic Review, 1982, 72 (3), 467­479.

Small, Kenneth A., "Valuation of travel time," Economics of Transportation, 2012, 1
  (1), 2 ­ 14.

Su, Yichen, "The Rising Value of Time and the Origin of Urban Gentrification," Tech-
  nical Report, Stanford University 2018.

Tanner, Martin A. and Wing Hung Wong, "The Calculation of Posterior Distributions
  by Data Augmentation," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1987, 82
  (398), 528­540.

Thakral, Neil and Linh T T^
                          o, "Daily Labor Supply and Adaptive Reference Points,"
  2017.

Train, Kenneth E, Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation, Cambridge University
  Press, 2009.

Tseng, Yin-Yen and Erik T Verhoef, "Value of time by time of day: A stated-
  preference study," Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 2008, 42 (7-8),
  607­618.

Vickrey, William S, "Congestion theory and transport investment," The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 1969, 59 (2), 251­260.

                                          44
Waldfogel, Joel, "The selection hypothesis and the relationship between trial and plain-
 tiff victory," Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103 (2), 229­260.




                                          45
Online Appendix

A   Omitted Graphics

              Figure 11: Picture of the Liftago App




              Note: This Graph shows the interfact of the Liftago App.




                                        46
                      Figure 12: Trips with Price/Waiting Tradeoff



            .7
            .65
 Fraction
            .6
            .55




                  0   2   4         6   8    10     12      14    16      18     20     22     24
                                                   Hour

                                        Mean                 95% CI



  Note: The graph shows the proportion of trips that involve an option to spend more and wait less.




                              Figure 13: Driver Fixed Effects


0.3



0.2



0.1



0.0
                              $-4                      $0                      $4
                                        Driver Fixed Effects




                                                  47
                                                            Figure 14: Choices as a Function of Wait Time




                                      .2
                                      .1
                     Choice (residualized)
                  -.1           0     -.2




                                                           -5                              0                        5              10
                                                                                           Wait Time (residualized)

                                                                           (a) Trips Choice as Function of Waiting Time
                                   .1
                Inside Option Choice (residualized)
                 -.2         -.1   -.3     0




                                                      -5                               0                         5                 10
                                                                                     Minimum Wait Time (residualized)

                                                                (b) Inside Option Choice as Function of the Minimum Waiting Time


Note: The graph on top shows the probability of choosing a trip as a function of the wait time, both residualized after taking into
accound time of day, origin and destination location, weather conditions, and the respective other prices and wait times. The graph
 on the bottom shoes the probability of choosing any trip over the outside option as a function of the minimum waiting time, both
                      residualized for time of day, origin and destination locations, and weather conditions.




                                                                                               48
B        Relation to the model in Small (1982)
The model described in Equation 1 is the workhorse model of the transportation lit-
erature on travel time savings (see, e.g., Tseng and Verhoef (2008) and Engelson and
Fosgerau (2016)). It has its origins in the work of Small (1982), which is inspired by the
work of of Vickrey (1969). Small (1982) considers a special case of the above model
where:27

                                      voto (t) =                                                                             (15)
                                         votd =  - 1[t  t ] + 1[t  t ]

Note that under this specification,  = voto ,  = (voto (t) - votd (t))1[t  t ], and  =
(votd (t) - voto (t))1[t > t ]. s This version of the model, where over the relevant time

  Figure 15: Value at origin (black) and destination (blue) as a function of time in the
                                     constant model

                      voto , votd


                            +




                                 



                            -




                                                                 t                                          t


intervals, voto and votd are constant, is the one to which the approximation described
in Section 3 maps to. Whereas Small (1982), assumes that voto and votd are constant
everywhere, it is important to note that this is not the case in the exercise that we carry
out. Indeed, we only assume that this holds over [q, q + w + ]; however, we allow these
values to vary across different times of day, different locations, and different types of
riders.


    27 Small (1982) is expressed in terms of opportunities cost of time. Equation 15 in terms of the values is equivalent (see Tseng

and Verhoef (2008) and Engelson and Fosgerau (2016)).


                                                                49
B.1          Optimal query time
In reality, riders may plan the time at which they request a ride. Thus, the rider's
problem is given by:

                                                 max E max u(q, wi ) - pi                                                      (16)
                                                    q          iI


where the expectation is over the price and waiting times that the rider will face. Let
u (q, (wi , pi )iI ) denote the term inside the expectation and let q denote the solution
to the problem in Equation 16. Note that what we observe in the data corresponds to
u (q , (wi , pi )iI ). In what follows, we show that in spite of this there are two versions
of the model where the relevant parameters are identified, and hence the values of time,
for all q and not just q . Furthermore, to convey the main ideas we focus on the case
in which w2 , p2 , p1 are known, and the rider just faces uncertainty about the ETA of the
first ride, w1  F .
    The analysis that follows implicitly assumes that conditional on the trip, all riders
are identical. Buchholz et al. (2020) shows how to extend the arguments presented here
to the case in which, conditional on a trip, there is heterogeneity in the preferences of
the riders who need to take that trip.

B.1.1         Small (1982)

Consider first the specification in Small (1982), described in Equation 15. We assume
that t  T . Fix a query time q  0 such that q +  < t 28 . Figure 16 plots the function
u(q, w2 ) + p :29
   In a world without uncertainty in which the rider anticipates the waiting time w, she
would simply choose q = t - ( + w), so that the effective function (given the optimal
choice of q ) would be always decreasing.30
   Given a waiting time w2 , we can think of the waiting times w1 that are chosen over
w2 for a given price differential p ,

                                    C (w2 , p ) = {w1 : u(q, w1 )  u(q, w2 ) + p }                                             (17)


    28 We    show below that the optimal query time always satisfies this, so this is the relevant case
    29 The    figure implicitly assumes that the price differential is not "very" negative so that

                                                     p + (T - ) + (T - t )  0.

Otherwise, the entire figure would be below the w-axis.
     30 To see this, note that even though the above is the picture as a function of w, for fixed w, we would have the same picture as

a function of q, once we flip the roles of q and w.


                                                                    50
                                       Figure 16: The function u(q, w2 ) + p
                       u(q, ·) + p




                                                    w2               t - (q + )           w(w2 )           w


As Figure 16 suggests, C (w2 , p ) is an interval with one of its endpoints being w2 .
Intuitively, if the consumer arrives before their ideal time under w2 , then w2 is the lowest
ETA that the consumer is willing to accept instead of trip 2 given p . Similarly, if the
consumer arrives after their ideal time under w2 , then w2 is the highest ETA that the
consumer is willing to take instead of trip 2 given p . Thus, the shape of C (w2 , p )
reveals whether w2 is below or above t - (q + ).31
   To infer the parameters , , consider the case in which p = 0. Fix w2 such that
min{w : w  C (w2 , 0)} = w2 . For > 0,  is identified as the parameter such that the
rider is indifferent between (w2 , p) and (w2 - , p -  ). That is,  is how much we
have to pay the rider to take a trip that leaves > 0 earlier than trip 2. On the other
hand,  is identified as the parameter such that the rider is indifferent between (w2 , p)
and (w1 + , p -  ). That is,  is how much we have to pay the rider to take a trip that
leaves > 0 later than trip 2.




    31 Formally,   one can show that if w2 < t - (q + ), then C (w2 , p ) = [w2 , w2 (w2 , q, p )] where

                                                       p + ( + )(t - (q + )) - w2 
                                w(w2 , q, p ) = max                              , t - (q + ) ,
                                                                   

whereas if w2 is to the right of t - (q + ), then C (w2 , p ) = [w2 (w2 , q, p ), w2 ], where

                                                      p + ( + )(t - (q + )) - w2 
                                w(w2 , q, p ) = min                             , t - (q + ) .
                                                                  




                                                                  51
   Finally, note that with ,  identified, we can identify t - (q + ) from solving:

                                     w2 + w(w2 , q, 0)
                                                       ,
                                          +

where w(w2 , q, 0) is the maximum element of C (w2 , p ). A similar experiment identifies
,  and t - q when w2 = max{w : w  C (w2 , p )}. Clearly,  cannot be identified.
    When q +   t , then the rider is always late. This would correspond to a case
where Figure 16 only displays the downward sloping branch. In this case, the rider
always prefers shorter ETAs for a given price differential. However, one can show that
in this model the rider always chooses q so that q +  < t :

Proposition 1. Let voto , votd be as in Equation 15. Then, the optimal choice of query
time, q , satisfies that q +  < t .

   The proof is available upon request. However, it is intuitive that such a result should
be true. Inspection of Figure 16 reveals that the rider is risk averse in w; by choosing q
smaller than t - , the rider makes sure that he has a chance to arrive early.

B.1.2   Linear specification

Another common specification of the model is the linear case (see Engelson and Fos-
gerau (2016)):

                                 voto (t) = ,                                          (18)
                                 votd (t) =  + (t - t ),

where ,  > 0 and t is the desired arrival time. We continue to assume that the trip
length,  is less than t so that the rider can potentially arrive at her ideal arriving time.
   As before, it will not be possible to identify  from the choices. However, a similar
exercise allows us to identify , t . Figure 17 plots the function u(·, q) + p for q < t - :

   To understand how choices reveal , t , consider the case in which p = 0. When
2t < T +  + q, we have that C (w2 , p ) is an interval with w2 as its lower or upper end
(see Figure 17a). Moreover, T - t is always the center of that interval. Thus, we can
identify T - t from the midpoint of this interval. Given T - t , we can write

                                     
                       u(q, w2 ) =     (w2 - (T - t ))2 + u(T - t , q)
                                     2




                                              52
                           Figure 17: The function u(q, w2 ) + p
                   (a) 2t < T +  + q                         (b) 2t > T + q + 

    u(q, ·) + p                                u(q, ·) + p




                      w2 T - t  w2                w             T - t                         w


Using this, let k be such that the rider is indifferent between (w2 , p) and (w2 - , p - k ).
Then, it follows that

                                                  k
                                        =                   .
                                       2 2(w2 - (T - t )) -

On the other hand, when 2t > T + q + , the function u(·, q) + p is as in Figure 17b.
For p = 0 and w2 low enough, however, C (w2 , 0) is an interval with w2 as its lower
bound and T - t as its midpoint. Thus, a similar experiment identifies /2.
   The above discussion implicitly assumes that q < t - . Indeed, this is without loss
of generality:

Proposition 2. Let voto , votd be as in Equation 18. Then, the optimal choice of query
time, q , satisfies that q +  < t .

    The proof is available upon request.


C      Identification of Location Values
The following are the three assumptions that will be used in our main theorem below.
                                                 i,k    i,k
Assumption 1. (Independence across locations) F Va   , Va               = Fi,a,k (V ) · Fi,a ,k (V )
(a, a )  J 2 and (k, k )  {o, d}2

  The following assumption imposes the existence of at least one location where the
mean of the values is known either when this location is the destination or it is the


                                                53
origin. For example, the mean (local) wage per minute might be a good approximation
of the mean value per minute for trips originating in a typical business area.

Assumption 2. (Location Normalization) a  A, k  {o, d} : E vk
                                                            i,a = µ0 .


   While we will establish non-parametric identification of the value distributions, for
the empirical application it will be useful to consider a special case of normal distribu-
tions.

Assumption 3. (Normal Distributions) Vik,a  N µk
                                               a , a i, a  A, k  {o, d }), iid
                                                   k

across (i, a, k).

    With these assumptions we can state the following identification result. The first part
is straightforward, but requires the knowledge of a subset of trips, such that one of the
two values in the difference Vid       o
                                ,a - Vi,a is a known constant. The second part imposes
a potentially weaker requirement: only that we know the mean value at one location
(whether it is the origin or the destination) and that one part of difference can be held
constant across a subset of observations. The last part is a special case, which imposes
more parametric structure.

Theorem 3. (Sufficient Conditions for Identification)

  1. Under Assumption 1, if  X o , X d , a  X × X × A : Pr Vik,a = v
                                                                   ^ k |X k , a = 1 for
     k  {o, d}, then Fa,k (v) is identified a  A, k  {o, d}.

  2. Under Assumptions 1 and 2 , when either k  {o, d} : vk                i,a,t = vi ,a,t (i, i , a, t) or
                                                                                    k

     k  {o, d} : vk
                  i,a,t = vi,a,t (i, a, t, t ), then F a,k (v) is identified a  A and k  {o, d }
                           k

     whenever |A|  3.

  3. Under Assumptions 2 and 3, µk
                                 a , a is identified a  A, k  {o, d } whenever
                                     k

     |A|  3.

   Proof: See Appendix C. The theorem says that we can identify the distributions
of valuations non-parametrically whenever (1) values are independent across locations
and we can isolate cases for which the value either at the origin or at the destination is
known to be equal to some constant, (2) when values are independent and are location-
and time-, but not individual-specific either at the origin or at the destination (e.g.,
everyone has the same value of spending a minute in a residential area) or values are
location and individual, but not time-specific (e.g., an individual has always the same
value of a minute of being at his business location at 8am every Monday), we know
the mean value in at least one location and there are at least 3 locations. Given the


                                                   54
previous result, we can of course also identify the values parametrically. However, this
approach is particularly easy when the values are iid normal, when there are at least
3 locations and we have one location normalization for both mean and variance. (1)
follows from restricting attention to cases where one part of the difference is known to
be a constant, and hence the distribution can be fully recovered from the distribution of
the differences. (2) follows from a deconvolution argument as in Li and Vuong (1998)
since under the hypothesis of the theorem we can construct a sample in which we hold
one part of the difference fixed. By applying the Kotlarski Lemma, one can then recover
the distributions of both pieces of the difference (up to the location). The additional
location normalization pins down the means separately. (3) follows since adding an
additional location to the existing set of L locations comes with 4 new parameters (two
means and two standard deviations) and generates 2 · (L - 1) additional equations and
hence one needs L  3 together with the two normalizations.

Proof. (1) Restricting attention to X o and trips originating in a going to destination a
identifies F D,a (v) trivially from the observed distribution of the differences by shifting
the distribution of the data by the relevant constant, v    ^ O . Similarly, FO,a (v) is identified
                                 d
from using only data from X and trips that originated in a and went to a .
   (2) Consider |A| = 3 and the case vo    i,a,t = vi ,a,t (i, i , a, t),i.e., that values at a given
                                                    o

origin and time are the same for all individuals i. Since values at origin are the same,
the deconvolution argument identifies (using variation over time) the distribution of
values at origin and the distribution of the values at each destination (using variation
across individuals going to each destination) - up to a location normalization, i.e., the
two means cannot be identified separately directly.32 With 3 locations we can setup
the following system of 6 equations in 6 unknowns (in the means of values at origin
and at destination), where the objects on the LHS are recovered from the deconvolution
argument: µ12 = -µo      1 + µ2 , µ13 = -µ1 + µ3 , µ21 = -µ2 + µ1 , µ23 = -µ2 + µ3 , µ31 =
                               d          o       d               o       d             o    d

-µo3 + µ1 , µ32 = -µ3 + µ2 . This system is not identified since the matrix of coefficients
         d            o     d

has a rank of 5. Substituting equation from Assumption 2 for one of the equations
including that mean restores the full rank of the coefficient matrix. For any additional
location, 2 new parameters and L - 1 new equations are introduced, but the rank is still
(2L-1). Substituting equation from Assumption 2 brings the rank to 2L, and we have
L · (L - 1) equations. Hence we can simply keep any subset with rank 2L as at true
parameters all of these equations will hold simultaneously.


    32 In the measurement literature setup Y = X +  , Y = X +  , the distributions F ( X ), G () are identified from H (Y , Y )
                                            1       1 2            2                                                     1 2
whenever the usual iid assumption holds, when the characteristic functions of F and G are non-vanishing everywhere and when
E () = 0.


                                                             55
    The case voi,a,t = vi,a,t (i, a, t, t ), is analogous, except variation over individuals is
                        o

used for the deconvolution argument and the distribution of values at origin and desti-
nation is identified using variation within individuals as they go to different destinations.
The means are then recovered as above.
    (3) Since sum of two normally distributed random variables is also normally dis-
tributed with mean being the sum of means and the variance being the sum of the vari-
ances, the means can be recovered directly by using the argument in (2). However,
the system of equations involving the variances is also less than full rank - and hence to
identify these directly, one needs another location normalization (such as the knowledge
of the variance at some location) or one needs to appeal to case (2), which establishes
that the variances are identified non-parametrically.




D     Data Details

D.1     Locations
Using the exact GPS points of trip origin, we partition our data into 30 locations. Fig-
ure 18 shows these locations together with an index value for comparing results in Sec-
tion 5. The partitioning is done according to a simple k-means clustering procedure on
the requested pickup locations with k = 30. This procedure minimizes the straight-line
distance between each point and the weighed center of all points within the same clus-
ter, with the constraint that each cluster has an equal number of points. The depicted
locations are close approximations, displayed as Voronoi cells that contain the clus-
tered points. This process allows location definitions to be independent of any political
boundaries and better representative of places in which demand is concentrated.


D.2     Market Time Series Summary
Figure 19, panels (a) and (b) summarize the week-over-week trends in prices. Begin-
ning 2017 the ridership and drivers stop to grow and enter a relatively stationary period,
although there are some large swings in the number of passengers towards the end of
2017. It shows the relationship between labor supply and price during the sample pe-
riod. As expected, price decreases as supply increases during the winter holiday seasons
and increases as supply falls during the summer. The second panel shows how average
waiting time and average price evolve during the sample period.




                                              56
                                                                  Figure 18: Locations in Prague




    Note: This figure maps the boundaries of the city of Prague with locations defined by a kmeans-clustering procedure on
GPS-locations of trip origins and depicted as Voronoi cells that contain the clustered points. Displayed index values correspond to
                                                    indices used in the paper.




                 Figure 19: Weekly Waiting Times and Number of Drivers Compared to Prices
                                                                                                                                          800
                             8.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                12.5
                                                                                       12.5
     Mean Wait Time (min.)




                                                                                                                                          750
                             8




                                                                                                                      Number of Drivers




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mean Price (USD)
                                                                                              Mean Price (USD)




                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                       12




                                                                                                                                          700
                             7.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                11.5
                                                                                       11.5




                                                                                                                                          650
                             7




                                                                                                                                                                                                11
                                                                                       11




                                                                                                                                                                                                10.5
                                                                                       10.5




                                                                                                                                          600
                             6.5




                             2016w40       2017w8              2017w28            2017w48                                             2016w40     2017w8              2017w28              2017w48
                                                       Week                                                                                                    Week
                                       Mean Wait Time (min.)         Mean Price ($)                                                              Number of Drivers        Mean Price ($)



                                             (a) Average Prices                                                                                 (b) Price and Driver Count




                                                                                                                 57
E                    Estimation Details

E.1                  Recovering Latent Types: Conditional K-Means-Clustering Pro-
                     cedure
The clustering procedure allocates passengers to initial latent classes using a "k-means++"
algorithm and then reallocates passenger types to best explain individual choices after
controlling for observable features of the environment. This approach is based on Bon-
homme et al. (2017) and uses Julia's Clustering package implementation of k-means++.
Our discussion here is mainly based on the two.


E.2                  Location Parameter Estimates
Here we offer additional details on location-specific parameter estimates. Figure 20
plots these estimates across origins and destinations.

                                        Figure 20: Location-Specific Coefficient Estimates

                                                                                         -0.5
                                                                Pickup                                                            Pickup
              0.20                                              Dropoff                                                           Dropoff


                                                                                         -1.0
              0.15
Coefficient




                                                                           Coefficient




              0.10                                                                       -1.5



              0.05
                                                                                         -2.0


                        5          10          15         20   25                               5     10         15         20   25
                                         Location Index                                                    Location Index

                            (a) Waiting Times × Locations                                           (b) Location Means




        Note: This figure shows coefficient estimates for 120 location-specific parameters omitted from Table 2. Standard errors are
       depicted as bars around each point. Location indices may be cross-references with Figure 18. Panel (a) displays results for the
       coefficients on the interaction between waiting time and location, and Panel (b) displays results for the coefficients on location
                      indicators, which can be interpreted as location-specific utility shifters relative to location index 1.




E.3                  Model Fit
Figure 21 illustrates the model's ability to fit the observed choices in the data. For
each trip and corresponding driver bids, we use our estimates to predict whether each
customer will pick the outside-option and plot the average prediction for each week.
   Figure 22 Demonstrates the model's ability to correctly predict specific choices
across auctions. We do this in two ways: first we use our estimates to predict which

                                                                          58
                              Figure 21: Model Fit On Outside Option Selection

                                                        0.7
                                                                                                        Data H
                                                                                                        Data L
                                                        0.6



                  Choice of Outside Option
                                                                                                        Model H
                                                                                                        Model L
                                                        0.5


                                                        0.4


                                                        0.3


                                                        0.2


                                                               0       20          40              60
                                                                            Calendar Week



option each customer will pick inclusive of simulated draws of i, j,t . Because the i, j,t
represent unobservable attributes associated with each choice, this simulation will tend
to add additional noise to our choice predictions. We also make the same predictions
but set i, j,t = 0 for all i, j, t, which improves our predictions by about 10%.

                              Figure 22: Model Fit On Outside Option Selection

                                                        0.65
                  Prob. Model Matches Specific Choice




                                                                                            Type 1 (w/ epsilons)
                                                                                            Type 2 (w/ epsilons)
                                                        0.60                                Type 1 (no epsilons)
                                                                                            Type 2 (no epsilons)
                                                        0.55


                                                        0.50


                                                        0.45


                                                        0.40

                                                                   0   20          40              60
                                                                            Calendar Week




E.4    Elasticities by Area
See Table 9 and Table 10 below.


E.5    Estimation Results Omitting Control Function
Table 11 below presents the price and waiting time elasticity estimates in which the
control function is omitted.




                                                                              59
                Table 9: Bid Level Elasticities by Origin Area

                   High VOT-Type Elasticities         Low VOT-Type Elasticities
Origin Area        Price    Waiting Time              Price   Waiting Time
1                   -4.82          -0.98              -5.22           -0.93
2                   -2.71          -0.37              -3.66            -0.3
3                   -3.98          -0.56              -4.26           -0.46
4                   -2.95          -0.38              -3.79           -0.29
5                   -4.47          -0.37              -4.53           -0.38
6                   -5.05          -0.59              -5.37           -0.57
7                   -9.64          -0.27               -9.7           -0.22
8                   -10.0          -0.55              -9.75           -0.48
9                   -2.78          -0.46              -3.38           -0.41
10                  -2.62          -0.33               -3.7           -0.25
11                  -2.41          -0.36              -3.19           -0.26
12                  -5.26          -0.47              -5.55           -0.43
13                  -7.81          -0.47              -7.58           -0.44
14                  -3.95          -0.51              -4.34           -0.44
15                  -3.45          -0.49              -3.69           -0.44
16                  -3.69          -0.38              -4.54           -0.31
17                  -2.79          -0.34              -3.89           -0.24
18                  -6.75          -0.78              -6.45            -0.7
19                  -5.63          -0.56              -5.93           -0.53
20                  -2.52          -0.31              -3.43           -0.22
21                  -5.48          -0.52              -5.41           -0.47
22                  -5.06           -0.7              -5.45            -0.6
23                   -6.9          -0.64              -7.09            -0.6
24                 -10.31          -0.44               -9.6           -0.38
25                  -5.82          -0.44              -6.17           -0.41
26                  -2.98          -0.39              -3.59           -0.34
27                  -3.89          -0.56              -4.33            -0.5
28                  -6.66          -0.43              -6.56           -0.39
29                  -2.84          -0.36              -3.64           -0.29
30                  -4.98          -0.57               -5.2           -0.51
Note: This table shows price and waiting time elasticities across the thirty differ-
ent origin places separated by high and low VOT types. Figure 18 shows location
indices on a map of Prague.




                                        60
                Table 10: Bid Level Elasticities by Destination Area

                          High VOT-Type Elasticities          Low VOT-Type Elasticities
Destination Area          Price   Waiting Time                Price   Waiting Time
1                          -4.3           -0.47               -4.44            -0.42
2                         -2.45           -0.47               -3.09            -0.45
3                          -3.6           -0.32               -3.88            -0.26
4                         -2.67           -0.45               -3.31            -0.47
5                         -4.16           -0.43               -4.39            -0.32
6                         -4.75           -0.28               -4.96            -0.21
7                         -9.35           -0.38               -8.33            -0.39
8                         -8.75           -0.32               -8.48            -0.28
9                         -2.64           -0.37               -3.16            -0.36
10                        -2.52           -0.44               -3.29            -0.45
11                        -2.32           -0.35               -2.87            -0.35
12                        -4.81           -0.34               -4.69            -0.24
13                        -7.02           -0.26               -7.06            -0.21
14                        -3.55           -0.32               -3.93            -0.27
15                        -3.18           -0.32               -3.51             -0.3
16                        -3.18           -0.41               -3.75            -0.37
17                        -2.57           -0.45               -3.41            -0.46
18                        -5.86            -0.3               -5.98            -0.24
19                        -5.24           -0.33               -5.13            -0.26
20                        -2.42           -0.48               -3.26             -0.5
21                        -5.04           -0.33                -5.3            -0.28
22                        -4.27           -0.31               -4.37            -0.23
23                        -6.14           -0.19               -5.77            -0.17
24                        -8.21           -0.38               -7.69            -0.31
25                        -5.42           -0.36               -5.51            -0.28
26                        -2.84           -0.41               -3.24            -0.37
27                        -3.35           -0.35               -3.46            -0.29
28                         -6.0           -0.37               -5.84            -0.27
29                        -2.72           -0.36               -3.19            -0.34
30                        -4.58           -0.33               -4.67            -0.26
Note: This table shows price and waiting time elasticities across the thirty different desti-
nation places separated by high and low VOT types. Figure 18 shows location indices on
a map of Prague.




                                             61
                                         Table 11: Estimated Elasticities

                                                            Bid Level Elasticities Order Level Elasticities
 Time of Day Individual Type
                                                            Price Waiting Time Price Waiting Time
                    Overall                                 -1.83           -0.63            -1.74              -0.64
                    H Price, H Wait Sensitivity             -4.08           -1.18            -3.83              -1.09
 Daytime
                    H Price, L Wait Sensitivity             -0.95           -0.51            -1.04              -0.53
 6am-6pm
                    L Price, H Wait Sensitivity             -2.15            -0.6            -2.05              -0.68
                    L Price, L Wait Sensitivity             -0.65            -0.3            -0.75              -0.38

                    Overall                                 -2.58           -0.25             -2.4              -0.28
                    H Price, H Wait Sensitivity             -4.32           -0.39            -4.12               -0.4
 Evening
                    H Price, L Wait Sensitivity             -1.25            -0.2            -1.33              -0.22
 6pm-6am
                    L Price, H Wait Sensitivity             -3.09           -0.26            -2.87              -0.31
                    L Price, L Wait Sensitivity             -1.04           -0.15            -1.12              -0.18
 Note: This table shows the demand elasticity of price and waiting time across daytime and evening hours and individual type
 groupings. This table replicates Table 3 except that the model is estimated with no control function. We distinguish as high (H)
                                                                    p
 price sensitivity individuals who have below median values for i and low (L) price sensitivity individuals as those with above
                      p
 median values for i , and similarly for waiting time sensitivity. The first two columns show these elasticities among competing
 bids, reflecting the change in demand due to a 1% change in price or waiting time on a single bid. The second two columns
 show them with respect to choosing the outside option, reflecting a change in demand due to a 1% change in price or waiting
 time on all bids.


E.6       Trip-Specific Heterogeneity Results
The baseline results in Table 4 show the average nvot across different hours of the
day. Within each time-of-day and within each individual's type, however, there is ad-
ditional heterogeneity due to the fact that some trips are more or less time-sensitive.
For example, a given person may express higher nvot if she is late for an appointment
compared.
    To analyze this type of heterogeneity, we define time-sensitive trips as the subset of
trips in which a rider, having requested a ride, is faced with a set of bids in which (1)
the arrival time falls around a rounded hour increment such as 9:00am or 2:00pm, (2)
only bid would provide a trip that arrives before the hour and all others would provide
a trip which arrive after the hour, and (3) a trip occurs on the platform. Because the
nvot estimated on trips generated on this subset is inherently selected due to point (3),
we compare this against a similar subset of trips around a placebo clock-time. We thus
define placebo trips by selecting orders where the arrival time falls around a clock time
ending in :23 or :53, such as 8:23am or 2:53pm. We then apply criteria (2) and (3) to
these trips. The difference nvot between time-sensitive and placebo trips reveals the
relevant heterogeneity in time-sensitivity.
    To augment our baseline results, Table 12 reports results for time sensitive trips and
shows that the nvot for this subset is about 58% greater than a comparable measure
in the placebo group. The first column reports nvot for all trips, as in Table 4, as a

                                                               62
                    Table 12: Trip-Specific Heterogeneity in NVOT

                                           Time-Selected Trips
                                          All Trips
                                          Placebo Time-Sensitive
                  nvot ($/hour) $13.47 $17.92         $28.34
                  N Trips       1,021,007 86,786      62,229
                  N Individuals 80,161 32,438         21,651
                  Note: This table shows baseline mean nvot estimates in the first column.
                  The second column reports mean nvot estimates for trips in which exactly
                  one bid occurs before the 23rd and 53rd minute of each hour and additional
                  bids fall beyond this time. The third column similarly reports nvot estimates
                  for trips in which exactly one bid occurs before the first minute of each hour.
                  All estimates are presented in US dollars.


comparison. Our baseline nvot results, therefore, can be interpreted as averages across
this type of trip-specific heterogeneity.




                                                       63
