                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ELECTRICITY AND FIRM PRODUCTIVITY:
                          A GENERAL-EQUILIBRIUM APPROACH

                                           Stephie Fried
                                          David Lagakos

                                       Working Paper 27081
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27081


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




For helpful comments we thank Judd Boomhower, Jonathan Colmer, Mark Jacobsen, Chad Jones,
Doug Gollin, Michael Greenstone, Kelsey Jack, Pete Klenow, Nick Ryan and seminar /
conference participants at the AEA meetings, ASU, IGC Growth Week, the IMF, SED, UCSB,
USC, Yale, and UCSD. For excellent research assistance we thank Qinzhuo Gong, Alejandro
Nakab, and Shu Zhang. We are grateful to the IGC for financial support. All potential errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27081.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Stephie Fried and David Lagakos. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Electricity and Firm Productivity: A General-Equilibrium Approach
Stephie Fried and David Lagakos
NBER Working Paper No. 27081
May 2020
JEL No. E13,E23,O11,O41,Q43

                                           ABSTRACT

The lack of reliable electricity in the developing world is widely viewed by policymakers as a
major constraint on firm productivity. Yet most empirical studies find modest short-run effects of
power outages on firm performance. This paper builds a dynamic macroeconomic model to study
the long-run general equilibrium effects of power outages on productivity. The model captures
the key features of how firms acquire electricity in the developing world, in particular the
rationing of grid electricity and the possibility of self-generated electricity at higher cost. Power
outages lower productivity in the model by creating idle resources, by depressing the scale of
incumbent firms and by reducing entry of new firms. Consistent with the empirical literature, the
model predicts that the short-run partial-equilibrium effects of eliminating outages are small.
However, the long-run general-equilibrium effects are many times larger, supporting the view
that eliminating outages is an important development objective.


Stephie Fried
Arizona State University
sdfried@asu.edu

David Lagakos
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
lagakos@ucsd.edu
1. Introduction

Most firms in the developing world put inadequate electricity supply at or near the top of their
list of constraints holding back their productivity (World Bank Group, 2017). Not surprisingly
then, improving electricity provision has emerged as a top policy priority for many develop-
ing countries to promote economic growth. Yet most existing empirical studies of the effects
of power outages on firm productivity have found fairly modest impacts. For example, All-
cott, Collard-Wexler, and O'Connell (2016) estimate that Indian manufacturing firms operate
at a mere 1.5 percent lower productive level on average due to the (widespread) electricity
outages they face. Similar studies also find that power outages lead to small declines in firm
productivity across a broad set of developing countries.1 More generally, a growing micro liter-
ature on the effects on electrification has found small economic impacts, at least in rural areas
(Dinkelman, 2011; Burlig and Preonas, 2016; Lee, Miguel, and Wolfram, Forthcoming). Given
the massive differences in aggregate output per capita across countries (Hall and Jones, 1999;
Caselli, 2005), these modest estimated effects of electricity suggest that policy makers could
be overemphasizing its importance in their development strategy.

One important limitation of most of the existing empirical studies of electricity and firm pro-
ductivity is that they are restricted to studying the short-run partial-equilibrium effects of power
outages. The goal of this paper is to understand the general-equilibrium effects of unreliable
electricity on firm and aggregate productivity in the long run. To do so, we build a dynamic
macroeconomic model that incorporates several key aspects of how electricity is provided in the
developing world, and how firms respond to an unreliable electricity supply. First, electricity
is a strong complement to capital in the production function and other inputs cannot be easily
be substituted for electricity (Atkeson and Kehoe, 1999; Hassler, Krusell, and Olovsson, 2015;
Casey, 2018). Second, electricity is provided through the grid at a low price but rationed, with
unpredictable power outages occurring in equilibrium (see e.g. Burgess, Greenstone, Ryan,
and Sudarshan, 2020). Third, some firms self-produce electricity using generators, though at
a higher cost than electricity purchased from the grid. Finally, firms can choose not to enter
the "modern" electricity-using sector at all, and instead operate a low-productivity "traditional"
technology (as in Midrigan and Xu, 2014) that doesn't require electricity.
   1
    Fisher-Vanden, Mansur, and Wang (2015) find a statistically insignificant effect of power outages on firm pro-
ductivity in a panel of Chinese manufacturing firms. Abeberese, Ackah, and Asuming (2019) estimate a 10 percent
productivity decrease from outages among small Ghanaian firms. Similarly, Hardy and McCasland (2019) esti-
mate that outages lead to a 13 percent decrease in productivity for Ghanaian enterprises with no workers, though
they find no effect on productivity for all other firms. Grainger and Zhang (2017) estimate that outages lead
to productivity decreases of less than one percent among Pakistani manufacturing firms. Scott, Darko, Lemma,
and Rud (2014) find small and generally insignificant correlations between the number of power outages a firm
experiences and its labor productivity across a sample of six major developing economies.



                                                        1
To analytically illustrate how power outages affect firm productivity, we first present a simple
version of the model in which the probability of a power outage is exogenous. Power outages
are unpredictable in the sense that firms know the probability that the power will be on, but
they do not know when it will be on. These unpredictable outages create idle resources in
equilibrium. In particular, when the power is off, modern firms idle productive capital if they
do not have enough generator capital. When the power is on, modern firms instead idle their
generator capital, because the marginal cost of self-generated electricity is higher than the
price of grid electricity. We measure the short-run partial-equilibrium effect of eliminating
power outages by simulating a counterfactual scenario under which firms make entry and scale
decisions assuming that the probability of grid power is less than one, but then experience no
outages ex-post. This exercise captures the spirit of the empirical literature described above
which focuses on ceteris paribus regression counterfactuals, assuming that firms face no power
outages, but that all else is constant. We show that eliminating outages increases output per
worker in the short-run partial equilibrium only because productive capital is no longer idled.

By contrast, we simulate the long-run general-equilibrium effect of eliminating outages by solv-
ing for a new steady state of the model in which firms get grid electricity with probability one.
The long-run general-equilibrium effect includes the increases in output per worker from not
idling productive capital, as in the short-run partial-equilibrium, plus two additional channels.
First, the incumbent modern firms, who now expect never to idle capital in an outage again,
demand more productive capital and zero generator capital. Since in steady state, the rental
rate on capital is pinned down entirely by the household Euler equation, capital supply, rather
than the price of capital, expands to meet the new demand from firms. Second, when there
are no outages, more firms produce with the modern technology, which is more attractive now
that grid electricity is reliably available.

To quantify the importance of eliminating power outages on firm and aggregate productivity,
we extend the simple model to a richer quantitative version which endogenizes the probability
of a power outage by adding a distorted electricity-production sector. We set the electricity
price below its market-clearing value, as in the evidence of Burgess et al. (2020), which leads
electricity producers to restrict supply. Thus, instead of the price clearing the electricity mar-
ket, the extent of power outages is determined so that the rationed supply of grid electricity
equals the demand at the regulated price. We calibrate the model to match the main features of
electricity use in five large Sub-Saharan African countries. The key targets to inform our quan-
titative analysis are: the importance of electricity in production, the cost of generator electricity
versus grid electricity and the overall prevalence of self-generated electricity, including both
the number of firms that have generators and how much electricity those firms self-produce.


                                                 2
We use the calibrated model to simulate the long-run general-equilibrium effects of eliminating
power outages on the macroeconomy. In each country, we compare outcomes in an undistorted
steady state with no power outages to their values in the initial calibrated steady state, which
has widespread outages. To compute the undistorted steady state, we remove the electricity
price regulations and allow the price to adjust freely to clear the electricity market. Our model
predicts that the short-run partial-equilibrium effects are modest, on the order of a few per-
centage points. These small effects mirror the estimates from the microeconomic literature on
electricity and firm productivity, lending credence to the model's short-run partial-equilibrium
predictions. In contrast, the long-run general-equilibrium effects of eliminating power outages
are around five times larger, averaging 25 percent across our countries.2 Through the lens of
development accounting, eliminating power outages works through both higher aggregate cap-
ital per worker and higher measured TFP, as fewer resources are idled and production moves
into the modern sector.

We conclude by providing new evidence that helps validate the model's long-run aggregate
predictions, which are harder to test in practice. In particular, we conduct new surveys of firms
in Nigeria and Ghana about the expected effects of permanently eliminating power outages.
The majority of Ghanaian and Nigerian firms report that eliminating outages would be likely
or very likely to expand their own investment and hiring, consistent with the model's firm-
expansion channel. An even larger fraction of firms in both countries expect that permanently
eliminating power outages would lead to entry of new firms into their industry, just as the
model's firm-entry channel predicts. As a frame of reference, we also surveyed firms from the
same population about the likely effects of a placebo "treatment" in which the national airports
convert to solar power, on the exact same outcomes. Across both countries and all questions,
the expected effects of eliminating power outages are economically and statistically larger than
the effects of the placebo, suggesting that our results are unlikely to be artifacts of misreporting
by survey respondents.

Our paper builds on two distinct literatures in macroeconomics. The first is the growing macro
development literature that draws on dynamic general equilibrium models to understand how
the partial equilibrium effects of development policies­ informed by reduced-form empirical
evidence­ compare to the long-run general equilibrium effects. Our quantitative exercises are
particularly related to those of Buera, Kaboski, and Shin (2019), who use a macroeconomic
   2
     These larger longer-run effects are similar in spirit to the literature on the long-run regional effects of elec-
tricity (Rud, 2012; Lipscomb, Mobarak, and Barham, 2013), who find large long-run differences in economic
development across regions within countries with differing levels of electrification. Rud (2012) studies a panel
of Indian states between 1965 and 1984, while Lipscomb et al. (2013) consider a panel of Brazilian states from
1960 to 2000.



                                                          3
model of credit constrained firms to infer how the general equilibrium effects of microfinance
lending differ from the partial equilibrium effects estimated in the empirical literature on micro
finance. Also in this vein, Brooks and Donovan (Forthcoming) flush out the general-equilibrium
effects of improved transportation infrastructure on rural farmers starting with reduced-form
evidence on the effects of rural bridge building. Using a similar methodology, Lagakos, Mo-
barak, and Waugh (2020) quantify the aggregate effects of subsides to rural-urban migration,
and Akcigit, Alp, and Peters (Forthcoming) infer the general equilibrium effects of improving
managerial capabilities.

The second literature on which we build is the recent literature on sector linkages and devel-
opment, which studies how low productivity in one intermediate sector ­ especially one that
exhibits a high degree of complementarity with other sectors­ can have a disproportionate ef-
fect on aggregate output per worker (Jones, 2011; Bartelme and Gorodnichenko, 2015; Baqaee
and Farhi, 2019).3 Electricity is a classic example of such an input, and our paper is the first to
study the general equilibrium implications of distortions in the electricity sector. We illustrate
how the distortions in the electricity sector lead to larger aggregate gains than the general dis-
tortions analyzed by most studies in this literature because the artificially low electricity price
depresses electricity supply relative to a competitive economy. Boehm and Oberfield (2018) fo-
cus on a different type of distortion stemming from a government inability to enforce contracts
between firms, and study how that propagates through linked sectors. Liu (2019) builds a
model in which distortions at the sector level accumulate through backward demand linkages,
and that the most upstream sectors become the "sink" for market imperfections, which may
well apply to electricity production, though this channel is not present in the current model.
Baqaee and Farhi (2020) show that sectoral shocks in a distorted economy, such as ours, can
be far more potent than in an efficient one, since moving resources out of a distorted sector
can have first-order effects on output.4

   3
     Most of this literature has focused on business cycle fluctuations, rather than long-run outcomes, and has
largely concluded that input-output linkages play an important role in amplifying short-run microeconomic
shocks; see Carvalho (2014) for an insightful overview of the literature. Empirically, di Giovanni, Levchenko,
and Méjean (2014) draw on rich firm-level data to document that firm-specific shocks contribute to aggregate
fluctuations mainly through firm-to-firm linkages. Similarly, Atalay (2017) shows that outputs at the sector level
are strong complements, implying that shocks to individual sectors have out sized aggregate impacts.
   4
     Additionally, our paper relates to the literature that studies general equilibrium models of energy use and the
macroeconomy (see e.g. Hassler, Krusell, and Smith, Jr., 2016, for an overview). Much of this literature focuses
on the macroeconomic and environmental impacts of a carbon tax. Previous studies explore these impacts in
a variety of different settings, including neoclassical growth frameworks, (e.g., Golosov, Hassler, Krusell, and
Tsyvinski, 2014; Barrage, 2019; Fried, Novan, and Peterman, 2018) and models of endogenous innovation (e.g.,
Acemoglu, Aghion, Bursztyn, and Hémous, 2012; Hémous, 2016; Casey, 2018; Fried, 2018; Lemoine, 2018). A
common theme is that there is an important role for energy in the production function, though we abstract from
environmental factors.



                                                         4
2. Electricity and Firms in the Developing World: Stylized Facts

To motivate our model of electricity and firm productivity, we begin by summarizing four key
facts about electricity in developing countries. To be sure, these facts are known by those
who study electricity in developing countries, though they are likely to be less well known by
macroeconomists. First, grid electricity is rationed to firms through frequent and unpredictable
power outages. Second, some firms use generators to produce their own electricity to insure
themselves against grid electricity shortages. Third, the cost to firms of self-generated electric-
ity is substantially higher than the cost of grid electricity. Fourth, the electricity sector itself is
highly distorted, with prices held at below-market levels in most countries.

2.1. Firms Experience Frequent Unpredictable Power Outages

Unlike in advanced economies, the electricity grid is highly unreliable in developing countries.
Even firms with grid connections still experience frequent and unpredictable power outages
(see e.g., Eberhard, Rosnes, Shkaratan, and Vennemo 2011; Scott et al. 2014). To illustrate
how frequent power outages are in the developing world, we draw on evidence from the World
Bank's World Enterprise Surveys (WES), which cover random samples of medium and large
firms from a large set of countries (though the richest countries are excluded).

Figure 1 plots the percent of firms in the WES that report having experienced an electricity
outage in the last month against GDP per capita. Each point on the graph represents the
averages for all firms sampled in the WES by country in the most recent available year. The
figure presents a very stark picture of how common electricity outages are in the developing
world. In most of the word's poorest countries, more than eight out of ten firms experienced
an outage in the last month. Across all countries in the data, the average percent of firms
experiencing outages is 55 percent. There is also a clear negative relationship with outages
and GDP per capita; nearly all the firms in the poorest countries experienced outages in the
last month, but only one quarter of the firms experienced outages in the WES countries with
the highest GDP per capita. The world's richest countries are not covered by the WES, but it is
well-known that outages there are extremely infrequent. Power outages are, in other words,
almost a defining feature of developing economies.

2.2. Some Firms Self-Generate Electricity to Insure Against Outages

Since electricity outages are clearly undesirable for firms, many of them self-produce electricity
using generators (Alby, Dethier, and Straub 2013; Eberhard et al. 2011; Foster and Steinbuks
2008). The ability to self-produce electricity allows firms access to electricity during an outage,


                                                  5
                       Figure 1: Percent of Firms Experiencing Electricity Outages

                            100
                                              BEN           MMR
                                          TGO      CMR SDN
                                           BFA
                            90          COD             GHA
                                       MDGMLI                     AGO
                                  BDI           TZA     ZMB
                                     MWI GIN UGA SENKEN           PRY
                            80      NER
                                         ETH          CIV    LAO
                                              ZWE             NGA   LKA
                                              SLE
                            70                 TCD        HND
                                                                                     VEN ARG
                                               RWA NPL                         ECU      ROU
                            60
                  Percent




                                                                     IND GTM     DOM
                                                                                  COL
                                         MOZ                                    PER
                            50                                  NIC                SRBBGR
                                                                          SLV
                                                                                 ZAFBRA
                                                                                     MEX
                                                           KGZ                            CHL
                            40                                          PHL                  GRC
                                                                              EGY
                                                          KHM          BOL UZB
                                                         TJK                     CHN
                            30                                                  UKR
                                                                                        TUR
                                                                     VNM                BLR SVKCZE
                                                                             IDN              PRT
                            20                                           MAR                HUN
                                                                                          MYS ISR
                                                                                      AZE KAZ
                                                                                           RUS
                                                                               JOR
                                                                               TUN
                            10                                                      THA     POL

                                                                                                    ITA
                             0
                                     1            2         4             8          16        32         64
                                                      GDP per Capita x $1000

 Note: This figure plots the percent of firms in the World Bank's World Enterprise Surveys that experienced
 an electricity outage in the last month against 2013 GDP per capita. The figure includes all countries with a
 population greater than five million and a survey covering at least one hundred firms.


which must be valuable given the frequency of outages. To see how much self-generation goes
on in practice in the developing world, we turn again to the WES, at least for evidence on
self-generation among the relatively large firms that make up the WES sample. We focus on
a set of ten large African countries for which we have comparable data on other dimensions,
which we discuss below.

Figure 2 plots the percent of firms in the WES that own or share a generator at the time of the
survey in these ten countries. The generator ownership rate is 48 percent on average across
these countries. Nigeria, which is Africa's largest economy, has the highest generator owner-
ship rate, at 71 percent. Madagascar has the lowest rate at 19 percent. When looking across
all countries in the WES, there is a strong negative correlation between generator ownership
and GDP per capita, with less than 10 percent of firms in the richest WES countries owning
generators. Thus, it is clear that many firms in the developing world use generators to insure
themselves against outages, though far from all firms have access to generators




                                                                 6
                       Figure 2: Percent of Firms Owning or Sharing a Generator

                            100

                            90

                            80

                                                                     69    71
                            70                      66

                            60
                  Percent




                                              52                                       52
                            50          49
                                                                                 43
                            40
                                  30                            29
                            30

                            20                            19


                            10

                             0
                                  CIV   ETH   GHA   KEN   MDG MOZ    NER   NGA   TZA   UGA
                                                           Country

 Note: This figure plots the percent of firms that own or share a generator in the ten most populous countries
 in Sub-Saharan Africa that have the data required for both Figures 2 and 3. The data on generator access are
 from the World Bank's World Enterprise Surveys.


2.3. Self-Generated Electricity is More Expensive Than Grid Electricity

Even though firms can produce their own electricity, this does not mean that firms are indiffer-
ent between getting their electricity from the grid or producing it themselves using generators.
Evidence shows that self-generated electricity is substantially more costly for firms than grid
electricity (Foster and Steinbuks, 2008).

Figure 3 plots estimates of the average cost of grid electricity and self-generated electricity in
the ten largest Sub-Saharan African countries for which data are available. The average cost of
self-generated electricity includes the capital costs of owning a generator, based on estimates
in World Bank (2007), plus the cost of fuel for the generator (see Appendix B.2 for details on
these calculations).

The average cost of self-generated electricity ranges from a low of $0.34 per kWh in Ethiopia
to a high of $0.45 per kWh in Mozambique (reflecting differences in the price of fuel). Grid
electricity prices range from $0.04 per kWh in Ethiopia to $0.17 per kWh in Uganda (Trimble,
Kojima, Arroyo, and Mohammadzadeh, 2016). The variation in the grid electricity price likely
reflects differences in official tariffs as well as differences in bill collection rates and theft. On
average, self-generated electricity is approximately four times as expensive as grid electricity.

                                                          7
                                         Figure 3: Average Cost of Electricity: Grid vs. Generator
                                         55
                                                                                                  Grid            Generator
                                         50

                                                 44                                     45                         45
                                         45
                                                                               41                                         42
                                                                      41
                    Cents/kwh (2014 $)   40                     40                            40

                                                          35
                                         35                                                                  34

                                         30

                                         25

                                         20
                                                                                                                        17
                                                                     15                      14                   14
                                         15
                                               11              11
                                         10                                9        8
                                                                                                         6
                                          5           4

                                          0
                                                CIV   ETH GHA        KEN MDG MOZ NER NGA                          TZA   UGA
                                                                           Country

 Note: This figure plots the effective price of grid electricity and the average cost of self-generated electricity
 in the ten most populous countries in Sub-Saharan Africa for which data are available. Data on the effective
 price of grid electricity, accounting for theft and lapses in bill collection, are from Trimble et al. (2016). We
 calculate the average cost of generator electricity from estimates of the capital cost of a typical diesel generator
 from World Bank (2007) and the price of diesel fuel. See Appendix B.2 for a full description.


Importantly, the high average cost of self-generated electricity results from both the high cost
of the generator equipment and the high cost of the fuel necessary to run it. The marginal
cost of self-generated electricity, which depends on the price of diesel fuel and the efficiency
of the generator, is on average three times higher than the price of grid electricity. Thus, while
firms with generators do have the ability to produce their own power during an outage, the
cost of their electricity inputs are substantially higher when they self-produce, than when they
directly purchase electricity from the grid.

2.4. Grid Electricity Provision is Highly Distorted

It is well known that the public sector regulates electricity providers in most countries. The
developing world provides few exceptions to this rule. Moreover, as Trimble et al. (2016)
document, virtually none of the electricity sectors in Sub-Saharan Africa collect enough revenue
to recover their costs. One reason for this is the low official tariffs for electricity. Burgess et al.
(2020) argue that governments in developing countries present electricity as a basic right for
their citizens, and, as a result, political incentives play a substantial role in keeping electricity
prices regulated at levels that are unprofitable for power producers.


                                                                           8
A second, related, reason that electricity prices are so low is the rampant non-payment that
prevails throughout the developing world (see Jack and Smith, 2015). As Burgess et al. (2020)
colorfully illustrate, power producers in the power sectors of Bihar, India have an official rate
of $0.10 per kWh, which should, in principle, be enough to cover their production cost of
about $0.06 per kWh. Yet power producers collect only around $0.01 per kWh after subsidies,
technical losses, un-billed power and unpaid bills are taken into consideration! While the
numbers differ in Africa, the problems are largely similar: technical losses, un-billed power
and underpayment all cut into the effective prices of grid electricity (Eberhard et al. 2011;
Jack and Smith 2015; Dzansi, Puller, Street, and Yebuah-Dwamena 2018).

In sum, the price of grid electricity is regulated to be too low across the developing world, and
this regulation is the proximate cause of the widespread power outages there (Burgess et al.,
2020; Eberhard et al., 2011). Some firms can insure against these outages by producing their
own electricity with generators. However, the self-generation of electricity is expensive because
both the average and marginal cost of self-generated electricity are considerably higher than
the effective price of grid electricity.


3. Simple Model of Electricity and Firm Productivity

We now build a simple, dynamic, general-equilibrium model that incorporates the key features
of electricity supply in developing countries presented in the previous section. The model is
intentionally stylized to provide an analytic characterization of how power outages impact firm
productivity in general equilibrium. In particular, the model takes the probability of grid power
as exogenous, abstracts from hired labor input and assumes that the price of grid electricity is
zero. We relax all of these assumptions in Section 4 to follow.

3.1. Environment

The economy is inhabited by a representative household that chooses consumption and saving
each period to maximize:

                                           
                                                   t u(C t ),                                (1)
                                           t =0

where   (0,1) is the discount factor, C t is consumption, and u(·) is a concave, strictly in-
creasing and continuously differentiable period utility function. Households save in physical




                                                    9
capital. Capital accumulates according to the standard law of motion:

                                       K t +1 = (1 - )K t + I t ,                                 (2)

where   [0,1] is the depreciation rate and I t is the number of final goods saved as investment.
Households rent capital to firms at rate R t . Household income includes the payments to capital
and profits from the firms (described below).

There is a unit measure of heterogeneous entrepreneurs that operate firms and produce a
homogeneous final good using their managerial ability and capital input. Each entrepreneur
draws her managerial ability, z , from distribution G (z ) with support z  [1, ]. Entrepreneurs
can choose to operate either in the "traditional sector" or in the "modern sector". The sectors
differ in terms of their production technologies and associated input requirements. If the en-
trepreneur chooses to operate in the modern sector, she must pay an entry cost, .

The production function in the traditional sector is:

                                          y tT = z 1- [k t
                                                         T 
                                                           ] ,                                    (3)

where y tT is output of the final good, k t
                                          T
                                            is the capital input and   [0,1] measures the en-
trepreneur's span of control. The traditional entrepreneur chooses capital to maximize profits,
 T , where profits are the difference between production and rental payments for capital.

The production technology in the modern sector differs from that of the traditional sector in
two ways. First, it uses managerial and capital inputs more efficiently. Second, it requires elec-
tricity. As discussed in Section 2, the supply of grid electricity is rationed and unpredictable,
meaning frequent power outages. To incorporate this unpredictable rationing into the model,
we divide the time period into a continuum of measure one of "instants." We model the avail-
ability of grid power in each instant i of period t as the realization of an exogenous random
variable: with probability v , grid power is available in instant i and with probability 1 - v , grid
power is not available. As such, v corresponds to the fraction of the period that the power is
on and 1 - v corresponds to the fraction of the period that the power is off.

Following Hassler et al. (2015), the modern firm's output in each instant i , yiM
                                                                                t , is a Leontief
function between capital and electricity:

                                        M 1-                        
                                  yiM
                                    t =A z
                                                   M
                                             min(k t , ei t )          ,                          (4)

where ei t is the electricity that the firm uses during instant i to operate her capital input, and
                                                                                    -1/(1-)
AM is the TFP in the modern sector. We require that AM > (1 - ) v 1/(1-)                      , which

                                                  10
ensures that entrepreneurs operate in both sectors in equilibrium. When capital and electricity
inputs are equated, the production function equals AM z 1- [k t
                                                              M 
                                                                ] , mirroring the production
function in the traditional sector, but with higher productivity.

All instants when grid power is on are symmetric and all instants when grid power is off are
                M                                                              M
symmetric. Let y1 t denote output during any instant when the power is on and y0 t denote
output during any instant when the power is off. The firm's total output in period t , y tM , equals
the sum of output during the instants when grid power is on and output during the instants
when grid power is off:

                                     y tM = v y1
                                               M               M
                                                 t + (1 - v ) y0 t .                            (5)


There are two ways a modern firm can acquire electricity in each instant. First, if available,
it can get it from the electricity grid, eiGt
                                              , at a "below-market" price that we set to zero for
                                                                                   S
simplicity. Second, a fraction of modern firms can produce their own electricity, ei t
                                                                                       , at a higher
cost. As discussed in Section 2, many, but not all, modern firms in low-income economies
have access to generators. Some modern firms might not have generators because of financing
constraints, lack of markets for generators, poor distribution networks for diesel fuel, or lack
of parts or repair facilities (Scott et al., 2014). We do not take a stand on why some modern
firms do not have generator access. Instead, we assume that a fraction  of modern firms have
access to generators and a fraction 1 -  do not. An entrepreneur learns if she has generator
access after she enters the modern sector. Importantly, while generator access grants the firm
the ability to rent a generator and produce its own electricity, it does not require the firm to do
so. Firms with generator access endogenously decide how much electricity to self-produce, if
any.

Grid and self-generated electricity are perfect substitutes in the production of the final good.
For example, if a machine requires five kilowatt-hours of electricity to operate, it does not
matter if those kilowatt-hours are produced by a diesel generator or by a coal-fired power
plant. To generate its own electricity in instant i , the firm combines self-generation capital, kS
                                                                                                  t,
with fuel, f i t (denominated in units of final good), according to:

                                         S            S
                                        ei t = min[ k t , f i t ].                              (6)

The marginal cost of a unit of grid electricity is one unit of the final good, which is used as fuel
for the generator. Since all instants without power are symmetric, we use the notation f0 t to
denote the firm's demand for fuel during any instant without power.



                                                   11
Power outages in the model correspond to instants when the power is off and the firm produces
y0 t . The direct effect of these outages for firms with generators is that they must self-produce
all of their electricity inputs. If they do not have enough generator capital to operate their
productive capital at full capacity, then they must idle some productive capital, partially halting
production. The direct effect of outages for firms without generators is to halt all production.
In practice, power outages often require halting production because they lead to assembly line
disruptions, failure of electrically operated machines, and loss of lighting (Scott et al., 2014).

3.2. Modern Firm's Problem

We first describe the optimization problem for modern firms with generator access. At the
                                                                  M
start of period t , each modern firm chooses its capital input, k t , and generator capital, kS
                                                                                              t,
both of which are then fixed for the entire period. During each instant, the firm chooses its
electricity input. If the grid power is on, the firm gets electricity from the grid (since it has zero
marginal cost). If the grid power is off, the firm either produces its own electricity or simply
idles its capital input. The firm's profits are the difference between production and the costs
of generator capital, productive capital and fuel:

                          M      M               M                     S     M
                          t = v y1 t + (1 - v ) y0 t - f 0 t - R t ( k t + k t ).                   (7)

Importantly, the firm only pays for fuel during instants when the power is off. In contrast, the
firm must rent the generator and productive capital for the entire period. Since power outages
are unpredictable, as discussed in Section 2, firms cannot rent a generator only when the power
is off, or productive capital only when the power is on.

Profit maximization in the presence of power outages presents firms with a dismal trade-off.
A firm can purchase enough generator capital to operate its productive capital at full capacity
when the power is off. But then it must idle generator capital when the power is on. Alterna-
tively, the firm can purchase less generator capital, and thus reduce its idle generator capital
when the power is on. But then it must idle some of its productive capital when the power is
off.
                                                   M
Formally, the modern firm's problem is to choose k t , kS    G
                                                        t , e1 t , and f 0 t to maximize profits, taking
the probability of grid power, v , and the rental rate of capital, R t , as given. The Lagrangian for
the firm's problem can be written as:

                           = vAM z 1- (k t
                                         M 
                                           ) + (1 - v ) AM z 1- (kS      S
                                                                  t ) - kt                          (8)
                                   - R t (kS    M       M    S
                                           t + kt ) +  kt - kt ,



                                                   12
where  represents the Lagrange multiplier on the inequality constraint that kS    M
                                                                             t  k t . This in-
equality constraint arises from the firm's trade-off between idling productive capital and idling
generator capital. In particular, it is never optimal to produce more self-generated electricity
than is required to operate the productive capital, implying that generator capital will never
exceed productive capital, i.e. kS    M
                                 t  k t . However, it could be optimal to hold less generator
capital than is necessary to operate the productive capital at full capacity when the power is
                M 5
           t < kt .
off, i.e. kS

The optimization problem for modern firms without generator access is similar to the above
discussion except that generator capital always equals zero. Hence, the firm must idle all of
its productive capital input during an outage, implying that its profits equal equation (7) with
the self-generation terms set to zero: y0 t = f0 t = kS
                                                      t = 0.

We now characterize how the availability of grid power, v , affects modern firms' optimal levels
of productive capital and of generator capital (for those firms with generator access).

Proposition 1. The firm's productive capital input is increasing in the probability of grid electric-
ity, v, for any R t . Firms with generator access idle generator capital when the power is on for any
v < 1. For these firms, there exists a cutoff v  (R t )  (0,1) such that when v < v  (R t ), generator
capital is increasing in v and no productive capital is idled. When v  v  (R t ), generator capital
is decreasing in v and productive capital is idled when the power is off. Generator capital equals
zero when v = 1.

Figure 4 illustrates the implications of Proposition 1 for optimal production by modern firms
with a given productivity, z . The green solid line and the green o's plot production by modern
firms with generator access during instants when the power is on and off, respectively. Simi-
larly, the blue dashed line and the blue x's plot production by modern firms without generator
access during instants when the power is on and off. Moving from left to right on the x-axis
increases the probability of grid power from zero (no grid power) to one (no outages). The
value v corresponds to the threshold in Proposition 1, beyond which firms with generators
choose to idle some productive capital during an outage.

We focus first on the production decisions by the firms with generator access (green solid line
and o's). When v < v , firms operate their productive capital at full capacity when the power
is off, implying that output is the same during instants with and without grid power. When
   5
     By contrast, the other Leontief production functions ­ (4) when the power is on, and (6) when the power
is off ­ both hold with equality. That is, f0 t = kS
                                                   t , since it is never optimal to purchase more or less fuel than is
                                                                                              t = k t , since it is never
                                                                                             G      M
necessary to operate the generator capital at full capacity when the power is out, and e0
optimal to use more or less grid electricity than is necessary to operate the productive capital when the power is
on.


                                                          13
                                Figure 4: Solution to the Modern Firm's Problem


                                                                                      D
                                     Power on: generator
                                     Power off: generator
                                     Power on: no generator
                   Output            Power off: no generator




                                              A




                                              B


                                              C

                            0                 v1                v*                        1
                                            Probability of grid power: v
 Note: The green solid line and o's plot production by a modern firm with generator access when the power
 is on and off, respectively. The blue dashed line and x's plot production by a modern firm without generator
 access when the power is on and off, respectively. Value v corresponds to the cutoff from Proposition 1.


v > v , firms idle some of their productive capital when the power is off. As a result, output
is lower when the power is off than when the power is on. When v > v , output when the
power is off decreases with v because firms rent less generator capital as the probability of grid
power increases. The intuition is that when v is high, outages are sufficiently rare such that it
is optimal for firms to idle some of their productive capital during the occasional outage.

We turn next to the firms without generator access. Regardless of the probability of grid power,
these firms cannot produce when the power is off, hence the blue x's always equal zero. When
the power is on and v < v , output produced by firms without generator access is less than
output produced by firms with generator access (e.g. the dashed blue line is below the solid
green line). The marginal product of productive capital is lower for firms without generator
access because they must idle this capital for fraction 1 - v of the period. As a result, they rent
less productive capital and thus produce less output when the power is on. In contrast, when
v  v , output produced by firms with and without generator access is equal during instants
with grid power. In this region, the marginal product of productive capital is the same for
firms with and without generator access because both types of firms idle the marginal unit of
productive capital when the power is off.


                                                          14
Importantly, output when the power is on increases with the probability of grid power for all
modern firms (e.g., the solid green and dashed blue lines are upward sloping). The reason
is that increases in the probability of grid power increase the marginal product of productive
capital because it is idled for a smaller fraction of the period (for modern firms without gen-
erators, and for all modern firms when v > v ) and because having access to grid power for a
longer fraction of the period reduces the average cost of electricity over the period (for mod-
ern firms with generators). As a result, all modern firms scale up production by renting more
productive capital. Additionally, note that among modern firms with generators, a marginal
increase in the probability of grid power results in a larger increase in output when v > v ,
than when v < v (e.g., the slope of the solid green line is steeper when v > v ). When v < v ,
firms optimally choose to purchase enough generator capital to produce at full capacity when
the power is off, implying that any increase in scale in response to an increase in v requires
more productive capital and more generator capital. In contrast, when v > v , firms' optimal
demand for generator capital falls with v . Thus, any increase in scale in response to an increase
in v in this region requires an increase in productive capital but a decrease in generator capital.

We define the short-run partial-equilibrium effect of eliminating outages as the increase in the
firm's output when it learns that there will be no outages ex-post, after it has already made its
long-term input decisions. This definition captures the spirit of the microeconomic literature on
power outages and firm productivity which considers the effect of eliminating outages on firms
who have already made their entry and scale decisions. We can use Figure 4 to understand
the short-run partial-equilibrium effects of eliminating outages in the context of our model.
For example, consider an economy with probability of grid power v1 . The short-run partial-
equilibrium effect of eliminating outages for firms without generator access is the increase in
output when they produce at point B for the entire period, instead of switching between points
B and C. The short-run partial-equilibrium effect of eliminating outages for firms with genera-
tor access is zero because they produce at point A for the entire period, regardless of whether
the power is on or off. Hence, all of the short-run partial-equilibrium gains in output per worker
arise because firms without generator access no longer idle productive capital. However, elim-
inating outages in the short-run partial-equilibrium does not remove idle resources from the
economy altogether because firms with generator access still rent generators, which they now
idle for the entire period.

In addition to firms' short-run partial-equilibrium response to outages, Proposition 1 implies
that eliminating outages causes existing modern firms to demand more productive capital and
zero generator capital, all else constant. This increase in scale implies that not only do the
firms produce on the power-on line for the entire period, but they also incorporate that v = 1


                                                15
into their optimal production decisions by moving all the way to the right along the x-axis in
Figure 1. Consequently, eliminating outages (holding fixed R t ) increases output produced by
modern firms with and without generator access to point D in the upper-right corner of Figure
4. Like the short-run partial-equilibrium effect, firms do not idle productive capital at point
D because the power is on for the entire period. But unlike the short-run partial-equilibrium
effect, firms also do not idle generator capital at point D because they know ex-ante that there
will be no outages, and hence they do not rent any generator capital to begin with.

3.3. Modern-Sector Entry

Having characterized the optimal behavior of firms in the modern sector, we now turn to the
decision of whether or not to enter the modern sector. The entrepreneur enters the modern
sector if the expected value of profits in the modern sector minus the entry cost exceeds the
value of profits in the traditional sector:

                                                     E ( M       T
                                                         t ) -   t ,                                                          (9)

where the expectation is taken over whether not the entrepreneur has generator access. We
show in Appendix A that as long as there exist entrepreneurs in both sectors, then the difference
in expected profits, E ( M
                         t ) -  t , is increasing in z . Thus all entrepreneurs with z > z t enter the
                                T

modern sector, where productivity cutoff z t is the value of z such that equation (9) holds with
equality. This result implies that lower productivity entrepreneurs operate in the traditional
sector and higher productivity entrepreneurs operate in the modern sector. Firm size increases
with the entrepreneur's productivity, thus the smallest firms are traditional and the largest firms
are modern.

3.4. Definition of a Competitive Equilibrium

We define a sequence-of-markets equilibrium for this economy. We denote whether a mod-
ern firm has generator access with indicator variable x  {0,1}, where x = 1 denotes gener-
ator access and x = 0 denotes no access. A sequence-of-markets equilibrium consists of: a se-
quence of rental rates of capital, {R t }                                   
                                         t =0 ; productivity cutoffs, {z t } t =0 ; household allocations,
{ C t , K t }                                                                                                             
             t =0 ; and entrepreneurial allocations { k t (z ), k t (1, z ), k t ( x , z ), e1 t ( x , z ), f 0 t (1, z )} t =0 for
                                                        T         S            M             G

all x  {0,1} and for all z  [1, ] such that:

   1. Given prices, allocations of entrepreneurs across the traditional and modern sectors are
        consistent with the modern-sector productivity cutoffs, {z t }t =0 , defined in equation (9).

   2. Given prices, traditional-sector allocations solve the profit maximization problem for all

                                                               16
         firms in the traditional sector and modern-sector allocations solve the profit maximization
         problem for all firms in the modern sector.

      3. Given prices and firm profits, household allocations maximize (1) subject to the budget
         constraint:
                                                    zt                        
         C t + K t +1 = R t K t + (1 - )K t +             T
                                                          t (z ) dG (z ) +        ( M                  M
                                                                                    t (1, z ) + (1 - ) t (0, z ) - ) dG (z )
                                                    1                        zt


         and the non-negativity constraints, C t  0, and K t  0, where  T
                                                                        t (z ) are the profits of the
         traditional firms with productivity z ,  M
                                                  t ( x , z ) are the profits of the modern firms with
         generator access, x , and productivity z .

      4. The market for capital clears:

                       zt                       
                             T                             M                   M
              Kt =          kt (z )dG (z ) +            (k t (1, z ) + (1 - )k t (0, z ) + kS
                                                                                            t (1, z )) dG (z ).   (10)
                       1                       zt


We are interested primarily in how eliminating outages effects the economy in the long-run.
For this it is useful to define a steady state competitive equilibrium, which consists of a constant
rental rate, R; productivity cutoff z ; household allocations, {C , K }; and entrepreneurial allo-
cations {k T (z ), kS (1, z ), k M ( x , z ), e1
                                               G
                                                 ( x , z ), f0 (1, z )} for all x  {0,1} and for all z  [1, ] such
that conditions (1)-(4) hold and all variables are constant from one period to the next.

3.5. Long-Run General-Equilibrium Effects of Power Outages

We define the long-run general-equilibrium effect of eliminating outages as the steady state in-
crease in aggregate output (and other equilibrium variables) when we increase the probability
of grid power from its existing value to one. We first characterize how the probability of grid
power affects entry into the modern sector in the long-run general equilibrium.

Proposition 2. The steady-state productivity cutoff, z , is decreasing in the probability of grid
power, v.

Proof: The household's first order condition for capital implies that the steady-state rental rate
is:

                                                              1
                                                         R=     +  - 1,                                           (11)
                                                              



                                                                17
and hence the steady-state price of capital does not depend on the probability of grid power.
It follows that an increase in v does not affect profits for a traditional firm. Therefore, we only
need to show that expected profits for a potential modern entrant with a given z are increasing
in v . By the envelope theorem:

                 E ( M (z ))      M            M                                 M
                             = [ y1 (1, z ) - y0 (1, z ) + f0 (1, z )] + (1 - ) y1 (0, z ).        (12)
                    v

Note that the expectation is taken over x , the indicator variable which determines if the firm
has generator access. If v < v , then firms with generator access operate at full capacity when
                                 M
the power is off, implying that y0 (1, z ) = y1
                                              M
                                                (1, z ). When v > v , y1
                                                                       M
                                                                         (1, z ) > y0
                                                                                    M
                                                                                      (1, z ). In either
case, equation (12) is positive, implying that E ( M (z )) is increasing in v .

Our analytic model allows us to compare the short-run partial-equilibrium effect of eliminat-
ing outages with the long-run general-equilibrium effect. The short-run partial-equilibrium
effect corresponds to the increase in aggregate output when power outages are eliminated ex-
post. The long-run general-equilibrium effect incorporates the effects of two additional chan-
nels. First, since the steady-state rental rate is pinned down by the household Euler equation,
Proposition 1 implies that all existing modern firms scale up their production by demanding
more productive capital and reducing their demand for generator capital to zero. We call this
the firm-expansion channel. Second, Proposition 2 implies that more entrepreneurs enter the
modern sector, increasing modern output and decreasing traditional output. We call this the
firm-entry channel. A key difference between the short-run partial-equilibrium and the long-
run general-equilibrium effects is that the long-run general-equilibrium effect accounts for the
fact that permanently eliminating outages changes firms' expectations and hence their behav-
ior with regards to entry and their scale of operation, represented by their choices of productive
and generator capital.

Proposition 3. For any v < 1, the long-run general-equilibrium effect of eliminating outages is
larger than the short-run partial-equilibrium effect.

Proof: We define steady state A to be the steady state of the economy when the probability
of grid power is va < 1. We use this steady state as a baseline from which to calculate the
short-run partial-equilibrium and long-run general-equilibrium effects of eliminating outages.
The first order conditions from the traditional firm's profit maximization problem imply that
capital demand for a traditional firm with productivity, z in steady state A equals:

                                                             1
                                           T                1-
                                          ka (z ) = z            .                                 (13)
                                                        R

                                                   18
Similarly, the first order conditions from the modern firm's profit maximization problem im-
ply that productive capital demand for a modern firm with generator access x  {0,1} and
productivity z in steady state A equals:

                                                                                          1
                                                                  
                                    1                                        AM          1-
                                                                                               : va  v (R)
                                                                   z
       M                va AM      1-
                                                    M                      2R+1- va
      ka (0, z ) = z                       and     ka (1, z ) =                          1                        (14)
                           R                                               va AM        1-
                                                                                               : va > v (R).
                                                                   z
                                                                              R



Demand for generator capital by a modern firm with generator access and productivity z
equals:

                                                                  1
                                              
                                                      AM         1-
                                                                           : va  v (R)
                                               z
                              S                     2R+1- va
                             ka (1, z ) =                          1                                              (15)
                                                    (1- va )AM    1-
                                                                           : va > v (R).
                                               z
                                                      R+1- va



Let za denote the equilibrium productivity cutoff in steady state A. To calculate aggregate
output, we substitute the above expressions for capital demand in each sector into the re-
spective production functions (equations (3) and (4)) and integrate over the distribution of
entrepreneurs. Aggregate output in the traditional, YaT , and modern, YaM , sectors equals:

                                                            za
                                                     1-
                                        YaT   =                  zdG (z ) and                                     (16)
                                                R          1




                                                                               
          
                         AM       1-                       va AM      1-
           AM                           + (1 - ) va A M
                                                                                    zdG (z )       : va  v (R)
          
                       2R+1- va                               R
                                                                              za
 YaM =                                                                                                            (17)
                                                                                    
                        va AM     1-                      (1- va )AM   1-
          
              va AM                    + (1 - va )AM                                     zdG (z ) : va > v (R).
          
                                                            R+1- va
                           R
                                                                                   za


Aggregate output, Ya , equals the sum of aggregate output in the traditional and modern sectors:
Ya = YaT + YaM .
                                                                                   ~ to equal
We compute the short-run partial-equilibrium effect of eliminating outages. Define Y
aggregate output when v = 1, but the productivity cutoff equals its value when v = va (za ) and




                                                          19
the demands for capital equal their values when v = va (equations (13) - (15)):
                                                                                
             
                          AM        1-                     va AM     1-
              A                          + (1 - )A                                       zdG (z )      : va  v (R)
               M                                      M
                        2R+1- va                              R
  ~ =YT+                                                                       za
  Y   a                                                                                                              (18)
                      va AM    1-
               M
                                               zdG (z )                                             : va > v (R).
             
              A
                         R
                                         za


                                                                       ~ - Ya . This represents
The short-run partial-equilibrium effect of eliminating outages equals Y
the difference between output when firms choose their scale and sector but experience no
outages ex-post and actual output.

To compute the long-run general-equilibrium effect of eliminating outages, we define steady
state B to be the steady state of the economy when v = 1. Let z b be the equilibrium productivity
cutoff in steady state B. Aggregate output in the traditional and modern sectors in steady state
B equals:
                                                                                          
                               zb                                                              
                         1-                                               AM             1-
              YbT =                 zdG (z ) and          YbM   =A M
                                                                                                    zdG (z ).
                    R          1                                           R                  zb


Aggregate output in steady state B equals Yb = YbT + YbM . The long-run general-equilibrium
effect of eliminating outages equals Yb - Ya . This represents the difference between output
in the steady state with no outages and output in the steady state with outages when the
probability of grid power equals va .

To demonstrate that the long-run general-equilibrium effect of eliminating outages exceeds
the short-run partial-equilibrium effect, we must show that Yb - Ya > Y
                                                                      ~ - Ya . First, note that
by Proposition 2, the productivity cutoff in steady state B is less than the productivity cutoff in
                                                                          -1/(1-)
steady state A: z b < za . Then, since AM > (1 - ) v 1/(1-)                                > 1, it follows that:

                                                                           
                                          za                                         
                                   1-                           AM        1-
                     Yb >                      zdG (z ) + AM                               zdG (z ).                 (19)
                          R              1                       R                  za


                                                                              ~ defined in
We show that the right-hand-side of equation (19) is larger than the value of Y
equation (18). First, observe that the first term on the right-hand-side of equation (19) equals
YaT . Second, one can show that the second term on the right-hand-side of equation (19) always
exceeds the second term in equation (18). Therefore, it follows that Yb > Y~ which implies that
Yb - Ya > Y
          ~ - Ya .

Figure 5 illustrates the implications of Proposition 3 for aggregate modern output, which is at


                                                          20
Figure 5: Short-Run Partial-Equilibrium and Long-Run General-Equilibrium Effects of Outages

                                                                                         B
                                  Aggregate modern output
                                  Aggregate modern output, power on ex-post




                                                   L.R. G.E.
                    Output




                                                               C


                                       S.R. P.E.
                                                               A


                             0                                     v1                        1
                                          Probability of grid power: v
 Note: The dashed blue line plots aggregate modern-sector output. The solid green line plots aggregate modern
 output when firms make their entry and scale decisions assuming the probability of grid power equals the value
 of v on the x-axis but the actual probability equals one. The short-run partial-equilibrium increase in aggregate
 modern output equals the vertical distance from A to C and the long-run general-equilibrium increase equals
 the vertical distance from A to B.


the heart of the proposition's result. The dashed blue line plots aggregate modern output as a
function of the probability of grid power. Increases in the probability of grid power increase
aggregate modern output through both the firm-expansion and the firm-entry channels. The
solid green line plots aggregate modern output when outages are eliminated after firms have
already made their capital and entry decisions.

To compare the short-run partial-equilibrium increase in aggregate modern output with the
long-run general-equilibrium increase, consider an economy with probability of grid power,
v1 . The short-run partial-equilibrium increase in aggregate modern output from eliminating
outages is the increase from point A to point C. Point A corresponds to aggregate modern
output when the probability of grid power equals v1 and firms internalize this probability into
their entry and capital decisions. Point C corresponds to aggregate modern output when firms
make their entry and capital decisions assuming that the probability of grid power equals v1 ,
but the actual probability equals 1. Aggregate modern output at point C is higher than at point
A because firms produce on their power-on lines in Figure 4 for the entire period. In context
of the proof of Proposition 3, moving from point A to point C is analogous to moving from Ya
                     ~.
in steady state A to Y


                                                          21
The long-run general-equilibrium increase accounts for the effects of the firm-expansion and
firm-entry channels by moving all the way to the right on the x-axis, increasing aggregate
modern output from point A to point B. Graphically, the increase in aggregate modern output
from A to B will always exceed the increase from A to C because the firm-expansion and firm-
entry channels imply that both lines must be upward sloping and they must be equal when
v = 1. Referring back to the proof of Proposition 3, moving from point A to point B parallels
the move from Ya in steady state A to Yb in steady state B.

The overall lesson from the model is that looking only at the short-run effect of eliminating
outages on firm productivity paints an incomplete picture of the total effect. In the longer
run, firms anticipate that there will be no outages. As a result, they demand more productive
capital and zero generator capital, scaling up their operations. New firms choose to operate
with better, electricity-using, technologies. Combined, these two channels cause output per
worker to rise more in the long-run than in the short-run.


4. Quantitative Model and Calibration

To quantify the long-run general-equilibrium effect of eliminating outages, we extend the
model from Section 3 in ways that are useful for the numerical analysis, but leave the funda-
mental intuition unchanged. Most importantly, we model power outages as the economy's en-
dogenous response to a regulated electricity price that the government fixes below the market-
clearing level. As a result, the supply of grid electricity is less than the demand. The amount of
rationing, and hence the probability of grid power, is determined so that the rationed demand
for grid power equals the amount supplied at the regulated price.

Additionally, the quantitative model includes hired labor as a production input in the tra-
ditional and modern sectors. It also adds additional parameters in the Leontief production
functions to allow them to better match the data and specifies the distribution of entrepreneur
productivity. We describe the main features of the quantitative model below. We relegate the
definition of an equilibrium to Appendix B.

4.1. Grid Electricity Production

We design a simple model of grid electricity production that captures the key features of elec-
tricity markets in developing countries discussed in Section 2, specifically the low electricity
prices and frequent outages. We abstract from other aspects of electricity production, such as
the degree of market power, different sources of electricity, and distinctions between genera-
tion, transmission, and distribution. These are important issues for some questions, but are


                                               22
not first order for our analysis.

There are measure one of electricity producers. Each electricity producer produces electricity
from land, b t , and grid capital, k G
                                     t , according to the production function:

                                                 G G          1-
                                           eG
                                            t = A (k t ) b t       .                             (20)

Parameter  denotes capital's share in grid-electricity production. The supply of land useful
for electricity (e.g., hydro dam sites) is fixed and owned by the government. The electricity
producers pay a licensing fee, Q t , for each unit of land.

The electricity producer chooses grid capital, k G
                                                 t , and land, b t , to maximize profits, taking as
given the grid electricity price, the licensing fee, and the rental rate for grid capital. Profits for
each grid-electricity producer are:

                                    G G G  1-
                               G
                               t = P A (k t ) x - R t kG
                                                       t - Q t bt .                              (21)

We assume that in equilibrium, the government sets the licensing fee, Q t , so that the fixed
supply of land is used at full capacity and all electricity producers earn zero profits (though
this assumption is not central to our results). We normalize the supply of land to unity. The
electricity producer's demand for grid capital and supply of grid electricity equal:

                                            1                                           
                           P G AG          1-                           1   P G        1-
                     kG
                      t =                        and       eG     G
                                                            t = (A )
                                                                       1-                   .    (22)
                           Rt                                               Rt

Note that the key implication of equation (22) is that electricity producers respond to an in-
crease in P G by raising their supply of electricity. The aggregate demand for grid capital and
the aggregate supply of grid electricity equal the respective sums of capital demand and supply
                                                      1 G                        1 G
by each identical electricity producer: K tG           k
                                                      0 t
                                                             = kG       G
                                                                t and E t         e
                                                                                 0 t
                                                                                        = eG
                                                                                           t .

In line with the evidence discussed in Section 2, the government sets the grid-electricity price,
P G , at a value below that which would clear the grid-electricity market. Therefore, the price,
P G , does not clear the electricity market as it would in a standard competitive model. Instead,
we assume that the probability that the power is on, vt , adjusts endogenously to ensure that the
total supply of grid electricity equals the total rationed demand for grid electricity. In particular,
vt solves:

                                       
                           G
                          Et   = vt        (1 - )e G              G
                                                   t (0, z ) +  e t (1, z ) dG (z ).             (23)
                                      zt




                                                      23
If the government raises the grid-electricity price, then equation (22) implies that electricity
producers increase production, raising the supply of grid electricity. Holding demand constant,
the increase in electricity supply raises the probability of grid power, vt , that solves equation
(23). On the demand side, the increase in the price of grid electricity reduces grid-electricity
demand, while the increase in the probability of grid power operates though the firm-expansion
and firm-entry channels to increase grid-electricity demand. In general equilibrium, the prob-
ability of grid power that solves equation (23) for each grid-electricity price depends on both
the supply- and demand-side factors.

4.2. Labor, Self-Generation, and Managerial Productivity

The household is endowed with one unit of labor which she supplies inelastically to the labor
market. She earns labor income Wt in each period t . Both traditional and modern firms use
labor, in addition to capital, in the production process. The traditional and modern production
functions for a firm with productivity z are:

                                                                                           
    y tT = AT z 1- [(k t
                       T  T 1- 
                         ) (n t ) ]     and     yiM   M 1-
                                                  t =A z
                                                                  M  M 1-
                                                           min((k t ) ( n t ) , µ ei t )      .   (24)

Parameter  denotes capital's share in the capital-labor composite and parameter µ controls
how much electricity is required to operate the capital-labor composite. Parameter AT denotes
the TFP of the traditional sector. We define parameter  > 1 to be the TFP boost from the
modern production technology: AM   AT .

The production function for self-generated electricity is:

                                         S      S       S
                                        ei t = A min[ k t ,  f i t ],                             (25)

where parameter AS is TFP in the production of self-generated electricity and parameter 
controls how much fuel is required to operate the self-generation capital.

Each entrepreneur draws her level of managerial productivity, z , from the Pareto distribution:

                                        
                                    1
                     G (z ) = 1 -           where  > 1           and z  [1, ].                    (26)
                                    z

The equilibrium is defined as in Section 3, but now the probability of grid power, vt , adjusts
to clear the grid-electricity market and the wage, Wt , adjusts to clear the labor market. The
formal definition of the equilibrium is in Appendix B.




                                                    24
4.3. Calibration

We calibrate the model to provide quantitative estimates of the effects of power outages on
output per worker and the contribution of the different general equilibrium channels. We
focus on five major Sub-Saharan African economies: Ethiopia, Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania, and
Uganda. We first compute a baseline calibration using data from the Nigerian economy. We
then recalibrate TFP and the key electricity-related parameters to match targets specific to each
country in our study. The time period in the model is one year. We report all monetary values
in year 2014 US dollars. We relegate the description of the data sources to Appendix B.2.

4.3.1. Baseline Calibration: Nigerian Economy

The calibration has two steps. First, we choose some parameters directly from the data and
existing literature. Given these directly calibrated parameters, we choose a second set of pa-
rameters such that moments in the model match their empirical targets. Table 1 reports the
values of the directly calibrated parameters.

We set the span-of-control parameter, , equal to 0.85, as in Midrigan and Xu (2014). We use
one third for capital's share in the capital-labor composite,  = 0.33. We set the depreciation
rate, the CRRA coefficient and the discount rate equal to standard values of 0.06, 2 and 0.96,
respectively. Parameter  equals the fraction of modern entrepreneurs that have access to
generators. Viewing the World Enterprise Surveys as a survey of modern firms, parameter 
corresponds to the fraction of firms that report access to generators (Figure 2), adjusted for
the fact that not all firms in the World Enterprise Surveys experience outages (Figure 1). In
Nigeria, 77.6 percent of firms experience outages and 70.7 percent of firms have access to
generators. Thus,  equals the fraction of firms that experience outages that have access to
generators,  = 70.7/77.6 = 0.91.

We are not aware of any direct empirical estimates of the price elasticity grid electricity, which
would help pin down the value of . Instead, we choose  = 0.7 to reflect the relatively high
capital share in electricity in the data. Section 5.2 reports the sensitivity of the main results to
alternative values of this parameter.




                                                25
                           Table 1: Parameter Values: Direct Calibration
              Parameter                                                                 Value
              Span of control:                                                           0.85
              Capital share:                                                             0.33
              Traditional productivity: AT                                                 1
              Modern productivity boost:                                                 1.43
              Fraction of modern entrepreneurs with generator access:                    0.91
              Depreciation rate:                                                         0.06
                                                   G
              Grid electricity productivity: A                                             1
              Grid capital share:                                                         0.7
              CRRA coefficient:                                                            2
              Discount rate:                                                             0.96
         Note: This table reports the baseline parameter values that we take from existing estimates.


We normalize grid-productivity, AG , and traditional productivity, AT , both to unity. Modern pro-
ductivity parameter,  , determines the productivity boost an entrepreneur receives by switch-
ing to the modern production technology. Using data from six lower income economies, La-
gakos (2016) finds that the productivity of the large modern segment of the retail sector is 1.43
times larger than the productivity of the smaller traditional segment. Based on this evidence,
we set  = 1.43. Section 5.2 explores the sensitivity of the main results to alternative values
of  , and shows that the results are not as sensitive to this parameter as one might think.

We jointly calibrate the remaining parameters, {AS ,  , P G , , µ, } so that moments in the model
match their empirical targets. Table 2 reports the resulting parameter values. Table 3 reports
the values of the moments we target in the model and in the data. We discuss each parameter
and its primary target in turn.

The grid-electricity price, P G , largely determines the level of grid capital, K G , which in turn con-
trols the supply of grid electricity. All else constant, the supply of grid electricity governs how
much electricity firms can purchase from the grid and how much they must self-produce from
generators. The World Enterprise Survey reports that Nigerian firms self-generate 58.8 per-
cent of their total electricity consumption. We choose the regulated level of the grid-electricity
price, P G , to match this target.

The ratio of the average cost of self-generated electricity (green columns of Figure 3) to the
average cost of grid electricity (blue columns of Figure 3) pins down self-generation produc-
tivity, AS . For grid electricity, the firm's average cost equals the marginal cost, P G . However,
for self-generated electricity, the average cost differs from the marginal cost because the firm


                                                       26
                           Table 2: Parameter Values: Method of Moments
              Parameter                                                                     Value
              Leontief parameter in final good production: µ                                1.59
              Leontief parameter in self-generated electricity production:                  2.14
                                                   S
              Self-generation productivity: A                                               1.30
              Grid-electricity price: p G                                                   0.08
              Entry cost:                                                                   0.32
              Pareto tail:                                                                  3.97

Note: This table reports the baseline parameter values that we choose to match the empirical targets in Table 3.



must incur the fixed cost of renting the generator. To calculate the average cost of self-generated
electricity, we add the variable cost calculated above to estimates of the capital and mainte-
nance costs of a typical diesel generator (see Appendix B.2). The average cost of self-generated
electricity equals 34 cents per kWh, 5.51 times larger than the average cost of grid electricity.

Parameters  and  affect the number and size of modern firms. Using data from the Nigerian
Survey of Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises, we find that the modern sector employs 63
percent of workers and includes 30 percent of firms. We choose  and  to match these two
targets.

Finally, the Leontief parameter in final goods production, µ, determines electricity's share of
modern production. Allcott et al. (2016) estimate that electricity share equals 7.4 percent
of value added among Indian manufacturing firms.6 Since, electricity expenditures include
expenditures on both grid and self-generated electricity, the probability of grid power could
affect the electricity share. Furthermore, the probability of grid power in the Nigerian economy
likely differs from Allcott et al. (2016)'s reported probability of 0.93 for Indian manufacturing
firms. To align our model as closely as possible with the empirical target, we choose µ so
that modern electricity share equals 7.4 percent in a counterfactual steady state in which the
probability of grid power in Nigeria equals 0.93. Table 3 reports the values of the moments in
the model and the data. The model matches the targeted moments out to four decimal places.
   6
    Similarly, Fisher-Vanden et al. (2015) find that the electricity share of value added equals 6 percent among
Chinese manufacturing firms.




                                                       27
                                            Table 3: Model Fit
           Moment                                                               Model      Target
           (variable cost of self-generation)/(grid-electricity price)           4.33       4.33
           (average cost of self-generation)/(grid-electricity price)            5.51       5.51
           Fraction of self-generated electricity                                0.59       0.59
           Modern electricity share                                              0.07       0.07
           Fraction of modern labor                                              0.63       0.63
           Fraction of modern entrepreneurs                                      0.30       0.30
 Note: This table reports the empirical and model values of the moments used to calibrate the parameters in
 Table 2 for the baseline economy. We compute the modern electricity share in the model in a counterfactual
 steady state in which the probability of grid power equals 0.93. All the parameters in Table 2 are jointly
 determined by all of the moments. The model matches the targets out to four decimal places.

4.3.2. Country-Specific Calibration

                                Table 4: Country Specific Parameters
                    Price of grid       Self-gen       Self-gen     Trad. TFP:     Generator access
      Country
                   electricity: P G    Leontief:       TFP: AS          AT          probability: 
      Ethiopia           0.03              2.03           2.86         0.41                0.61
      Ghana              0.10              1.75           1.94         0.75                0.58
      Nigeria            0.08              2.14           1.30         1.00                0.91
      Tanzania           0.07              1.51           3.44         0.53                0.50
      Uganda             0.08              1.63           3.56         0.45                0.64

 Note: This table reports the values of the country-specific parameters in the model. We measure the fraction
 of modern firms with access to generators, , directly from the data. We calibrate the remaining parameters
 to match the empirical targets in Table 5.

We re-calibrate the four electricity-related parameters, {AS ,  , , P G } and traditional productiv-
ity, AT , for each remaining country in our study. All other parameter values are constant across
countries and equal to their values in the baseline calibration (Tables 1 and 2). Table 4 reports
the values of the country-specific parameters.

For each country, we measure the fraction of modern firms that have access to generators, ,
directly from the World Enterprise Survey data reported in Figure 2, adjusting for the frequen-
cies of outages reported in Figure 1. We calibrate the remaining four parameters so that four
moments in the model directly match their corresponding empirical targets. In particular, we
choose  and AS for each country to match the ratios of the average and marginal cost of self-
generated electricity relative to grid electricity (using the same data as in Figure 3). We choose
the regulated grid-electricity price, P G , to match the country-specific fractions of self-generated

                                                     28
electricity reported in the Word Enterprise Surveys. We determine the country-specific values
of AT to match the ratio of output per worker in the specific country relative to its value in
Nigeria. Table 5 reports the values of these country-specific targets. The calibrated model in
each country matches the corresponding targets out to four decimal places.

                                     Table 5: Country-Specific Targets
         Country       (AC self)/(AC grid)         (MC self)/(MC grid)          E s /( E s + E g )   Y /YN GA
         Ethiopia               8.61                          6.84                   0.49             0.25
         Ghana                  3.66                          3.00                   0.22             0.67
         Nigeria                5.51                          4.33                   0.59             1.00
         Tanzania               3.22                          2.70                   0.25             0.38
         Uganda                 2.48                          2.05                   0.18             0.33
 Note: This table reports the empirical values of the country-specific targets for each of the five countries in
 our study. The targets are: (1) the average cost of self-generated electricity relative to grid electricity, (2) the
 marginal cost of self-generated electricity relative to grid electricity, (3) self-generated electricity relative to
 total electricity and (4) output per worker in the specific country relative to output per worker in Nigeria.

5. Quantitative Results

In our main experiment, we simulate the effects of eliminating outages by letting the price
of grid electricity adjust to clear markets.7 Introducing a market-clearing electricity price is
a purely counterfactual exercise in the sense that no African country has implemented such a
reform (Eberhard et al., 2011). Hence, our model provides the necessary laboratory to explore
how increasing the electricity price to eliminate outages would affect output, consumption,
and other macroeconomic aggregates.

5.1. Long-Run General-Equilibrium Effects of Eliminating Power Outages

To quantify the long-run general-equilibrium effect of eliminating outages in each country, we
compare the country's initial calibrated steady state with a counterfactual "no-outages" steady
state. In the no-outages steady state, we de-regulate the electricity market by allowing the
price to adjust so that grid-electricity supply exactly equals demand. The resulting increase in
the grid-electricity price eliminates outages by increasing the supply of grid capital and grid
electricity (equation 22). The first column of Table 6 reports the percent increase in the grid-
electricity price between the initial and no-outages steady states in each country. The second
and third columns report the corresponding increases in grid-electricity capital and supply.
   7
     Note that this experiment involves raising price as well as increasing the reliability of the grid. Raising the
price alone has negative effects on firms in the model, since it raises production costs and reduces output. This
is consistent with the empirical findings of Abeberese (2017), who documents that higher electricity prices for
Indian manufacturing firms resulted in lower output and labor productivity growth.


                                                         29
                         Table 6: Grid Electricity Price, Capital, and Supply
                                    Percent change from the initial steady state
                             Grid price: P G     Grid capital: K G     Grid electricity: E G
               Ethiopia            338                13,614                   3,033
               Ghana                41                    212                   122
               Nigeria              81                    617                   297
               Tanzania             71                    494                   248
               Uganda               36                    179                   105

 Note: Column (1) reports the percent increase in the grid-electricity price from its value in each country's
 initial steady state necessary to eliminate outages. Columns (2) and (3) report the corresponding percent
 increases in grid-electricity capital and supply.

Eliminating outages requires substantial increases in grid-electricity prices, capital, and supply
across all five countries. Ghana, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda require between a 30 and
80 percent increase in the grid-electricity price, resulting in two- to seven-fold increases in
grid capital. These are accompanied by large increases in grid-electricity supply. Ethiopia
stands out with more than a quadrupling of the grid-electricity price required to clear the
electricity market, generating over a 14-fold increase in the level of grid capital. Both the grid-
electricity price and the level of grid capital in Ethiopia are extremely low in the initial steady
state (see Appendix Table B.3). Consequently, the large proportional increases in Ethiopian
grid-electricity prices, capital, and supply occur because the electricity sector is very distorted
and, mechanically, because of the low initial steady-state values, from which the proportional
increases are measured.

Figure 6 plots the long-run general-equilibrium effect of eliminating outages. Eliminating out-
ages leads to large increases in output per worker in all countries, ranging from 16.8 percent
in Uganda to 30.7 percent in Ethiopia. Ghana, Nigeria, and Tanzania are in the middle, with
increases in output per worker equal to 24.9, 28.4, and 27.1 percent, respectively. Averag-
ing across all five countries, eliminating outages increases output per worker in the long-run
general equilibrium by approximately 25 percent.

To better understand the sources of productivity gains from eliminating outages, we decompose
the total increase in output per worker into three components, corresponding to the three
sections of each bar in Figure 6. The green section shows the short-run partial-equilibrium
effect, which is the increase in output per worker that results when outages are eliminated ex-
post, after entrepreneurs have already made their scale and entry decisions. Specifically, we
hold firm size, the productivity cutoff, and all prices constant and compute output per worker
if the probability of grid power equals one, instead of its value in the initial steady state. This


                                                     30
        Figure 6: Long-Run General-Equilibrium Effects of Eliminating Power Outages
                                                          40
                                                                             SR, PE
                                                          35                 LR, GE, firm-expansion channel



                  Percent Increase in Output per Worker
                                                                             LR, GE, firm-expansion and firm-entry channels
                                                               30.7
                                                          30                        28.4
                                                                                                    27.1
                                                                      24.9
                                                          25


                                                          20
                                                                                                                   16.8
                                                          15


                                                          10


                                                          5


                                                          0
                                                               ETH    GHA           NGA             TZA            UGA
                                                                                 Country

 Note: The height of each bar equals the total steady-state increase in output per worker from eliminating
 power outages in each country. The green, blue and purple regions of each bar correspond to the relative
 contributions from the short-run partial-equilibrium effect, the firm-expansion channel and the firm-entry
 channel, respectively.


exercise is truly partial equilibrium in the sense that we do not require the markets for capital,
labor, or electricity to clear.

Consistent with the microeconomic evidence (e.g., Allcott et al., 2016, and the other studies
cited in the introduction), the short-run partial-equilibrium effects of eliminating outages are
small, ranging from 0.7 percent in Ethiopia to 7.6 percent in Nigeria. Averaging across all five
countries, eliminating outages in the short-run partial equilibrium only increases output per
worker by approximately 4 percent. Comparing the short-run partial equilibrium effect with
the long-run general-equilibrium effect (equal to the full height of each bar in Figure 6) reveals
that the long-run general-equilibrium effects are around five times larger, on average. Hence,
as Buera et al. (2012) also find in the microfinance context, the short-run partial equilibrium
effect is an important component of the total macroeconomic impact, but it is far from the
whole story.

The large long-run effects do not result from large (counterfactual) short-run partial-equilibrium
effects, but instead from the additional increases in output per worker generated by the firm-
expansion and firm-entry channels. The blue and purple sections of each bar represent the
increase in output per worker from adding the firm-expansion and firm-entry channels, re-


                                                                                 31
spectively. To isolate the effects of the firm-expansion channel (blue sections), we solve for
a no-outages steady state in which the productivity cutoff, z , is fixed at its value in the ini-
tial steady state. In this exercise, all markets clear, but entrepreneurs' sector decisions do not
necessarily satisfy the entry condition in equation (9). The additional increases in output per
worker from the firm-entry channel (purple sections) equal the difference between the no-
outages steady state and the no-outages steady state with the productivity cutoff fixed at its
value in the initial steady state.

As Figure 6 shows, both the firm-entry and the firm-expansion channels are large relative to
the short-run partial-equilibrium effect. The firm-entry channel is somewhat larger than the
firm-expansion channel (i.e., the purple sections of each bar are larger than the blue sections)
because the ability of the firm-expansion channel to increase output per worker is constrained
by the size of the modern sector in the initial steady state. While all existing modern firms
scale up production, if there are very few modern firms, then this increase in scale will have
only a small effect on output per worker. Indeed, Ethiopia has the smallest modern sector in
the initial steady state (see Appendix Table B.3) and experiences the largest difference in the
effects of the firm-expansion and firm-entry channels.

To quantify the broader macroeconomic consequences of eliminating outages in each country,
Table 7 reports the percent change in a number of variables in the no-outages steady state
relative to their values in the initial steady state. Eliminating outages leads to substantial
increases in the size of the modern sector, measured either by the number of modern firms, Q M ,
or by the number of modern workers, N M (first two rows of Table 7). Since the total numbers of
firms and workers are fixed, the increases in the numbers modern firms and workers generate
parallel decreases in the numbers of traditional firms and workers.

Eliminating outages leads to large increases in the equilibrium wage, ranging from 11 percent
in Uganda to 26 percent in Nigeria (third row of Table 7). The reason for the increase in wages
is that the number of modern firms increases and existing modern firms rent additional capital
and purchase more electricity, all of which increase the marginal product of labor. The rental
rate of capital is pinned down entirely by the household-Euler equation and is thus unchanged,
as in the analytic version of the model in Section 3. Productive capital in the traditional and
modern sectors moves in opposite directions (fourth and fifth rows of Table 7). The combined
effects of the firm-expansion and firm-entry channels lead to substantial increases in productive
capital in the modern sector. Capital in the traditional sector falls both because the firm-entry
channel implies that there are fewer traditional firms and because the higher wages cause
traditional firms to hire fewer workers, reducing their demand for capital.

The final three rows of Table 7 report the effects of eliminating outages on the aggregate capital

                                               32
stock, measured TFP, and consumption. Following the development accounting literature (Hall
and Jones, 1999; Caselli, 2005) we define measured TFP as aggregate output, Y , divided by a
                                                      ~  N 1- , where  equals the calibrated
Cobb-Douglas aggregate of measured capital and labor, K
                                                                              ~ , to equal the
value of capital share, 0.33. To be conservative, we define measured capital, K
aggregate capital stock plus entry costs, which can be thought of as a type of capital.


                   Table 7: Effects of Eliminating Outages on Macro Aggregates
                                                  Percent change from the initial steady state
                                               Ethiopia      Ghana     Nigeria     Tanzania      Uganda
                                     M
      Modern entrepreneurs: Q                    3,513        158        129          326          120
      Modern labor: N M                          1,421         64         52          149           63
      Wage rate: W                                 17          21         26           18           11
                                          M
      Modern productive capital: K               1,677         98         91          193           81
      Traditional capital: K T                    -67         -74         -82         -68           -51
      Aggregate capital stock: K                   46          28         31           36           22
      Measured TFP: Y /(K ~  N 1- )                14          14         17           14            9
      Consumption: C                               18          17         21           17           11
 Note: This table reports the percent change in a number of variables in the no-outages steady state from their
 corresponding values in the initial steady state. Measured TFP equals aggregate output divided by a Cobb-
 Douglas aggregate of measured capital and labor, K ~  N 1- , where  equals 0.33. Measured capital, K ~ , equals
 the aggregate capital stock plus entry costs.

Eliminating outages leads to substantial increases in the aggregate capital stock, ranging from
31 percent in Nigeria to 46 percent in Ethiopia, implying that capital accumulation is an im-
portant driver of the gains in output per worker reported in Figure 6. However, the increases in
output per worker do not result from capital accumulation alone. We also see large increases in
measured TFP, ranging from 9 percent in Uganda to 17 percent in Nigeria. Eliminating outages
increases measured TFP because it eliminates idle resources and because it shifts entrepreneurs
to the more-productive modern sector. The higher steady-state capital stock and measured TFP
generate substantial increases in consumption.

5.2. Sensitivity

To provide insights on the underlying mechanisms driving the quantitative results, we explore
the sensitivity of the results for the Nigerian economy to the following parameter values and
targets: (1) capital's share in grid electricity production, , (2) the productivity boost from
becoming modern,  , (3) grid-electricity's share in modern production, and (4) the average
and marginal costs of self-generated electricity. In each case, we re-calibrate all the parameters
in the Nigerian economy to either match the new set of targets or to account for the change

                                                        33
in the directly calibrated parameter value. The four panels of Table 8 report the effects of
eliminating outages on output, consumption, and capital for each sensitivity exercise. The
middle row in every panel corresponds to the baseline calibration.


                        Table 8: Sensitivity to Parameter Values and Targets
                                                Percent change from the initial steady state
                                                Output: Y       Consumption: C         Capital: K
           Capital share in grid-electricity production: 
            = 0.6                                    22                 16                  24
            = 0.7                                    28                 21                  31
            = 0.8                                    35                 27                  37
           Modern productivity boost: 
            = 0.3                                    26                 20                  29
            = 0.43                                   28                 21                  31
            = 0.5                                    31                 22                  33
           Electricity share of modern output
           Share = 0.05                              23                 15                  24
           Share = 0.074                             28                 21                  31
           Share = 0.1                               37                 30                  41
           Self-generation costs
           50 percent decrease in costs              21                 14                  25
           Baseline costs                            28                 21                  31
           50 percent increase in costs              41                 36                  40
 Note: This table reports the percent increase in aggregate output, consumption, and capital between the
 initial and no-outages steady states in the Nigerian economy for different perturbations of the parameters
 and targets. The four panels correspond to perturbations of the capital share in grid-electricity production,
 the modern productivity boost, the electricity share of modern output in the counterfactual steady state with
 v = 0.93, and the self-generation costs. The middle row in every panel corresponds to the baseline calibration.

Higher values of the capital share in grid-electricity production, , imply weaker diminishing
returns in grid-electricity production. As a result, de-regulating the electricity market leads
to a smaller increase in the grid-electricity price and a larger increase in the grid-electricity
supply, magnifying the gains in output per worker. Higher values of the modern productivity
boost,  , increase the gains in output per worker from the firm-entry channel, raising the total
increase in output per worker. However, the impact of changes  are smaller that one might
expect because the model must match the same empirical targets in the initial steady state.
For example, all else constant, higher values of  make the modern sector more attractive,
increasing the size and number of modern firms. Consequently, matching the empirical shares

                                                      34
of modern labor and firms with a higher value of  requires a larger entry cost, , and a larger
Pareto distribution parameter, . The larger values of  and  partially offset the impact from
the larger value of  on the increase in output per worker from eliminating outages.

As one might expect, the effects of eliminating outages depend on electricity's share of modern
output, which determines the relative importance of electricity as a production input, and on
the costs of self-generation, which determines the cost of electricity during an outage (last two
panels of Table 8). At the extreme lower bound, if electricity did not enter modern production
at all (so that its share equaled zero) or if the cost of self-generation equaled the cost grid elec-
tricity, then eliminating outages would have no effect on output per worker. Increasing either
of these variables from this lower bound necessarily increases the long-run general-equilibrium
effects of eliminating outages. Importantly, the values used in the baseline calibration for elec-
tricity's share of modern output and the self-generation costs are disciplined by direct empiri-
cal evidence from developing economies. Thus, while the actual values could always differ, in
practice, we expect that they will be relatively close to the baseline calibration.

Finally, our main results assume that fraction  of modern entrepreneurs have access to gener-
ators and fraction 1 -  do not, where the value of  is disciplined by the evidence on generator
ownership from the World Enterprise Surveys. Importantly, when v < v (as it is in the initial
steady state for all five countries) firms with generator access endogenously choose a larger
scale than firms without generator access. Hence, the model is consistent with the empirical
evidence that firms with generators are larger than those without (see e.g. Foster and Stein-
buks, 2008; Alby et al., 2013). However, it is also possible that generator access is correlated
with unobservable firm productivity, z . Since we have no direct evidence on this correlation,
we instead bound our main results in Figure 6 from below by re-calibrating and re-solving our
model assuming that all modern firms have generator access. We find that while the magni-
tudes are smaller than in our main results, the increases in output per worker from eliminating
outages are still substantial, ranging from 8.2 percent in Uganda to 24.0 percent in Ethiopia
(see Appendix Figure B.1).

5.3. Insights on Weak Links and Aggregate Productivity

One insight from the previous literature is that aggregate productivity may not be as affected
by weak link sectors as one might think, since a competitive economy can compensate by
allocating more inputs to those sectors (Jones, 2011). The logic is that if output from a weak-
link sector is sufficiently scarce, then its price will rise to attract more inputs, thus raising output
in the weak-link sector. In our context, with electricity rationed through power outages, these
forces do not operate in the same way. The electricity price is regulated to be artificially low,


                                                  35
                       Figure 7: Competitive Economy versus Outages Economy
            Aggregate Output per Worker                            Grid-Electricity Capital per Worker
   1                                                        2


0.95
                                                          1.5

 0.9
                                                            1
0.85

                                                          0.5
 0.8
                              Outages economy
                              Competitive economy
0.75                                                        0
   -40         -30          -20         -10           0     -40          -30         -20          -10          0
                Electricity Supply Shock                                  Electricity Supply Shock

Note: This figure plots the responses of output per worker and grid-electricity capital per worker in Nigeria to
an electricity supply shock in our outages economy (solid green line) and in a competitive economy (dashed
blue line). The right-most point on the solid green line in both panels corresponds to the counterfactual no-
outages steady state for Nigeria and the left-most point corresponds to the initial steady state. Moving from
right to left along the outages-economy (solid green) line, we reduce the price of grid-electricity so that total
electricity supply (grid plus self-generated) in steady state decreases by the amount on the x-axis. Moving
from right to left along the dashed blue line, we reduce productivity in grid-electricity production, AG , by the
percentage on the x-axis.


which prevents resources from reallocating to the electricity sector and, as a result, the weak
link in the electricity sector can more severely constrain aggregate output.

To illustrate the how the effects of power outages differ from low productivity in the electricity
sector, Figure 7 plots the responses of output per worker and grid-electricity capital per worker
to an electricity supply shock in our outages economy (solid green line) and in a competitive
economy (dashed blue line) in which the grid-electricity price adjusts to clear the market. The
right-most point in both panels corresponds to the counterfactual no-outages steady state for
Nigeria. Moving from right to left along the outages-economy (solid green) line, we reduce the
price of grid-electricity so that total electricity supply (grid plus self-generated) in steady state
decreases by the amount on the x-axis. Hence, as one moves from right to left, the probability
of grid power falls and outages become more frequent. The left-most point corresponds to the
initial steady state in the Nigerian economy.8

Moving from right to left along the dashed blue line, we conduct a similar exercise for the com-
   8
    In a small region right around the productivity cutoff, v , there are two different steady states that generate the
same amount of grid-electricity supply, one in which v < v and relatively more electricity comes from generators
and one in which v > v and relatively more electricity comes from the grid. As a convention, we plot only the
steady state with v < v when there are two steady states. Plotting instead only the steady state with v > v when
there are two steady states does not meaningfully change the graph.



                                                          36
petitive economy by reducing productivity in grid-electricity production, AG , by the percentage
on the x-axis. This exercise results in higher grid-electricity prices, but no outages, because the
price endogenously adjusts to clear the grid-electricity market.

The electricity-supply shocks lead to larger decreases in output per worker in the outages
economy than in the competitive economy; moving from right to left in the left panel of Figure
7, the solid green line falls farther and farther below the dashed blue line. Indeed, going all the
way to the initial steady state (left-most point on the x-axis), output per worker falls by almost
25 percent in the outages economy but by less than 10 percent in the competitive economy.
The reason for the difference is that in the competitive economy, the endogenous increase in
the grid-electricity price attracts more capital to the grid-electricity sector, which substitutes
for the low productivity, thus alleviating the constraints on aggregate output. In contrast, in
the outages economy, the artificially low grid-electricity price causes capital to leave the grid-
electricity sector, reducing supply and creating outages. The right panel of Figure 7 illustrates
these opposite responses; moving from right to left, grid-capital per worker increases in the
competitive economy (dashed blue line) and decreases in the outages economy (solid green
line).

In sum, the distortions in the electricity sector, caused by artificially depressed prices, funda-
mentally differ from those caused by low sector productivity in a competitive economy. Com-
petitive forces can alleviate the consequences of low productivity by raising the price to attract
more resources to the low-productivity sector. But competitive forces cannot alleviate the con-
sequences of depressed prices since, by design, the price cannot adjust to reflect the true scarcity
of the input. Instead, the depressed prices discourage investment in electricity production, re-
sulting in shortages. Thus, as long as electricity prices are artificially low, the electricity sector
is likely to remain a weak link.


6. Supporting Evidence

Our theory predicts that eliminating power outages would cause existing firms to expand their
operations and new firms to operate better technologies that require electricity. In this section,
we use two approaches to validate these two channels. First, we cite the existing empirical
evidence on the effects of outages on firm expansion and firm entry. Second, we provide new
survey evidence from firms in Ghana and Nigeria about the expected effects of permanently
eliminating outages on their businesses and industries.




                                                 37
6.1. Existing Evidence

It is challenging to empirically estimate the long-run general-equilibrium effect of eliminating
outages because, to our knowledge, no developing country in the modern era has been able to
eliminate outages for any significant period of time. Two studies that estimate related channels
are by Reinikka and Svensson (2002) and Kassem (2020). Using cross-sectional data from 171
Ugandan firms, Reinikka and Svensson (2002) find that among firms without generators, those
that experience more outages undertake less investment. They find no statistically significant
effect for firms with generators. While the firm-expansion channel in our model implies that
power outages reduce investment for modern firms with and without generators, the impact
is considerably larger for firms without generators, consistent with Reinikka and Svensson
(2002)'s findings.

Kassem (2020) exploits regional variation in the roll out of the Indonesian electric power grid
to estimate the effects of grid connections on the size and structure of the manufacturing sector.
She finds that access to the national electric grid increases both the number and size of manu-
facturing firms. In the context of our model, gaining access to the electric grid corresponds to
an increase in the probability of grid power from zero to some positive number. Hence, we view
her results as supporting the model's theoretical predictions that increases in the probability of
grid power will cause existing firms to expand and new firms to enter.

6.2. New Survey Results From African Firms

To supplement the existing empirical evidence, we survey firms about their expectations for
what would happen if electricity outages were permanently eliminated. We do so using new
surveys of business owners in Ghana and Nigeria. The main advantage of this approach is that
we can directly ask firms in two of the countries we include in our analysis about the specific
channels in our model.

6.2.1. Survey Data

Our surveys cover a sample of firm owners in Ghana and Nigeria, and were conducted from
June to August 2019. We implemented the surveys with Google Surveys, a platform that allows
users to survey a random sample of internet news readers. The readers are incentivized to take
the survey by being offered free access to the remainder of their news article after completing
the survey. Readers are also given the option to opt out of any survey. We identified business
owners with an initial screening question about whether the respondent currently owned and
operated a business. We then asked the business owners between three and six additional
questions, depending on the survey. We ran a total of 34 surveys covering 3,425 firms, of

                                               38
which 1,913 were from Ghana and 1,512 were from Nigeria. The overall dropout rate was
low after the initial screening question, at slightly less than 14 percent, and we kept only those
responding to all questions, which was most of the respondents.

Not surprisingly, the business owners in our surveys were disproportionately educated and
living in urban areas. In Ghana, for example, 89 percent of respondents had completed sec-
ondary school or more and 93 percent came from the largest two cities of Accra and Kumasi.
One would not want to use these surveys to learn about rural farmers or entrepreneurs in the
traditional sector in urban centers. Yet they may not be a bad approximation to those operating
in the modern sector in our model, since modern-sector entrepreneurs in the model are those
with the highest productivity levels.

Importantly, firms in our surveys were representative in that they reported regularly expe-
riencing power outages and use of generators to self-produce power. When asked about the
frequency of power outages in the last year, the most common answer in both countries was 10
or more times, with 46 percent of Nigerians and 23 of Ghanians selecting this answer. Just 23
percent of Ghanian firms and of 11 percent of Nigerian firms reported not having any outages
in the last year. On average, 55 percent of firms in Ghana and 85 percent in Nigeria reported
that they owned or had access to a generator. These statistics line up well with those from the
World Bank Enterprise Surveys presented in Section 2. Firms in our survey are also consistent
with World Bank Enterprise Surveys in their skewness toward smaller firm sizes relative to
richer countries (see Appendix C), and their industry composition being primarily services and
only partly manufacturing and agriculture.

6.2.2. Expected Effects of Eliminating Outages

To understand how eliminating power outages would affect firms in the developing world,
we asked a series of hypothetical questions to the Ghanaian and Nigerian firm owners about
their expectations for what would happen if outages were eliminated. We focused on four
main outcomes: profits, expansion through investment, expansion through hiring, and entry
of new firms in the same industry. For the first three questions we ask about the effects of
eliminating power outages "for your firm" and for the last we specify that power outages would
be eliminated in their country. For all questions we asked how likely the firms felt each outcome
would be if power outages were eliminated, with the options being "very unlikely," "unlikely,"
"neutral," "likely," "very likely" and "I don't know."

One potential limitation of any survey ­ and online surveys in particular ­ is that respondents
may provide uninformative answers or answers based on what they expect the surveyors would
like to hear. In order to measure how common this is among the respondents in our setting, we

                                                39
                  Figure 8: Effects of Eliminating Power Outages from the Firms' Perspective
                                                                  (a) Ghana
                      Raise own profits           Expand own investment        Expand own hiring            Increase entry
             70
                                                                                                         62.0
             60

                     49.5
             50                                    46.5
   Percent




                                                                              40.0                                       39.0***
             40
                                                           33.5
                                                                                       29.4
             30
                            24.1   25.4***
                                                                                                                 23.0
             20
                                                                    13.0***
                                                                                               10.6**
             10


             0

                                          Eliminate power outages                    Placebo                Difference


                                                              (b) Nigeria

                      Raise own profits           Expand own investment        Expand own hiring            Increase entry
             70

                                                    61.0                                                 62.5
                     60.0
             60                                                               58.0


             50
   Percent




                                   41.6***
             40                                            37.8                                                  36.7

                                                                                       30.5
             30                                                                                27.5***
                                                                                                                         25.8***
                                                                    23.2***
             20             18.4


             10


              0


                                          Eliminate power outages                    Placebo                Difference

 Note: This figure plots the percent of firms answering that each effect is "likely" or "very likely" if power
 outages were permanently eliminated (red bars). The other choices are "very unlikely," "unlikely," "neutral"
 and "don't know." The frame of references is a placebo scenario in when the national airports would convert
 to solar power (orange bars). The difference is plotted (yellow bars) along with ***,** or * to represent the p-
 value of the test of the null hypothesis that the difference between eliminating power outages and the placebo
 is zero being less than 1 percent, 5 percent and 10 percent.


ran a series of surveys that asked firms about the expected effects of a placebo "treatment" in
which the national airports in Ghana or Nigeria convert to solar power. The advantage of this
placebo treatment is that it is a policy issue related to electricity, as in our main questions about
eliminating power outages, but it would be quite unlikely to affect the vast majority of firms.
In all of the surveys about the placebo treatment, we asked about exactly the same outcomes
and used the exact same response options as the main surveys on power outages, so as to make

                                                                       40
apples-to-apples comparisons.

Figure 8 plots the percentage of firms responding that each outcome would be "likely" or "very
likely" if power outages were permanently eliminated. As a frame of reference we plot the
percentage responding that each outcome would be "likely" or "very likely" under the placebo
treatment. We also plot the simple difference between the two percentages, and summarize
the p-values of a test of the difference in the two proportions with three, two or one stars to
represent significance at the 1-, 5- and 10-percent level. Panels (a) and (b) present the results
from Ghana and Nigeria, respectively.

As Figure 8 shows, the majority of firms owners expect that eliminating power outages for their
firm would raise profits and lead them to expand by making new investments and increasing
hiring. Relative to the placebo treatment, 25.4 percent more Ghanaian firms and 41.6 percent
more Nigerian firms expect that eliminating power outages would be "likely" or "very likely"
to raise their profits. Firms in both countries were also significantly more likely to report that
eliminating power outages would lead them to expand through increased investment or by
increasing their hiring. These differences are all statistically significant at the 5-percent level or
lower. These results provide support for the model's predictions that permanently eliminating
power outages would lead firms to expand.

The last columns of Figure 8 report the firms' expectations for how eliminating power outages
would affect the entry of new firms into their industries. Relative to the placebo, 39 percent
more Ghanaian firms report that eliminating power outages would be likely or very likely
to increase entry. In Nigeria, it is 25.8 percent more firms. Both are statistically significant
differences, suggesting that firms do expect that eliminating outages would increase entry, as
our model predicts.


7. Conclusion

Unreliable electricity is widely thought by policymakers to be a major constraint on firm pro-
ductivity in the developing world. Yet most empirical studies of how power outages affect
firm performance conclude that eliminating outages would lead to very modest productivity
increases. Our paper is the first to model and quantify the long-run general-equilibrium effects
of eliminating power outages. In contrast to the previous literature, we find that eliminating
outages generates large increases in aggregate output per worker across the five Sub-Saharan
African countries in our study, on the order of 25 percent. Through the lens of development
accounting, eliminating outages works through increases in aggregate capital per worker, as
firms expand, and through increases in TFP, as fewer productive resources are idled and more


                                                 41
firms operate with more-productive, electricity-using technologies.

Our model abstracts from several mechanisms through which electricity could increase output
per capita, implying that our quantitative results may be a lower bound. First, temporary out-
ages may permanently damage production. The production of semiconductors represents one
extreme, in which a split-second interruption in the power supply reportedly damaged chips
that take weeks to produce (Clark and Osawa, 2010). These potential disruptions imply that
frequent power outages could deter some industries, such as semiconductors, from locating in
a country altogether. On the household side, electricity may also raise labor supply through
the adoption of time-saving home appliances (Dinkelman, 2011; Gertler, Shelef, Wolfram, and
Fuchs, 2016) or encourage human capital accumulation (Vidart, 2020). Future work should
explore other channels through which electricity raises income levels in the long run.


References
ABEBERESE, A. B. (2017): "Electricity Cost and Firm Performance: Evidence from India," Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 99, 839­852.

ABEBERESE, A. B., C. G. ACKAH, AND P   . O. ASUMING (2019): "Productivity Losses and Firm
  Responses to Electricity Shortages: Evidence from Ghana," World Bank Economic Review.

ACEMOGLU, D., P . AGHION, L. BURSZTYN, AND D. HÉMOUS (2012): "The Environment and Di-
  rected Technical Change," American Economic Review, 102, 131­166.

AKCIGIT, U., H. ALP, AND M. PETERS (Forthcoming): "Lack of Selection and Limits to Delegation:
  Firm Dynamics in Developing Countries," American Economic Review.

ALBY, P., J.-J. DETHIER, AND S. STRAUB (2013): "Firms Operating under Electricity Constraints
  in Developing Countries," World Bank Economic Review, 27, 109­132.

ALLCOTT, H., A. COLLARD -WEXLER, AND S. D. O'CONNELL (2016): "How Do Electricity Short-
  ages Affect Productivity? Evidence from India," American Economic Review, 106, 587­624.

ATALAY, E. (2017): "How Important Are Sectoral Shocks?" American Economic Journal: Macroe-
  conomics, 9, 254­280.

ATKESON, A. AND P. J. KEHOE (1999): "Models of Energy Use: Putty-Putty versus Putty-Clay,"
  American Economic Review, 89, 1028­1043.

BAQAEE, D. R. AND E. FARHI (2019): "The Macroeconomic Impact of Microeconomic Shocks:
  Beyond Hulten's Theorem," Econometrica, 87, 1155­1203.

------ (2020): "Productivity and Misallocation in General Equilibrium," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 131, 105­163.



                                             42
BARRAGE, L. (2019): "Optimal Dynamic Carbon Taxes in a Climate-Economy Model with Dis-
  tortionary Fiscal Policy," Review of Economic Studies, 87, 1­39.

BARTELME, D. AND Y. GORODNICHENKO (2015): "Linkages and Economic Development," NBER
  Working Paper No. 21251.

B OEHM, J. AND E. OBERFIELD (2018): "Misallocation in the Market for Inputs: Enforcement
   and the Organization of Production," Unpublished Working Paper, Princeton University.

BROOKS, W. J. AND K. DONOVAN (Forthcoming): "Eliminating Uncertainty in Market Access:
  The Impact of New Bridges in Rural Nicaragua," Econometrica.

BUERA, F. J., J. P. KABOSKI, AND Y. SHIN (2012): "The Macroeconomics of Microfinance," Un-
  published Manuscript.

------ (2019): "The Macroeconomics of Microfinance," Unpublished Working Paper, Univer-
  sity of Notre Dame.

BURGESS, R., M. GREENSTONE, N. RYAN, AND A. SUDARSHAN (2020): "The Consequences of
  Treating Electricity as a Right," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 34, 145­169.

BURLIG, F. AND L. PREONAS (2016): "Out of the Darkness and Into the Light? Development
  Effects of Rural Electrification," Energy Institute at Haas Working Paper 268.

CARVALHO, V  . M. (2014): "From Micro to Macro via Production Networks," Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 28, 23­48.

CASELLI, F. (2005): "Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences," in Handbook of Eco-
  nomic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion and S. Durlauf., Elsevier, 679-741.

CASEY, G. (2018): "Energy Efficiency and Directed Technical Change: Implications for Climate
  Change Mitigation," Unpublished Working Paper, Williams College.

CLARK, D. AND J. OSAWA (2010): "Brief Power Blip Jolts Supply of Gadget Chips," The Wall
  Street Journal.

DI   GIOVANNI, J., A. A. LEVCHENKO, AND I. MÉJEAN (2014): "Firms, Destinations, and Aggregate
     Fluctuations," Econometrica, 82, 1303­1340.

DINKELMAN, T. (2011): "The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New Evidence
  from South Africa," American Economic Review, 101, 3078­3108.

DZANSI, J., S. L. PULLER, B. STREET, AND B. YEBUAH-DWAMENA (2018): "The Vicious Circle of
  Blackouts and Revenue Collection in Developing Countries: Evidence from Ghana," Unpub-
  lished Working Paper, Texas A&M.

EBERHARD, A., O. ROSNES, M. SHKARATAN, AND H. VENNEMO (2011): Africa's Power Infrastruc-
  ture, The World Bank.



                                              43
FISHER-VANDEN, K., E. T. MANSUR, AND Q. WANG (2015): "Electricity Shortages and Firm Pro-
  ductivity: Evidence from China's Industrial Firms," Journal of Development Economics, 114,
  172­188.

FOSTER, V. AND J. STEINBUKS (2008): "Paying the Price for Unreliable Power Supplies: In-
  House Generation of Electricity by Firms in Africa," Africa Infrastructure Country Diagnostic
  Working Paper No. 2.

FRIED, S. (2018): "Climate Policy and Innovation: A Quantitative Macroeconomic Analysis,"
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10, 90­118.

FRIED, S., K. NOVAN, AND W. B. PETERMAN (2018): "The Distributional Effects of a Carbon Tax
  on Current and Future Generations," Review of Economic Dynamics, 30, 30­46.

GERTLER, P. J., O. SHELEF, C. D. WOLFRAM, AND A. FUCHS (2016): "The Demand For Energy-
  Using Assets among the World's Rising Middle Class," American Economic Review, 106, 1366­
  1401.

GOLOSOV, M., J. HASSLER, P. KRUSELL, AND A. TSYVINSKI (2014): "Optimal Taxes on Fossil Fuel
 in General Equilibrium," Econometrica, 82, 41­88.

GRAINGER, C. AND F. ZHANG (2017): "The Impact of Electricity Shortages on Firm Productivity:
  Evidence from Pakistan," Tech. rep., The World Bank.

HALL, R. E. AND C. I. JONES (1999): "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
 per Worker than Others?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 83­116.

HARDY, M. AND J. MCCASLAND (2019): "Lights Off, Lights On: The Effects of Electricity Short-
 ages on Small Firms," The World Bank Economic Review, lhz028.

HASSLER, J., P. KRUSELL, AND C. OLOVSSON (2015): "Energy-Saving Technological Change,"
 Unpublished Working Paper, IIES.

HASSLER, J., P. KRUSELL, AND A. A. SMITH, JR. (2016): "Environmental Macroeconomics," in
 Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor and H. Uhlig, Elsevier, vol. 2.

HÉMOUS, D. (2016): "The Dynamic Impact of Unilateral Environmental Policies," Journal of
  International Economics, 103, 80­95.

JACK, K. AND G. SMITH (2015): "Pay As You Go: Prepaid Metering and Electricity Expenditures
  in South Africa," American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 105, 237­41.

JONES, C. I. (2011): "Intermediate Goods and Weak Links: A Theory of Economic Develop-
  ment," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3, 1­28.

KASSEM, D. (2020): "Does Electrification Cause Industrial Development? Grid Expansion and
  Firm Turnover in Indonesia," Unpublished Working Paper, University of Mannheim.

LAGAKOS, D. (2016): "Explaining Cross-Country Productivity Differences in Retail Trade," Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 124, 579­620.

                                              44
LAGAKOS, D., A. M. MOBARAK, AND M. E. WAUGH (2020): "The Welfare Effects of Encouraging
  Rural-Urban Migration," NBER Working Paper No. 24193.

LEE, K., E. MIGUEL, AND C. WOLFRAM (Forthcoming): "Experimental Evidence on the Demand
  for and Costs of Rural Electrification," Journal of Political Economy.

LEMOINE, D. (2018): "Innovation-Led Transitions in Energy Supply," NBER Working Paper No.
  23420.

LIPSCOMB, M., A. M. MOBARAK, AND T. BARHAM (2013): "Development Effects of Electrifica-
  tion: Evidence from the Topographic Placement of Hydropower Plants in Brazil," American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5, 200­231.

LIU, E. (2019): "Industrial Policies in Production Networks," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  134, 1883­1948.

MIDRIGAN, V. AND D. Y. XU (2014): "Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-Level
 Data," American Economic Review, 104, 422­458.

REINIKKA, R. AND J. SVENSSON (2002): "Coping With Poor Public Capital," Journal of Develop-
  ment Economics, 69, 51­69.

RUD, J. P. (2012): "Electricity Provision and Industrial Development: Evidence from India,"
  Journal of Development Economics, 97, 352­367.

SCOTT, A., E. DARKO, A. LEMMA, AND J.-P. RUD (2014): "How Does Electricity Insecurity Af-
  fect Businesses in Low and Middle Income Countries?" Tech. rep., Overseas Development
  Institute.

SMEDA (2017): "National Survey of Micro Small And Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)," Tech.
  rep., Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency of Nigeria.

TRIMBLE, C., M. KOJIMA, I. P . ARROYO, AND F. MOHAMMADZADEH (2016): "Financial Viability
  of Electricity Sectors in Sub-Saharan Africa," World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
  Number 7788.

VIDART, D. (2020): "Human Capital, Female Employment, and Electricity: Evidence from the
  Early 20th Century United States," Unpublished Working Paper, UCSD.

WORLD BANK (2007): "Technical and Economic Assessment of Off-Grid, Mini-Grid, and Grid
 Electrification Technologies," Tech. rep., World Bank, eSMAP Technical Paper 121/07.

WORLD BANK GROUP (2017):                   "Enterprise   Surveys:       Technical   Report,"
 Https://www.enterprisesurveys.org/.




                                             45
                  Appendix: For Online Publication Only

A. Solution to the Analytic Version of the Model

Proof of Proposition 1: For firms with and without generator access, the result that capital
demand is increasing in the probability of grid power follows directly from the first order
condition for capital. We focus instead on understanding the cutoff, v (R t ), below which firms
with generator access purchase enough generator capital to operate at full capacity during an
outage.

The firm always idles generator capital when the power is on because the price of grid elec-
tricity is zero, and this is lower than the marginal cost of fuel to operate the generator (which
equals unity). Whether the firm idles productive capital when the power is off depends criti-
cally on whether the constraint that kS    M
                                      t  k t binds. We show that this constraint binds for all
values of v less than the cutoff, v  (R t ), which we will characterize below.

The modern firm's first order conditions for kS         M
                                              t , and k t from (8) are:


                         kS
                          t :   (1 - vt )AM z 1- (kS
                                                   t)
                                                     -1
                                                        = Rt + 1 - v +                       (27)
                          M
                         kt :    vAM z 1- (k t
                                             M -1
                                               )  +  = Rt ,                                  (28)

and the complementary slackness condition requires that:

                                           M
                                          kt - kS
                                                t = 0.                                       (29)

When the constraint does not bind, the solutions are:
                                        1                                  1

                      M    v AM        1-
                                                            (1 - v )AM    1-
                     kt =z                   and     kS = z                    .             (30)
                             Rt                       t
                                                             Rt + 1 - v

                                          M
The constraint does not bind as long as k t > kS                                         S       M
                                               t . Substituting in the expressions for k t and k t
from equation (30) implies that the constraint will not bind as long as,

                                       v    1- v
                                         -           > 0.                                    (31)
                                       Rt Rt + 1 - v

The left-hand side of equation (31) is increasing in v. Define v  (R t ) to be the value of v that
makes (31) hold with equality given R t . When v < v  (R t ), the constraint binds and the firm
rents enough generator capital to operate at full capacity when the power is off. As a result,
there are zero idle resources during instants without power. When v  v  (R t ), the constraint

                                                46
does not bind and the firm rents less generator capital that what is required to operate her
productive capital. In this case, she must idle some productive capital when the power is off.
Power outages are entirely responsible for the existence of idle resources. When there are
no power outages, v = 1, and equation (30) implies that generator capital equals zero. Zero
generator capital combined with zero instants without power results in zero idle resources.

Modern sector entry: We show that the difference in expected profits, E ( M (z )) -  T (z ) is
increasing in z . The difference in expected profits for a given entrepreneur with productivity z
equals:

                     E ( M (z )) -  T (z ) =  M (1, z ) + (1 - ) M (0, z ) -  T (z )

Substituting in the relationship that profits equal fraction 1 -  of output yields:

                E ( M (z )) -  T (z ) =(1 - )[ y tM (1, z ) + (1 - ) y tM (0, z ) - y tT (z )]      (32)

where,
                                                                                 
                                       
                                      1-                                 vAM    1-
                    y T (z ) = z           ,   y M (0, z ) = zvAM                     and           (33)
                                 R                                         R


                                                
                                      AM       1-
                             zAM
                            
                                     2R+1- v                                         : v  v (R)
            y M (1, z ) =                                                                           (34)
                                        vAM    1-                (1- v )AM   1-
                             z vAM
                            
                                          R         + (1 - v )    R+1- va            : v > v (R).


Substituting equations (33) - (34) into equation (32) shows that E ( M (z )) -  T (z ) is increasing
                                                           -1/(1-)
in z , since, by assumption, AM > (1 - ) v 1/(1-)                    .




                                                      47
B. Quantitative Version of the Model

B.1. Definition of an Equilibrium

We define a sequence-of-markets equilibrium for this economy as sequences of prices
{Wt , R t }                                                                          
           t =0 , grid-power probabilities, { vt } t =0 , productivity cutoffs {z t } t =0 , allocations for the
households {C t , K t +1 }t =0 and allocations for firms of type ( x , z ):
                                                                                                            
   t ( x , z ), n t ( x , z ), k t ( x , z ), k t ( x , z ), k t ( x , z ), e1 t ( x , z ), f 0 t ( x , z )} t =0 for all x  {0,1} and for all
{n T              M              T              S              M             G

z  [1, ] such that:


    1. Given prices, allocations of entrepreneurs across the traditional and modern sectors are
        consistent with the modern-sector productivity cutoffs, {z t }t =0 , defined in equation (9).

    2. Given prices, traditional-sector allocations solve the profit maximization problem for all
        entrepreneurs in the traditional sector and modern-sector allocations solve the profit
        maximization problem for all entrepreneurs in the modern sector.

    3. Given prices and entrepreneurial profits, household allocations maximize (1) subject to
        the budget constraints:

                     C t + K t +1 = Q t + Wt + R t K t + (1 - )K t +                                                                   (35)
                                          zt                       
                                               T
                                               t (z ) dG (z )          ( M                  M
                                                                         t (1, z ) + (1 - ) t (0, z ) - ) dG (z )
                                         1                        zt


        and the non-negativity constraints, C t  0, and K t  0. Variable  T
                                                                          t (z ) denotes the prof-
        its of traditional firms with productivity z and variable  M
                                                                   t ( x , z ) denotes the profits of
        modern firms with generator access x and productivity z .

    4. The markets for capital and labor clear:

                       zt                          
                             T                            M                   M
            Kt =            kt (z )dG (z ) +           (k t (1, z ) + (1 - )k t (0, z ) + kS
                                                                                           t (1, z )) dG (z ) + K
                                                                                                                  G
                                                                                                                                       (36)
                      1                           zt
                       zt                          
            Nt =            nT
                             t (z ) dG (z ) +          (n M                    M
                                                          t (1, z ) + (1 - ) n t (0, z )) dG (z ).                                     (37)
                      1                           zt


    5. The probability of grid power is such that the rationed grid-electricity demand equals the
        supply (equation (23)).



                                                                       48
B.2. Calibration

We calculate the average and variable costs of self-generation in each country. All cross-country
variation in these cost estimates comes from variation in diesel fuel prices; we assume that the
capital and maintenance costs of self-generation are the same for all countries. We use esti-
mates from the World Bank Technical Assessment (World Bank, 2007) to calculate the capital
cost of a typical generator. The Technical Assessment reports that a 100 kW diesel generator
would cost 760 dollars per kW, and last 20 years with a capacity factor of 0.8, (World Bank,
2007). Using an interest rate of 10 percent implies that the annual capital-cost per kWh equals
1.3 cents. The maintenance cost is 5.9 cents per kWh (World Bank, 2007).

We calculate the variable cost of self-generated electricity for the 100 kilowatt diesel generator
with 30 percent efficiency. We use the 2014 price of diesel fuel in each country from the World
Development Indicators. To convert dollars per liter of diesel fuel into dollars per kWh, we
convert liters of diesel fuel into BTUs, and then convert BTUs into kWhs, adjusting for the 30
percent efficiency of the generator.

The average cost per kWh equals the sum of the capital, maintenance and variable costs per
kWh. We use a capacity factor of 0.8 when we construct the average cost ratio in the model to
ensure that it is consistent with the data. Table B.1 reports the average price per liter of diesel
fuel and the variable and average costs of self-generated electricity in each country.


                                    Table B.1: Self-Generation Costs
                                     Diesel Price     Variable cost     Average cost
                       Country
                                        ($/ltr)         ($/kWh)           ($/kWh)
                       Ethiopia          0.89              0.28              0.35
                       Ghana             1.03              0.32              0.40
                       Nigeria           0.84              0.26              0.34
                       Tanzania          1.20              0.38              0.45
                       Uganda            1.11              0.35              0.42
 Note: This first column of this table reports the the price of diesel fuel in 2014 from the World Development
 Indicators. The second and third columns report the authors' calculations of the variable and average cost of
 self-generated electricity. All values are in year 2014 dollars.


To calibrate TFP in each country, we compare output per worker in the specific country to
output-per worker in Nigeria. Data on output per worker is from the Penn World Tables. We
use output per worker in each country in the same year as the World Bank Enterprise Survey
for that country, reported in Table B.2. Since the data in Penn World Tables end in 2014 and the

                                                     49
year of the Enterprise survey in Ethiopia is 2015, we extrapolate, using the 2013-2014 growth
rate, to find the value of Ethiopian GDP per capita in 2015.


                             Table B.2: Year of the World Enterprise Survey
                                     Country       Enterprise Survey Year
                                     Ethiopia                2015
                                     Ghana                   2013
                                     Nigeria                 2014
                                     Tanzania                2013
                                     Uganda                  2013
                    Note: This table reports the year of the enterprise survey in each country.



The baseline calibration uses measures of size of the modern sector from the 2017 Nigerian Na-
tional Survey of Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (SMEDA, 2017). The survey includes
a representative sample of micro enterprises (those with less than 10 employees) and small
(between 10 and 49 employees) and medium enterprises (between 50 and 199 employees).
There is no information on large enterprises (those with greater than 199 employees). The sur-
vey has two modules: (1) the micro enterprises are covered in the National Integrated Survey
of Households and (2) the small and medium enterprises are covered in National Integrated
Survey of Establishments. The survey covers all major sectors of the Nigerian economy, all
geographic areas, and includes both formal and informal firms. We do not have access to the
raw data from the survey. We take all information from the report, (SMEDA, 2017), assembled
by the Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency of Nigeria. The report compiles
two sets of aggregate statistics, one set for micro enterprises and the second set for small and
medium enterprises.

We use the survey results to compute the fraction of firms and workers that use electricity.
The survey reports the average number of hours an enterprise operates with an alternative
source of power. Firms that report zero use of alternative power "have little-to-nil need for
[any] power supply" (SMEDA (2017), page 33). Since these firms do not use electricity in
the production process, they correspond to the traditional sector in our model. Using this
definition, approximately 70 percent of micro enterprises are traditional and 6 percent of small
and medium enterprises are traditional. To calculate the fraction of traditional enterprises
relative to total enterprises, we divide the number of traditional enterprises by the total number
of micro, small, and medium enterprises.9
  9
      We assume that the number of large enterprises equals zero. Micro enterprises are so prevalent that any


                                                        50
We calculate the fraction of total workers that are traditional. Approximately, 76.5 percent
of the workers in Nigeria are employed by micro, small, and medium enterprises (SMEDA,
2017). We assume that the remaining 23.5 percent of workers are employed by large firms
in the modern sector. To divide the workers at micro, small and medium enterprises into
the traditional and modern sectors, we need information on how firm-size varies between the
modern and the traditional firms. While this information is not available in the Nigerian survey,
we use the fact that 70.4 percent of micro enterprises and 6 percent of small and medium
enterprises are traditional, and we assume that each traditional micro enterprise employs one
person and each traditional small and medium enterprise employs 10 people.

We use the US GDP deflator to convert all monetary values to 2014 dollars.




reasonable assumption about the number of large enterprises does not have meaningful effects on the fraction
of traditional enterprises. In particular, micro, small and medium enterprises account for 76.5 percent of total
employment in the Nigerian economy, implying that large enterprises employ at most 183,232,27 people. Since
each large enterprise must employ 200 or more people, there can be at most 183,232,27/200 = 91,616 large
enterprises. If we assume that there are 91,616 large enterprises, instead of zero, and all large enterprises are
modern, then the fraction of traditional enterprises decreases from 0.703 to 0.701.


                                                      51
B.3. Results

          Table B.3: Equilibrium Values of Macro-Aggregates in the Initial Steady State
                                                                                Ethiopia       Ghana         Nigeria        Tanzania   Uganda
  Grid-electricity price: P G                                                      0.03         0.10          0.08              0.07    0.08
                                                                   G
  Grid-electricity capital: K                                                     0.003         0.271        0.156           0.094     0.162
                                                                   G
  Grid-electricity supply: E                                                       0.02         0.40          0.27              0.19    0.28
  Fraction of modern labor: N M                                                    0.05         0.55          0.63              0.33    0.47
                                                                           M
  Fraction of modern entrepreneurs: Q                                              0.01         0.21          0.30              0.09    0.15
  Probability of grid power: v                                                     0.51         0.78          0.41              0.75    0.82
Note: This table reports the equilibrium values of a number of variables in the initial steady state in each country.
While the units of the grid-electricity price, capital, and supply are not meaningful independent of the model, the
comparison of the different values across countries is meaningful. In particular, note that grid electricity price,
capital, and supply are extremely low in Ethiopia in the initial steady state.


 Figure B.1: Long-Run General-Equilibrium Effect of Eliminating Outages When All Modern
                              Firms Have Generator Access
                                                            40
                                                                               SR, PE
                                                            35                 LR, GE, firm-expansion channel
                    Percent Increase in Output per Worker




                                                                               LR, GE, firm-expansion and firm-entry channels

                                                            30


                                                            25   24.0                 23.7


                                                            20


                                                            15
                                                                        12.2                          12.2

                                                            10
                                                                                                                      8.2

                                                            5


                                                            0
                                                                 ETH    GHA           NGA             TZA            UGA
                                                                                   Country

 Note: The height of each bar equals the total steady-state increase in output per worker from eliminating
 power outages in each country in the counterfactual world in which all modern firms have access to gener-
 ators in the initial steady state. The green, blue and purple regions of each bar correspond to the relative
 contributions from the short-run partial-equilibrium effect, the firm-expansion channel and the firm-entry
 channel, respectively.




                                                                                   52
C. Additional Survey Results

                                  Figure C.1: Frequency of Power Outages of Surveyed Firms

             50                                                                                         46.3

             40


             30
                      22.5                                                                     22.8
  Percent




             20                          19.1
                                                            15.6
                                                                                                                 13.1     13.8
                               11.0               11.8               10.5
             10                                                               6.9      6.8


             0
                        Never            1 to 2 times       3 to 5 times     6 to 10 times     More than 10      I don't know
                                                                                                  times
                                                           Ghana             Nigeria


Note: This figure reports the frequency of power outages in the previous year among the surveyed firms in
Ghana (red) and Nigeria (yellow).



                                      Figure C.2: Average Monthly Revenues of Surveyed Firms


              50        47.2
                                 44.8

              40



              30
   Percent




              20                           17.5
                                                    14.3                                                                            14.2
                                                                                                                                           12.8

              10                                               9.2                       8.8
                                                                       8.0
                                                                                                           6.0               5.5
                                                                                 4.3                                5.0
                                                                                                  2.6

                  0
                      Less than 2,000 2,000 to 5,000 5,000 to 10,000 10,000 to 25,000 25,000 to 50,000   50,000 to                   More than
                      GHC/ Less than GHC/ N150,000 GHC/ N300,000 GHC/ N500,000 GHC/ N1,000,000 100,000 GHC/                        100,000 GHC/
                         N150,000      to N300,000     to N500,000    to N1,000,000    to N3,000,000   N3,000,000 to                 More than
                                                                                                       N10,000,000                  10,000,000
                                                           Ghana               Nigeria


Note: This figure reports the average monthly revenues among the surveyed firms in Ghana (red) and Nigeria
(yellow).




                                                                               53
