                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   MEASURING THE PERCEIVED LIQUIDITY OF THE CORPORATE BOND MARKET

                                        Sergey Chernenko
                                          Adi Sunderam

                                       Working Paper 27092
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27092


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sergey Chernenko and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring the Perceived Liquidity of the Corporate Bond Market
Sergey Chernenko and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 27092
May 2020
JEL No. G12,G23

                                          ABSTRACT

We propose a novel measure of bond market liquidity that does not depend on transaction data:
the strength of the cross-sectional relationship between mutual fund cash holdings and fund flow
volatility. Our measure captures how liquid funds perceive their portfolio holdings to be at a
given point in time. The perceived liquidity of speculative grade and Rule 144A bonds is
significantly lower than investment grade bonds in the cross section and deteriorated significantly
following the 2008-9 financial crisis. Our measure can be applied in settings where either
transaction data are not available or transactions are rare, including the markets for asset-backed
securities, syndicated loans, and municipal bonds.


Sergey Chernenko
Krannert School of Management
Purdue University
403 W. State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907
schernen@purdue.edu

Adi Sunderam
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
asunderam@hbs.edu
1     Introduction
    The liquidity of corporate bond markets is crucial to their functioning. If investors are
forced to sell bonds into an illiquid market, the price impact of these sales can be amplified
through fire sales channels, threatening financial stability and real economic activity (e.g.,
Shleifer and Vishny (1992), Coval and Stafford (2007), Ellul, Jotikasthira, and Lundblad
(2011), and Stein (2012)). As the share of corporate bonds held by investors like mutual funds
who may need to sell their holdings quickly has grown,1 so have concerns about liquidity and
the potential for fire sales.2 These developments make it important to understand investors'
perceptions of corporate bond market liquidity and to develop measures of market liquidity
that are forward looking and capture the risk that liquidity suddenly evaporates.
    The literature has proposed many measures of the liquidity of individual corporate bonds,
including Roll (1984), Amihud (2002), Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007), Bao, Pan, and Wang
(2011), Jankowitsch, Nashikkar, and Subrahmanyam (2011), Corwin and Schultz (2012),
Feldh¨utter (2012), and Dick-Nielsen, Feldh¨  utter, and Lando (2012). These measures differ
substantially in their construction and have various strengths and weaknesses. One key
feature they share, however, is that they do not fully capture how liquid bond traders
perceive the market to be. In particular, most existing measures rely on the characteristics
of trades that actually took place. If investors choose not to trade bonds that they perceive
to be relatively illiquid, existing measures will understate the true illiquidity of the overall
market. Similarly, if investors care about the risk that liquidity will substantially deteriorate
in (as yet unobserved) states of the world where they need to sell, these concerns will not be
captured by the existing measures. Recent debate about the liquidity of the corporate bond
market has centered exactly around these issues. Regulators who allege that liquidity has
not declined point to the traditional measures of price impact among trades that occur. In
contrast, market participants who allege that liquidity has declined point to changes in the
set of trades that occur; for instance, declines in the trading volume of smaller bonds3 .

1
  According to the Financial Accounts of the United States, also known as the Flow of Funds, mutual funds'
share of domestic holdings of corporate bonds tripled from 9.2% in 2000 to 28.3% in 2019.
2
   In 2014, the Financial Stability Oversight Council issued a notice seeking public comments on
the financial stability risks posed by the asset management industry. Comments are available at
https://www.regulations.gov/docketBrowser?D=FSOC-2014-0001. In October 2016, the Securities and Ex-
change Commission adopted new rules to strengthen the liquidity management practices of open-end mutual
funds.
3
  See, for instance, "For Bond Investors, Bigger is Better", Wall Street Journal (2012). Consistent with a
decline in the liquidity of small bonds, the Barclays US Corporate index raised its liquidity constraint on
bond size from $250m to $300m in 2017.



                                                    2
    In this paper, we propose a novel measure of the perceived liquidity of corporate bond
markets that does not depend on quote or transaction data. We take a revealed preference
approach based on the cash holdings of open-end mutual funds. The idea is that mutual
funds try to minimize the price impact of their trading, and they do so in part by holding
cash buffers. Cash buffers allow funds to meet redemption requests from their clients without
trading immediately, instead trading over time in a way that minimizes price impact. Such
buffers are particularly valuable when a fund holds relatively illiquid assets. To formalize
this intuition, we write down a simple model showing that the optimal size of a fund's cash
buffer is related to two factors: the illiquidity of its portfolio securities and the volatility of
its inflows and outflows. When a fund holds more illiquid bonds, it holds more cash because
being forced to trade those bonds is costlier. Similarly, when a fund faces more volatile
flows, it holds more cash because it faces a greater risk of having to liquidate its holdings
in order to meet redemption requests. Thus, by examining the cross-sectional relationship
between fund cash holdings and flow volatility, we can measure how illiquid funds perceive
their portfolio holdings to be. Crucially, our measure is forward looking. It captures funds'
perceptions of future liquidity and of the risk that liquidity deteriorates.
    We start by providing simulation evidence to establish the feasibility of our procedure.
While our simple model is static to highlight the basic intuition, our simulations follow
Connor and Leland (1995) and consider the dynamic problem of a fund that holds both cash
and an illiquid asset while facing stochastic flows. In our simulations, we consider different
funds that vary in terms of the illiquidity of the illiquid asset they hold. We simulate flows and
cash holdings assuming these funds follow the optimal policy in Connor and Leland (1995).
We then regress simulated fund cash holdings on the estimated volatility of the fund's flows,
computed in sample using realized flows. The simulations show that in a realistic dynamic
setting, our procedure does a good job of recovering the liquidity of the underlying bonds.
    We then implement our regression procedure in data on actively managed open-end
corporate bond mutual funds from July 2009 to June 2016. In our benchmark specifications,
we expand the panel to the security-fund-time level. This serves two purposes. First, it allows
us to include security-time fixed effects. Thus, the regressions tell us how cash holdings vary
with flow volatility, comparing two funds that hold the same security at the same time. This
allows us control for funds' endogenous selection of securities, something that is missing from
our basic model and simulations, where flow volatility and illiquidity are independent. In
particular, one might expect funds facing higher flow volatility to hold more liquid securities,
thereby biasing towards zero the cross-sectional relationship between cash and flow volatility.
Second, expanding the panel to the security-fund-time level allows us to interact the fund's
flow volatility with bond characteristics, so that we can measure how perceptions of liquidity


                                                3
vary with characteristics.
    We first verify the basic logic of the procedure, running panel regressions relating a fund's
cash holdings to the volatility of its fund flows and including security-time fixed effects. We
find a strong positive relationship that is both economically and statistically significant. A
one-standard deviation increase in flow volatility is associated with a 46 basis point higher
cash-to-assets ratio, relative to a median ratio of 320 basis points.
    Having verified the basic logic of the procedure, we examine perceived illiquidity in the
cross section of bonds. Specifically, we run our baseline regression relating fund cash holdings
to the volatility of fund flows, but now interact the volatility of fund flows with bond charac-
teristics. We find that the relationship between cash holdings and flow volatility is stronger
for speculative grade and unrated bonds, consistent with these securities being perceived as
significantly less liquid. In addition, we find that Rule 144A bonds and secured bonds are
perceived to be less liquid, consistent with there being a smaller investor base eligible to buy
these bonds.
    We next examine whether perceived illiquidity is priced. Since our procedure does not
produce a measure of illiquidity bond-by-bond, we take an indirect approach. We ask whether
bonds that have high spreads also have high levels of perceived illiquidity according to
our measure. Specifically, we estimate our baseline regressions adding interactions of flow
volatility with the bond's spread. We find that bonds with higher spreads are perceived
to be less liquid, even controlling for a variety of other characteristics, including credit
ratings. This result is consistent with perceived illiquidity commanding a premium in the
cross section.
    We then conduct three empirical exercises that demonstrate the advantages of our method-
ology relative to existing measures. First, we show that our procedure can be used to make
consistent comparisons of perceived illiquidity across different asset classes that have different
market microstructures and different degrees of data availability. We separately estimate the
perceived illiquidity of domestic equities, foreign equities, corporate bonds, and municipal
bonds using our procedure. Specifically, we create security-fund-time panels of mutual fund
holdings for each asset class. We then regress fund cash holdings on flow volatility within
each asset class and compare the coefficients across asset classes. We find that foreign equi-
ties are perceived to be less liquid than domestic equities. Corporate bonds are perceived to
be significantly less liquid than equities and significantly more liquid than municipal bonds.
    Second, we demonstrate that our procedure can be used to measure the perceived illiq-
uidity of securities that do not trade, or that trade too infrequently to construct reliable
transaction-based measures of liquidity. Specifically, we examine the cross section of per-
ceived liquidity for municipal bonds, a setting where trade is infrequent: 70% of all municipal


                                                4
bonds held by mutual funds do not trade in a given month. We run our baseline regressions
adding interactions of flow volatility with dummies indicating that a bond did not trade
at all during the last three months. As we found in our cross-asset class results, the aver-
age municipal bond held by mutual funds is perceived to be significantly less liquid than
the average corporate bond held by mutual funds. Municipal bonds that do not trade are
perceived to be more illiquid than the average municipal bond, but the magnitudes are mod-
erate. This suggests that transaction volume is not a strong proxy for perceived liquidity in
the municipal bond market.
    Finally, we examine how the perceived liquidity of corporate bonds has evolved over
time. Market participants have expressed concern that liquidity has declined since the 2008-
9 financial crisis, ascribing these declines in part to the Volcker Rule and banks' reluctance
to use their balance sheets to intermediate the corporate bond market. However, standard
measures of liquidity that are based on transactions suggest that liquidity is comparable
to the pre-crisis period (e.g., Tobias et al. (2017)). Since our methodology fundamentally
only relies on a single cross section, we can use it to measure how the perceived illiquidity
of the bond market evolves over time. Specifically, we allow time variation in the cross-
sectional relationship between fund cash holdings and flow volatility, running regressions of
cash holdings on flow volatility interacted with dummies for the pre-crisis, crisis, and post-
crisis periods. For investment grade corporate bonds and equities, we find that perceived
liquidity deteriorated in the crisis, but returned to pre-crisis levels after the crisis. In contrast,
the perceived liquidity of speculative grade corporate bonds deteriorated in the crisis, but
did not recover.
    Our paper is related to the very large literature on debt and equity market liquidity,
including Roll (1984) Amihud and Mendelson (2001) Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam
(2001), Amihud (2002), Pastor and Stambaugh (2003), Acharya and Pedersen (2005), Bao,
Pan, and Wang (2011), Dick-Nielsen, Feldh¨       utter, and Lando (2012), Feldh¨        utter (2012),
Schestag, Schuster, and Uhrig-Homburg (2016), and many others. Most of these papers first
estimate security-level liquidity and then aggregate up to market liquidity. Our approach
differs from most of these papers in two ways. We focus on bonds held by mutual funds,
and we do not attempt to estimate security-level measures of liquidity. Instead, we take a
revealed preference approach that allows us to measure overall market liquidity as perceived
by mutual fund managers, an important group of market participants. Our approach offers
two key advantages. First, it captures the forward-looking perceptions of fund managers.
Second, it allows us to estimate liquidity for securities that do not trade very often.
    These features are useful in light of debates about bond market liquidity since the 2008-
9 financial crisis. While market participants have expressed concern about deteriorating


                                                  5
liquidity since the crisis, many standard transaction-based measures of liquidity suggest
that liquidity is comparable to the pre-crisis period. For instance, Bessembinder et al. (2018)
and Trebbi and Xiao (2016) find little evidence of deterioration in average trade execution
costs, though they note some deterioration in other measures of liquidity. Tobias et al.
(2017) finds little evidence of deterioration in a variety of price-based measures of liquidity,
while Anderson and Stulz (2017) and Bao, O'Hara, and Alex Zhou (2018) find evidence of
deterioration around stress events. One possible reconciliation of these differing perspectives
is that standard measures do not fully capture perceived liquidity. This could be because
fund managers worry about the risk of a sudden liquidity freeze that has not yet occurred
or because liquidity has deteriorated for a subset of bonds that do not trade frequently. Our
methodology allows us to assess these possibilities, and we find evidence for them.
    Schultz (2017) shows that dealers increasingly rely on pre-arranged trades. Such trades
offer better prices and lower price impact but at the cost of immediacy. This message is
reinforced by Goldstein and Hotchkiss (2020), who argue that observed spreads may fail
to capture cross-sectional and time-series variation in expected liquidity because dealers
endogenously adjust their behavior. Our methodology captures mutual fund managers'
perception of liquidity and the trade-off between price impact and immediacy.
    Our approach shares some similarities with Mahanti et al. (2008). They define a bond's
"latent liquidity" as the weighted average portfolio turnover of investors who hold the bond.
Therefore, like our measure of perceived liquidity, latent liquidity does not rely on transac-
tions data and can be used in markets with infrequent trading. There are some important
differences, however. First, our perceived liquidity measure is forward looking, reflecting mu-
tual fund managers' expectations of future liquidity and the risk that liquidity evaporates.
Second, our measure allows for comparisons of liquidity over time and across asset classes. In
contrast, turnover may be driven by factors other than liquidity in both the time series and
across asset classes. For this reason, the Mahanti et al. (2008) measure of latent liquidity is
defined as the bond's percentile ranking at a given point in time. Thus, it can only be used
to measure liquidity in the cross section of a single asset class by construction.


2     Empirical Framework
2.1    Static Model
    To help fix ideas and motivate our empirical procedure, we begin by presenting a simple
static model linking the liquidity of a fund's assets to its cash holdings. Consider a single
mutual fund with one dollar of assets that faces outflows x that are normally distributed


                                               6
with mean zero and variance  2 . The fund can accommodate redemptions in two ways.
First, it may choose to hold cash reserves R. These reserves are liquid claims that can be
sold costlessly to meet outflows. We assume that cash is available in elastic supply and that
each dollar of cash reserves is associated with carrying cost i. One can think of i as the cost
of tracking error for the fund. If it does not have sufficient cash reserves, the fund meets
outflows by liquidating some of its illiquid security holdings. When it does so, the fund
incurs average cost c per dollar of sales. The fund chooses its cash reserves R to minimize
the sum of carry costs and expected liquidation costs:
                                           
                                   iR +       c(x - R)dF (x),                                (1)
                                          R


where F is the cumulative distribution function of x.

2.1.1   Discussion of setup

    This setup, though stylized, captures key features of how mutual funds manage their
liquidity. The fund uses cash to minimize the transaction costs it must incur to meet outflows.
In a more realistic dynamic model like the one we explore below in simulations, a cash buffer
also allows the fund to net inflows and outflows across time, reducing the total volume of
the illiquid asset it needs to transact.

2.1.2   Optimal cash reserves

    We now solve for the fund's optimal holdings of cash reserves R. Proposition 1 charac-
terizes optimal cash holdings R .

Proposition 1 Assuming i  2      c
                                   , optimal cash holdings R satisfy the first order condition
F (R ) = 1 - c
             i
               . Because x is normally distributed, we have R = k , where k = -1 1 - c      i
                                                                                              ,
and  is the standard normal cumulative distribution function.

    Intuitively, the fund trades off the carrying costs of cash reserves against its expected
liquidation costs. The fund always pays the carrying cost i, while if it carries zero cash, it
                                                                                            c
pays liquidation costs only half of the time--when it has outflows. Thus, we need i  2        for
the fund to hold any cash.
                c
    When i < 2    , the fund uses cash holdings to further reduce its expected liquidation costs.
Intuitively, if the fund chooses to hold more cash, it is choosing to pay higher carrying
costs. This is optimal only if the fund faces higher expected liquidation costs. These costs
depend on the illiquidity of the noncash asset and expected total outflows, which in turn are
determined by the volatility of outflows.

                                                7
                          c
Proposition 2 Assuming i  2 , the optimal cash-to-assets ratio r satisfies the following
comparative statics:
        r
    ·   c
            > 0: The optimal cash-to-assets ratio increases with asset illiquidity.
        r
    ·   
            > 0: The optimal cash-to-assets ratio increases with the volatility of fund flows.
         2 r
    ·   c
             > 0: The relationship between cash-to-assets ratios and fund flow volatility is
        stronger for funds with more illiquid assets.

The three comparative statics describe optimal cash holdings. Cash holdings are driven by
the intersection of investor behavior and asset illiquidity.4 If the fund faces more volatile
flows, it will incur greater liquidation costs on average and is therefore willing to hold more
cash. Similarly, if the fund's assets are more illiquid, it will incur greater liquidation costs.
These two effects interact: the more illiquid the assets, the stronger the relation between the
cash-to-assets ratio and flow volatility.5
    The model could be generalized in at least two ways. First, we could more carefully
model net inflows. As structured, the model is set up to consider how the fund manages
outflows, but the fund faces a similar problem when it has inflows. On one hand, the fund
increases its tracking error if it holds the inflows as cash. On the other hand, holding cash
reduces the price impact the fund generates in buying the illiquid asset. Thus, the logic of
the model suggests that cash is useful for managing both inflows and outflows.
    A second generalization would be to introduce uncertainty about the illiquidity of the
noncash asset. Such uncertainty would capture liquidity risk and increase cash holdings for
precautionary reasons.6



4
  In the model, cash holdings and the cash-to-assets ratio are the same because we assume without loss of
generality that the fund has $1 of assets.
5
  It is worth noting that the fund's cash holdings are not necessarily optimal from a social planner's perspec-
tive. If transaction costs are simply a transfer between funds and outside liquidity providers, a planner may
prefer that funds not hold cash. Alternatively, if there are fire sale externalities, a planner would internalize
these externalities and would have funds hold larger cash buffers (Chernenko and Sunderam, 2020). The fact
that the funds' privately optimal cash buffers may be different from the socially optimal level does not affect
the logic of our methodology. Our empirical approach relies on cross sectional variation in cash buffers, not
on their absolute size.
6
   There are two ways to incorporate liquidity risk in the model. First, uncertainty about illiquidity could
increase expected liquidation costs. Second, liquidation costs could covary with outflows. Formally, the first
                                                               d
order condition in the baseline model takes the form i - c dR    E [x - R|x > R] = 0. If we make c stochastic
                                                                                     d
but uncorrelated with x, the first order condition would take the form i - E [c] dR    E [x - R|x > R] = 0. If
E [c] is increasing in uncertainty about liquidation costs, then optimal cash reserves will be increasing in that

                                                       8
2.2     Methodology
    We now discuss three aspects of our methodology for taking the basic intuition that arises
from the model to our data on mutual fund holdings of corporate bond. First, we explain
why we prefer to examine the cross-sectional relationship between cash and flow volatility,
rather than simply examining the level of cash. Second, we explain why our methodology
is best suited to estimating perceived liquidity at market level, rather than the bond level.
Third, we explain why we prefer to run our regressions at the security-fund-time level, rather
than the fund-time level.
    In the simple model above, both the level of cash and its cross-sectional relationship with
flow volatility are informative about the illiquidity of the noncash asset. In practice, cash
holdings are determined by many factors other than liquidity management considerations.
For instance, some funds may pursue strategies that involve holding dry powder until good
investment opportunities arise. In addition, the use of derivatives and leverage, including
short selling, involve margin accounts that require funds to have cash on hand. The cross-
sectional relationship between cash and flow volatility is less likely to be contaminated by
these factors and therefore is a better measure of perceived liquidity.
    To see why our methodology is best suited to estimating perceived liquidity at market
level, suppose that following the intuition of Proposition 2 funds set their cash-to-assets ratio
according to
                              Cash
                                         =       wb,f,t × Illiqb,t f,t                        (2)
                              T N A f,t        b

where the term in the square brackets represents the weighted average illiquidity of portfolio
securities.7 Given data on F funds over T periods, Equation 2 represents a system of F × T
equations in B × T unknown values of Illiqb,t . With about 16,000 unique bonds, 300 funds,
and 84 months worth of data, the system is not identified.
     One way to make progress on identification is to assume that each bond has constant
illiquidity over time
                                 Illiqb,t = Illiqb for all t.


uncertainty. If c stochastic and correlated with x, the first order condition becomes
                            d
                      i-      (E [c|x > R]E [x - R|x > R] + Cov [c, x - R|x > R]) = 0.
                           dR
So optimal cash reserves increase with the covariance between liquidation costs and outflows.
7
  We assume that the measure of bond illiquidity is appropriately scaled, and we omit the constant term,
assuming that a fund with zero flow volatility will not hold any precautionary cash.



                                                     9
Equation 2 then reduces to F × T equations in B unknowns. Even though we have enough
fund-date observations to identify bond-specific illiquidity, assuming time-invariant liquidity
is rather unrealistic, and our power will be relatively low.
    A more fruitful approach is to assume that all bonds within a given category, e.g., BBB-
rated bonds with 3­5 years to maturity and par values of less than $500 million, have the
same illiquidity:
                                 Illiqb,t = Illiqk,t for all b  k

Equation 2 then reduces to K × T unknowns where K is the number of bond categories for
which we want to estimate liquidity. As long as the number of categories, K , is smaller than
the number of funds in the data, F , Equation 2 is identified. In this sense, our methodology
is most appropriate for estimating market-level illiquidity for bonds, where we can define up
to K markets.
    A third question is whether to bring our model intuitions to the data at the fund-time
level or security-fund-time level. At the fund-time level, we could calculate the share of each
fund's portfolio invested in different categories and estimate a regression of the cash-to-assets
ratio on the portfolio shares interacted with flow volatility

                                Cash
                                                  =       k,t · wk,f,t × f,t + f,t                     (3)
                                T NA        f,t       k


where wk,f,t is the share of the portfolio invested in category k bonds. The coefficients
1,t , . . . , K,t would then capture the time-varying illiquidity of different categories.
    Alternatively, we could estimate the regression at the security-fund-time level:

                          Cash
                                           = b,t +             k,t · I (k )b,t × f,t + b,f,t ,         (4)
                          T NA     b,f,t                  k


where I (k )b,t is an indicator variable for bond b belonging to category k at time t. An
advantage of this approach is that it allows us to control for the endogeneity of security
choice. If funds with volatile fund flows choose to hold more liquid securities and smaller
cash buffers, this would bias downwards the estimated k,t coefficients in Equation 3. With
the inclusion of bond-date fixed effects in Equation 4, we can look at how cash holdings
vary with flow volatility across funds holding the same bond, thus alleviating the selection
problem at the cost of only being able to estimate perceived liquidity for bonds held by
multiple mutual funds.8 Because our explanatory variable is calculated at the fund level,
8
  If there is no selection problem and all bonds are held by multiple mutual funds, then running Equation 4
with appropriate weights should result in similar estimates to running Equation 3.



                                                              10
for proper statistical inference, we will need to adjust the standard errors for clustering by
fund-time.


2.3    Simulation
    We next run two types of simulations to validate our methodology. In this section, we
validate the idea of estimating position-level regressions by running a simulation showing
that the coefficients k,t in Equation 4 do indeed recover the average illiquidity of bonds in
different categories. The simulation procedure is as follows:

  1. Initialize a sample of 5,000 bonds.

        · Assign each bond to one of 10 categories. Bonds in different categories will vary
          in their average illiquidity.
        · For each bond in category k  {1 . . . 10}, randomly draw its illiquidity from the
          log-normal distribution with µ = 0.15k and  = 0.05. This specification is meant
          to capture the idea that bonds in different categories vary in average liquidity but
          that the distribution of illiquidity across categories overlaps.

  2. Initialize a sample of 500 funds.

        · Assign each fund to one of 10 objectives corresponding to different bond categories.
          Funds in objective k will invest only in category k bonds, consistent with most
          bond funds having restricted mandates.
        · Randomly sample each fund's portfolio of 200 bonds from bonds that belong to
          the fund's objective.

  3. Initialize a sample of 100 flexible funds that can invest in all bond categories.

        · Randomly sample each fund's portfolio of 200 bonds from all 5,000 bonds.

  4. Calculate portfolio illiquidity as the mean of bond level illiquidity.

  5. Draw each fund's flow volatility, f , from a lognormal distribution with mean 0.051 and
     standard deviation 0.028. These values are set to approximately match the empirical
     distribution of flow volatility in our data.

  6. Set each fund's cash-to-assets ratio according to

                             Cash
                                         = Illiquidityf × f + 0.025 × f ,                 (5)
                             T NA    f


                                               11
      where  is standard normal. The magnitude of the random shock is set to match the
      standard deviation of the residuals from the regression of the cash-to-assets ratio on
      fund characteristics in column 8 of Table 2.

  7. In the simulated holdings data, estimate the regression

                               Cash
                                             = b +       k · (1)k × f + b,f                   (6)
                               T NA    b,f           k


      adjusting the standard errors for clustering by fund.

  8. Run the simulation 100 times.

    Figure 1 presents the results of this simulation exercise. Figure 1a is a box plot of the
distribution of bond liquidity for bonds within each category from a single run of the simu-
lation. Figure 1b is a box plot of the estimated k coefficients across simulations measuring
liquidity of each bond category. The figures show that our methodology does a good job of
uncovering the average liquidity of bonds in each category. Furthermore, differences in the
estimated coefficients map linearly into differences in liquidity. This means that our method-
ology allows us to use the estimated coefficients on flow volatility to compare liquidity in
both the cross section and over time.


2.4    Dynamic model
    The simulation in the previous section uses the simple static model in Section 2.1 and
assumes that at each point in time the cash-to-assets ratio is set as a linear function of
portfolio illiquidity. How well does our methodology measure illiquidity in a dynamic setting?
    In this subsection, we investigate the performance of our methodology in the dynamic
environment studied by Connor and Leland (1995) in their model of fund cash management.
In their setting, a fund receives stochastic flows and can hold either cash or a non-cash illiquid
asset (representing a basket of securities). The fund dynamically manages its response to
flows and its cash position to trade off the carrying costs of cash against the transaction
costs of trading the illiquid asset. The optimal solution is for funds to manage cash using
an Ss-type rule. Funds accumulate inflows in cash until their cash-to-assets ratio reaches an
upper bound L. If the cash-to-assets ratio exceeds L, the fund rebalances back to L. Funds
accommodate outflows by drawing down their cash buffers until their cash-to-assets ratio
reaches zero. If they have further outflows, they accommodate these outflows by liquidating
some of their holdings of the non-cash illiquid asset.



                                                12
     We simulate funds' cash buffers under this policy and estimate regressions of the cash-to-
assets ratio on flow volatility. To focus on the dynamics of cash holdings over time, we stick
with the assumption in Connor and Leland (1995) that funds do not adjust their securities
portfolio and that the only choice variable is the fraction of total assets invested in cash.
Thus, in this simulation, each fund holds a single non-cash asset, with funds varying in the
illiquidity of their noncash asset and in their flow volatility.
     Specifically, we:

  1. Create 10 liquidity categories. Funds in different categories will vary in the average
     illiquidity of their non-cash assets.

  2. Simulate 500 funds in each category. Fund j  {1 . . . 500} in category k  {1 . . . 10},
                       1         1
     faces cost 0.01 + 10 × k + 500 × j per dollar of transacting in its illiquid asset.

  3. Draw each fund's flow volatility, f , from a lognormal distribution with mean 0.051 and
     standard deviation 0.028. These values are set to approximately match the empirical
     distribution of flow volatility in our data.

  4. Given each fund's flow volatility, simulate a time series of 200 months of flows and the
     fund's optimal response to those flows.

  5. Estimate each fund's flow volatility as the in-sample standard deviation of its realized
     flows.

  6. Within each k  {1 . . . 10}, regress funds' realized cash-to-assets ratio on their esti-
     mated flow volatility using the pooled fund-month sample for funds in category k .

     Figure 2 plots the regression coefficient for category k against the average illiquidity of
the funds in category k . The figure shows that regression coefficients increase with illiquidity,
demonstrating that the intuition for our procedure sketched in our static model does continue
to hold in a more complex dynamic setting. Note furthermore that, in this setting, the
relationship between regression coefficients and illiquidity appears to be slightly concave.
This means that a doubling of regression coefficients is associated with a more than doubling
in the illiquidity of the underlying asset. Thus, it is conservative to interpret our regression
coefficients linearly ­ that is, to interpret a doubling in the coefficient as a doubling of
illiquidity.




                                               13
3     Data
     Our main data set consists of long positions in corporate bonds held by actively managed
open-end mutual funds that invest primarily in corporate bonds. Definitions of all variables
can be found in the appendix. Fund holdings and characteristics are from Morningstar, while
bond characteristics are from Mergent FISD. Corporate bonds are defined as the corporate
debenture (CDEB) bond type in FISD. We define corporate bond mutual funds as funds
that invest at least 50% of their total net assets (TNA) in corporate bonds and are in one of
the following Morningstar categories: Corporate Bond, Emerging Markets Bond, High Yield
Bond, Intermediate-Term Bond, Long-Term Bond, Multisector Bond, Nontraditional Bond,
World Bond.
     Since the relationship between flow volatility and cash holdings may not be informative
of the portfolio holdings liquidity during the fund's incubation period, we exclude funds that
are less than two years old (Evans, 2010) and funds with less than $10 million in TNA.
To guard against potential data errors, we require the ratio of the net market value of
portfolio securities to fund TNA to be in the [0.5, 1.5] interval. Such filters are common in
the literature (e.g., Coval and Stafford (2007)).
     In most of our analyses, the sample period is July 2009­June 2016. The sample period is
limited by the availability of daily fund flows in Morningstar starting in July 2008. Rather
than start the sample period in the middle of the financial crisis, we conduct our cross
sectional analyses using post-crisis data. To study the effects of the financial crisis and the
behavior of our measure of illiquidity in the time series, we construct an alternative measure
of flow volatility that utilizes monthly fund flows estimated based on fund TNA and returns.
Although this measure is coarser than daily fund flow volatility, it allows us to extend the
sample period to July 2002­June 2016.
     Overall, the main corporate bond sample consists of 286 funds holding 15,505 unique
bonds.


3.1    Cash holdings
   We measure cash holdings as the sum of a fund's long positions in cash, certificates of
deposit, commercial paper, repurchase agreements, money market funds, and Treasury and
Agency securities with original maturity of less than one year. While most of these can be
identified based on the security code in Morningstar, this classification is imperfect and we
make a number of adjustments.
   First, some holdings of money market funds are classified by Morningstar as generic
"Mutual Fund - Open End" (security type code FO) or as "Equity - Unidentified" (EQ) rather

                                              14
than as "Mutual Fund - Money Market" (FM).9 We use the list of CUSIPs that correspond
to money market funds in CRSP Mutual Fund Database (based on CRSP objective code
starting with IM) to identify positions misclassified by Morningstar.
    Second, Morningstar classifies many commercial paper issues as "Unidentified Holding"
(textttQ).10 We use the CP institution type variable from the CUSIP Master File to identify
six-character issuer CUSIPs that correspond to commercial paper programs.
    Third, Morningstar does not differentiate between short- and long-maturity Treasury
and Agency securities. Using offering date and maturity information from FISD, we include
Treasury and Agency securities with original maturities of less than one year in our definition
of cash.
    Fourth, because Morningstar's classification is not always consistent within a given
CUSIP, we identify as cash any CUSIP that is classified as such more than 50% of the
time.11
    As previously mentioned, in calculating the level of cash holdings we include only long
positions. Negative values of Morningstar security code C (Cash) correspond to short po-
sitions in CDS and other derivatives.12 We used N-CSR and N-Q filings to measure the
cash-to-assets ratio for a random sample of 363 observations. For this sample, the correla-
tion between the true value of cash and equivalents and the Morningstar measure is 0.61
when only long positions are included and 0.06 when both long and short positions are
included.
    Figure 3a shows the distribution of the cash-to-assets ratio over time. Except for the
periods around the financial crisis and the European sovereign debt crisis, the distribution is
relatively stable. The median fund holds about 3.2% of its portfolio in cash and equivalents.


3.2       Flow volatility
   Our key explanatory variable is the volatility of fund flows. In our main analyses, we use
the dollar value of actual daily fund flows reported by Morningstar. We scale these by the
9
    About 3% of all holdings of money market funds are misclassified this way.
10
  About 43% of CP holdings are classified as "Unidentified Holding" (Q), another 13% are classified as
"Bond - Corporate Bond" (B).
11
    CUSIP 85799G001, which corresponds to Euro Time Deposits with State Street, is one example. Most of
the security codes associated with this CUSIP get tagged as cash, but for some funds' positions, Morningstar
assigns security codes B (Bond - Corporate Bond) or Q (Unidentified Holding). We calculate the average
of the raw cash dummy across funds and time. If this average is greater than 50%, all positions with that
CUSIP are considered to be cash.
12
     Nuveen High Yield Bond Fund in June 2008 is one example.



                                                     15
TNA at the end of the previous month and calculate the standard deviation of scaled fund
flows during the last three months, requiring at least twenty observations. Scaled fund flows
are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles within each month.
    Since daily flows are available in Morningstar only starting in July 2008, to study time
series changes in liquidity over the 2002­2016 period, we use the volatility of monthly fund
flows. Following the mutual fund literature, we estimate monthly fund flows as:

                                      T N Af,t - (1 + rf,t ) × T N At-1
                         F lowf,t =
                                                 T N Af,t-1

Flow volatility is then calculated as the standard deviation of fund-level flows over the
previous twelve months, requiring at least nine observations.
   Figure 3b shows the distribution of flow volatility over time. Over the full sample period,
the interquartile range is between 3.2% and 6.3%. There are noticeable increases in flow
volatility during the financial crisis, the European sovereign debt crisis, and in late 2015.


3.3    Municipal bonds
     We use the sample of municipal bonds held by municipal bond funds to analyze the
illiquidity of bonds that do not trade and that as a result lack standard transaction-based
measures of liquidity. Municipal bonds are a good laboratory for comparing the liquidity of
securities that do and do not trade. Our sample of municipal bonds consists of valid CUSIPs
with Morningstar security types "Muni Bond - General Obligation", "Muni Bond - Revenue",
and "Muni Bond - Unspecified". The sample of municipal bond funds consists of funds
that invest at least 50% of their TNA in municipal bonds and whose Morningstar category
includes the word "muni." Short-term funds (with the word "short" in their category name)
are excluded as it is difficult to tell whether their cash holdings are driven by liquidity
management or investment mandate.
     As with corporate bond funds, we exclude a) funds that are less than two years old, b)
funds with less than $10 million in TNA, and c) funds for which the ratio of the market
value of portfolio securities to TNA is not in the [0.5, 1.5] interval. Overall, the municipal
bond sample consists of 482 unique funds holding 114,485 unique bonds.


3.4    Equity funds
    As a benchmark, we also compute our measure of perceived liquidity for domestic and
foreign equities. Our sample of domestic equities consists of CUSIPs with CRSP share codes
10 and 11 that are listed on stock exchanges with codes 1­3. The sample of domestic equity

                                               16
funds consists of funds that invest at least 50% of their TNA in domestic stocks. Overall,
the domestic stock sample consists of 1,716 unique funds holding 4,891 unique stocks.
    The sample of foreign stocks consists of securities that are identified by Morningstar as
equities and that are either not in CRSP or have CRSP share codes 12 or 30­39.13 Foreign
equity funds are funds that invest at least 50% of their TNA in foreign stocks. Overall, the
foreign equity sample consists of 759 unique funds holding 23,615 unique stocks.


3.5     Summary statistics
    Table 1 reports summary statistics for our main sample of corporate bonds held by
corporate bond mutual funds during the July 2009­June 2016 period. In panel A the unit
of observation is fund-date. The median fund has TNA of $440 million, cash-to-assets ratio
of 3.2%, and monthly flow volatility of 4.5%. Most funds take only long positions: the 75th
percentile of the gross to net value of portfolio securities is 1.01. For most funds, the portfolio
shares of TBA securities, equities, and ETFs, which could be potentially liquidated first to
meet redemption requests, are very small. About 18% of all fund-date observations impose
redemption fees.
    Panel B reports summary statistics for bonds. The median bond has a par value of $500
million. Credit ratings are encoded so that AAA = 0, AA+ = 1, etc. Thus the 25th, 50th,
and 75th percentiles of the distribution correspond to BBB+, BBB-, and BB- credit ratings.
In a given quarter, the median bond is held by 8 funds in the final sample.


4     Results
    We start by presenting results verifying there is a significant relationship between the
cash-to-assets ratio and fund flow volatility. Subsection 4.2 establishes the robustness of
these results by showing that the relation between fund flow volatility and the cash-to-assets
ratio is not driven by the level of flows or by fund returns. In subsection 4.3 we examine the
cross section of perceived liquidity, showing that speculative-grade and Rule 144A bonds are
perceived to be less liquid. Subsection 4.4 shows that perceived illiquidity is priced. Finally,
we conduct three exercises that demonstrate the advantages of our methodology. First, in
subsection 4.5 we use our methodology to consistently compare perceived liquidity across
asset classes. Second, in subsection 4.6 we measure the perceived illiquidity of municipal
bonds, an asset class for which it is difficult to construct reliable transaction-based measures
13
  Share code 12 refers to Ordinary Common Shares of companies incorporated outside the US. Share codes
30­39 refer to American Depository Receipts (ADRs) of foreign firms.



                                                 17
of liquidity because trade is infrequent. Third, in subsection 4.7 we study time series changes
in perceived liquidity. We show that perceived liquidity has declined substantially, especially
for speculative-grade and Rule 144A bonds.


4.1    Baseline results
   We begin by verifying a baseline implication of our motivating model in Section 2.1: that
funds facing higher flow volatility do indeed hold more cash. Table 2 presents regressions of
the cash-to-assets ratio on fund flow volatility:

                       Cash
                                       = b,t + obj (f ),t +  · f,t +  Xf,t + b,f,t .             (7)
                       T NA    b,f,t


We include the following controls in Xf,t : (i) the fund's log TNA and the fund family's log
total TNA, which allow for economies of scale in cash management; (ii) the fund's leverage
(ratio of gross assets to net assets) because the use of leverage, including short sales, involves
holding cash in margin accounts; (iii) whether the fund has redemption fees, which can reduce
the need for large cash buffers; (iv) the share of the fund's assets invested in agency MBS
through the to-be-announced (TBA) market, which involves holding cash in margin accounts;
(v) the share of the fund's assets invested in equities and ETFs, which are more liquid than
corporate bonds. We standardize all continuous variables except for flow volatility so that
their coefficients represent the effect of a one standard deviation change. Standard errors
are adjusted for clustering by fund-date, the level at which we measure our key explanatory
variable.
    Columns 1­4 of Table 2 weight observations by their portfolio share, giving more weight
to observations that make up a larger share of a fund's portfolio and that therefore contribute
more to the overall illiquidity of a fund's portfolio.
    In column 1, the coefficient on flow volatility is 0.166 and is highly statistically significant.
The interpretation is that a one standard deviation increase in the annualized daily flow
volatility of 2.78% is associated with a 46 basis point higher cash-to-assets ratio. Relative
to the median cash-to-assets ratio of 320 basis points, this is a sizable effect.
    The coefficient on fund size is positive. Although larger funds may enjoy certain economies
of scale, they are also more likely to trade derivatives or to short securities, both of which
require funds to hold cash collateral. Consistent with this idea, the coefficient on the ra-
tio of gross to net assets is positive, indicating that funds that use leverage have higher
cash-to-assets ratios. The coefficient on the portfolio share of TBA agency mortgage-backed
securities is large and positive: funds that commit to purchasing such securities in the future


                                                    18
set aside cash to cover these purchases. We do find evidence of significant economies of
scale at the family level. Larger families help their funds economize on cash with liquidity
management tools like external lines of credit, interfund lending programs, and systems for
crossing trades across funds.14 Finally, the coefficients on ETF share and equity share are
negative, consistent with the idea these holdings are more liquid than the average corporate
bond held by mutual funds.
    One concern with the simple OLS regression in column 1 is that it may be picking up
differences in fund objectives and strategies rather than differences in portfolio liquidity. For
instance, high-yield funds may engage in more market timing and therefore hold larger cash
buffers than other funds. If high-yield funds also face more volatile flows, this could bias the
coefficient on flow volatility. In column 2, we add objective-date fixed effects, so we are only
identifying the relationship between cash holdings and flow volatility within a given fund
style. The coefficient on flow volatility is slightly larger at 0.186.
    A second concern with the simple OLS regression in column 1 is selection--funds with
highly volatile fund flows may choose to hold more liquid securities, which require smaller
precautionary cash buffers. This would bias the coefficient on flow volatility towards zero. To
address this concern, column 3 adds bond-date fixed effects. This regression asks whether
among funds that hold a given bond at a particular point in time, the ones with more
volatile fund flows hold more cash. The coefficient on flow volatility is 0.186, the same as
in column 2. Including bond-date fixed effects makes a larger difference for the coefficient
on the redemption fees dummy. This coefficient is positive and not statistically significant
in columns 1 and 2, but is negative and statistically significant in column 3. These results
suggest that funds holding more illiquid securities are more likely to impose redemption fees
and to hold larger cash buffers. Column 4 controls for both bond-date and objective-date
fixed effects. The results here are similar to column 3.
    Columns 5­8 of Table 2 present the equal-weighted results. These are broadly similar
in economic and statistical significance to the portfolio-share weighted results in columns
1­4. Comparing the results in columns 4 and 8, the economic magnitude of the coefficient
on flow volatility in the equal-weighted regression in column 8 is about 80% of its value in
the portfolio-share weighted regression in column 4. Going forward, we will focus on the
portfolio-share weighted regressions with bond-date and objective-date fixed effects. The
fixed effects help control for the portfolio selection effects, while portfolio share weights
give more weight to observations that contribute more to the overall illiquidity of a fund's
portfolio. We report the results of the equal-weighted regressions in the Internet Appendix.

14
     See Agarwal and Zhao (2018) on the use of interfund lending in liquidity management.



                                                    19
4.2     Robustness
    In this subsection, we rule out alternative explanations for our baseline results in Table 2.
In particular, we show our results are robust to controlling for a) past and future fund flows
and b) past and future fund returns.
    We control for past and future fund flows to show that funds' cash-to-assets ratios are
responding to their ex-ante concerns about flow volatility, and not to the ex-post realized
flows. For instance, suppose there were no relationship between ex-ante flow volatility and
cash-to-assets ratios. A fund that has recently had large inflows may mechanically have high
past flow volatility and could have a high cash-to-assets ratio because it is slow to invest
those inflows. Conversely, a fund that knows it is likely to have future outflows may build
up its cash-to-asset ratio in advance to meet those outflows.
    To ensure that any changes in the coefficient on flow volatility are due to the additional
controls and not due to changes in the sample, we hold the sample constant across all columns
in Table 3 and always require funds to have past and future flows and returns. For brevity,
we report only the coefficients on flow volatility and the new control variables. Full regression
output is reported in the Internet Appendix.
    Column 2 of Table 3 estimates Equation 7, adding the fund's last three months of flows
as controls. The coefficients on past flows in column 2 suggest that funds are indeed slow
to invest inflows: the cash-assets ratio rises temporarily when funds experience inflows.
However, the coefficient on flow volatility is similar to the baseline result in column 1,
suggesting that past realized flows do not explain our results. Column 3 adds three months
of future flows as controls, and again the coefficient on flow volatility is little changed.
    In columns 4 and 5 of Table 3, we control for the fund's past and future returns. Returns
could explain our results for two reasons. First, if funds are slow to rebalance, then past
returns will mechanically affect a fund's cash-assets ratio by changing the value of the non-
cash assets. If returns are correlated with flow volatility, for instance because there is a
performance-flow relationship, this could explain our baseline results. Column 4 controls
for past returns and shows that the coefficient on flow volatility is unchanged relative to
the baseline. The second reason returns could explain our results is that cash holdings may
reflect managers' expectations of risk and return. Specifically, fund managers may choose
to hold more cash whenever they expect future returns to be low or risk to be high. If
these expectations correlate with flow volatility, they could explain our baseline results.
Column 5 adds controls for future returns and shows that the coefficient on flow volatility is
unchanged.15 Finally, column 6 controls for past and future returns and past and future flows
15
  Future returns are negatively correlated with the time t cash-to-assets ratio, suggesting that corporate
bond funds do have some market timing ability. While it could also be the case that higher cash buffers exert

                                                     20
simultaneously; the results are similar to the baseline. Overall, these results suggest that
funds' cash-to-assets ratios are responding to their ex-ante concerns about flow volatility,
consistent with our motivating model in Section 2.1.


4.3     Cross-sectional results
    We next use our measure, the coefficient on fund flow volatility, to understand what types
of bonds are perceived by mutual fund managers to be less liquid. To explore the cross section
of perceived illiquidity, Table 4 estimates Equation 7, interacting flow volatility with bond
characteristics. All specifications include bond-date and fund objective-date fixed effects,
so we are comparing the cash holdings of two funds in the same objective with different
flow volatility that hold the same bond at the same time. We weight observations by their
portfolio share, giving more weight to observations that make up a larger share of a fund's
portfolio and that therefore contribute more to the overall illiquidity of a fund's portfolio.
    Column 1 examines the perceived illiquidity of bonds with different credit ratings. The
omitted category is AAA, so the raw coefficient on flow volatility captures the liquidity of
AAA-rated bonds. The negative coefficient on flow volatility suggests that AAA-rated bonds
may be considered a substitute for cash holdings. Despite only small differences in credit
risk, AA and A-rated bonds are perceived to be significantly less liquid than AAA-rated
bonds. Furthermore, AA and A-rated bonds are perceived to have about the same liquidity.
BBB-rated bonds, on the other hand, are perceived to be less liquid than AA and A-rated
bonds. There is a large jump in perceived illiquidity from 0.199 to 0.314 at the boundary
between investment grade and speculate grade bonds (i.e., between BBB and BB rated
bonds). Within speculative grade, there is some evidence that BB-rated bonds are perceived
to be somewhat more liquid than B or CCC-rated bonds. Interestingly, unrated bonds are
perceived to have similar liquidity to speculative-grade bonds. Overall, these results are
consistent with speculative-grade and unrated bonds being less liquid than investment-grade
bonds because of greater scope for asymmetric information and because the set of investors
who can hold these bonds is smaller, raising search costs (Duffie, G^    arleanu, and Pedersen,
2005, 2007).
    Columns 3­7 examine other bond characteristics. Larger bond issues are perceived to

a negative drag of fund performance, such a mechanical effect is not large enough to explain the magnitude
of the negative correlation. Assuming that the expected annual return on non-cash assets is five percentage
points higher than the return on cash holdings, a one percentage point higher cash-to-assets ratio would be
expected to lower monthly returns by about 0.01 × 500
                                                   12 = 0.42 basis points. In contrast, the results in column
5 indicate that a one standard deviation increase in month t + 1 returns of 172 basis points is associated
with a 1.72 × -0.623 = -1.07% lower cash-to-assets ratio.



                                                     21
be slightly less liquid, though the magnitudes are small. A one standard deviation increase
in (log) offering amount is associated with an increase in the coefficient on flow volatility of
0.018, which is about 10% of its value in column 4 of Table 2. Column 4 indicates that longer
maturity bonds are perceived to be less liquid. This result is consistent with the evidence
in Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011) and Feldh¨      utter (2012), who find that the Roll (1984) and
Imputed Roundtrip Trade measures of liquidity increase with bond maturity.
    In column 5, we find a negative correlation between bond age and perceived liquidity.
Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011) find that older bonds are less liquid according to the Roll (1984)
measure, while Chen, Lesmond, and Wei (2007) find no effect of bond age on either the
percentage of zero returns measure or the Lesmond, Ogden, and Trzcinka (1999) measure.
    Rule 144A bonds are perceived to be significantly less liquid, presumably because they
can be traded by a smaller set of investors: qualified institutional buyers. Secured bonds
are also perceived to be less liquid, presumably due to selection--firms tend to issue secured
bonds when they are distressed. Finally, column 8 includes the interactions of flow volatility
with all bond characteristics. While the coefficients are somewhat attenuated once we try to
distinguish between the effects of different bond characteristics, with the exception of bond
maturity, all interaction terms remain statistically significant.


4.4      Is perceived illiquidity priced?
    We next turn to the question of whether perceived illiquidity is priced. Since our proce-
dure does not recover bond-level measures of illiquidity, we must take an indirect approach.
We ask whether bonds that have high spreads also have high levels of perceived illiquidity
according to our measure. Specifically, we estimate our baseline regressions interacting flow
volatility with the bond's spread. Because the yield spread on low-rated distressed bonds is
likely to be dominated by default risk, we focus our analysis on investment grade bonds, for
which liquidity premia are likely to be an important component of yields.
    We use two measures of yields. First, we use the bond's offering yield at issuance.
Assuming that liquidity is a persistent characteristic, the offering yield will reflect expected
future liquidity. Another advantage of the offering yield measure is that we obtain it directly
from Mergent FISD. Second, we consider the bond's current yield-to-maturity, which we
compute using data on the bond's price, maturity, and coupon payments.16 While this
measure has the potential to better reflect time t perceptions of a bond's liquidity, it may
also be somewhat noisy because our calculations may not incorporate all of the bond's
payment features.
16
     We use the median price reported by mutual funds holding the bond at the end of month t.



                                                   22
    Columns 1­3 of Table 5 report results using the offering yield measure, while columns 4­6
report results using the current yield-to-maturity. In column 1, the interaction flow volatility
with the bond's offering yield is positive and significant, indicating that bonds with higher
yields are perceived to be less liquid. In other words, our measure of perceived illiquidity does
appear to be priced. The economic magnitude is large: a one-standard deviation increase
in offering yield is associated with a coefficient on flow volatility that is 0.022 larger, about
35% of the baseline value of 0.062 for the average bond.
    Columns 2 and 3 show that similar results hold when we control for credit ratings and
additional bond characteristics, as well as their interactions with flow volatility, allowing
these characteristics to separately affect perceived illiquidity. Controlling for credit ratings
in column 2 has little effect on the magnitude of the estimated coefficient, indicating that our
results are not driven by the default component of the yield spread. We find a negative effect
of bond size suggesting that larger investment-grade bonds are perceived to be more liquid.
This contrasts with the results in Table 4, where we pool investment- and speculative-grade
bonds and find that larger bonds are perceived to be less liquid.
    In columns 4­6 of Table 5, we report the specifications where we interact flow volatility
with the bond's current yield-to-maturity. We find similar results. In fact the magnitude of
the effect is somewhat stronger. A one-standard deviation increase in the current yield-to-
maturity is associated with a coefficient on flow volatility that is 0.046 larger, almost 60%
of the baseline value of 0.080 for the average bond.


4.5     Comparisons across asset classes
    One advantage of our methodology is that it can be used to compare perceived liquidity
across different asset classes that may have different market microstructures and different
degrees of data availability. Assuming that mutual fund managers in different asset classes
face similar penalties for tracking error,17 we can use Equation 7 to estimate their perceptions
of illiquidity across different asset classes. This is helpful given that differences in market
microstructure and data availability can make it difficult to compute and compare measures
of liquidity across asset classes. For example, both the Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011) and
Feldh¨ utter (2012) measures can only be computed for asset classes with high-quality trans-
action data. Similarly, bid-ask spreads may vary across asset classes due to microstructure
17
   Specifically, they face similar penalties for the tracking error generated by allocating a given percentage
of their portfolio to cash. This will be the case if investors scale tracking error by the expected return of
the asset class. In other words, if equities return 5% and bonds return 2%, investors equally penalize the 5
basis point tracking error generated by an equity fund manager's 1% cash allocation and the 2 basis point
tracking error generated by a bond fund manager's 1% cash allocation.



                                                     23
considerations.
    Table 6 reports our estimates of perceived liquidity for four asset classes: domestic eq-
uities, foreign equities, corporate bonds, and municipal bonds. Comparing the liquidity of
domestic versus foreign stocks can be challenging because stocks in different countries may
be subject to different market microstructure issues.18 Furthermore, measures of liquidity
constructed using foreign transactions data may not accurately reflect the liquidity available
to US-based investors in these markets. One advantage of our liquidity measure is that it
captures the liquidity of foreign stocks as perceived by the US-based mutual funds, an im-
portant set of investors holding foreign stocks. Measuring liquidity in the municipal bond
market is also challenging because, as we discuss in the next section, most municipal bonds
trade infrequently, making it difficult to construct traditional transaction-based measures
such as the Roll (1984) and Amihud (2002) measures.
    Our Morningstar holdings data for mutual funds investing in these four assets classes
are limited to January 2012­June 2016. For each asset class, we consider a mutual fund to
specialize in that asset class if it invests at least 50% of its portfolio in that asset class. As
with our main sample of corporate bond funds, we require funds to be actively managed and
at least two years old, and to have TNA of at least $10 million. Summary statistics for the
domestic and foreign equity funds and for municipal bond funds are reported in the Internet
Appendix.
    Table 6 shows that domestic and foreign equities are perceived to be more liquid than
corporate and municipal bonds. Foreign equities are perceived to be about 50% less liquid
than domestic equities.19 Note that this estimate is based on the sample of foreign stocks
that are held by US-based mutual funds and may thus be skewed toward the more liquid
foreign stocks.20 Corporate bonds are perceived to be significantly less liquid than domestic
stocks. Assuming a linear relationship between illiquidity and our estimated coefficients,
corporate bonds are almost seven times less liquid than domestic stocks. Municipal bonds
(0.336) are even less liquid than corporate bonds (0.137).




18
   See Fong, Holden, and Trzcinka (2017) for discussion and tests of alternative liquidity proxies used in
cross-country research.
19
  In unreported regressions we find that emerging markets stocks are perceived to be significantly less liquid
than developed markets stocks.
20
     For example, stocks from the frontier markets account for less than 0.5% of all observations.



                                                      24
4.6     Perceived liquidity of securities that do not trade
    Another advantage of our methodology is that it can be used to estimate the perceived
liquidity of securities that do not trade, while most other liquidity measures rely on trans-
actions data.
    We illustrate this advantage in the context of municipal bonds, where a significant fraction
of bonds do not trade regularly. Within our sample of municipal bonds held by the municipal
bond mutual funds, 70% of all bonds do not trade during a given month. Even for bonds that
do trade, many transactions are smaller than $100 thousand in face value, a typical cutoff for
differentiating between retail and institutional trades. In our data, only 13% of bond-month
observations have at least one customer-dealer transaction for at least $100 thousand in face
value.
    Table 7 reports our estimates of perceived illiquidity for the cross section of municipal
bonds. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 show that municipal bonds with no trades during the
last three months are perceived to be less liquid than other municipal bonds. The coefficient
in column 1 is 0.024, which is about 6.5% of the 0.367 coefficient on flow volatility itself. It
may seem surprising that bonds with no trades are perceived to be only slightly less liquid
than other municipal bonds. Selection effects may bias us against finding a larger effect of
no trade. First, because our regression specifications include bond-date fixed effects, our
estimation results are limited to bonds that are held by at least two mutual funds. Out of
all bond-month observations in our data, 71.5% are held by a single fund. The fact that a
bond is held by multiple mutual funds may lower the search costs of finding a counterparty
to trade with, meaning that bonds held by multiple funds are more liquid. Second, mutual
funds may choose to invest in more liquid bonds, so bonds with zero transactions held by
mutual funds may be significantly more liquid than bonds with zero transactions not held
by mutual funds.
    Table 7 studies the same bond characteristics as Table 4, where we examined the cross
section of corporate bonds. In addition, we add a characteristic that is specific to the
municipal bond market: whether the bond is a general obligation bond or not.21 Mutual
funds invest primarily in revenue bonds; general obligations bonds account for only 15%
of the position-level observations in our data. The results in Table 7 suggest that general
obligation bonds are perceived to be significantly less liquid than revenue bonds, helping to
21
    Another bond characteristic unique to the municipal bond market is bond insurance. Before the financial
crisis, many municipalities obtained bond insurance from AAA-rated monoline insurance firms. By giving
the bonds AAA ratings, bond insurance likely made them more liquid. During our sample period, however,
less than 1% of insured bonds were rated AAA, and almost 60% were rated A+ or below. As a result, bond
insurance does not have the same effect during our sample as it did in earlier periods, and we do not include
it in our regression specifications.



                                                     25
explain why mutual funds invest only a small fraction of their portfolios in general obligation
bonds.
    Columns 3 and 4 of Table 7 repeat the analysis in columns 1 and 2 using a dummy variable
for bonds with no trades with face value of at least $100 thousand. We find somewhat
stronger results with the coefficient on the no trades dummy in column 3 almost 40% larger
than the coefficient in column 1. The difference in results is consistent with small retail
trades having little effect on mutual funds' perceptions of liquidity.


4.7     Time series results
    Having shown that our measure behaves sensibly in the cross sections of corporate and
municipal bonds, as well as across asset classes, we turn to examining the time series be-
havior of perceived liquidity. Market participants have expressed concern that liquidity has
deteriorated since the 2008-9 financial crisis, ascribing declines in liquidity in part to the
Volcker Rule and banks' reluctance to use their balance sheets to intermediate the corporate
bond market. However, standard measures of liquidity that are based on transactions suggest
that liquidity is comparable to the pre-crisis period.22 Perceptions of illiquidity can deviate
from these standard measures for several reasons. For example, fund managers may worry
for the risk of a sudden liquidity freeze, which would not be captured by backwards-looking
measures based on realized transactions. Similarly, they may worry about their ability to
transact at larger-than-average volumes on short notice. In addition, they may place more
weight on the liquidity of bonds they hold that do not trade often. Our measure can there-
fore be helpful in shedding light on how post-crisis liquidity is perceived by an important
subset of investors in the corporate bond market.
    Table 8 reports regression Equation 7, interacting flow volatility with indicator variables
for various subperiods. The Pre-crisis period is July 2002­August 2008. We define the Crisis
period as September 2008­June 2009. Finally, the Post-crisis period is July 2009­June 2016.
Since daily flows data are not available before August 2008, we calculate flow volatility using
monthly flows over the last twelve months, requiring at least nine observations.
    In Panels A and B of Table 8, we include bond-date and fund objective-date fixed effects,
so we are comparing the cash holdings of two funds in the same objective with different
flow volatility that hold the same bond at the same time. We weight observations by their
portfolio share, giving more weight to observations that make up a larger share of a fund's
22
   Bessembinder et al. (2018) and Trebbi and Xiao (2016) find little evidence of deterioration in average trade
execution costs, though they note some deterioration in other measures of liquidity. Tobias et al. (2017) find
little evidence of deterioration in a variety of price-based measures of liquidity. Bao, O'Hara, and Alex Zhou
(2018) find evidence of deterioration around stress events.



                                                      26
portfolio and that therefore contribute more to the overall illiquidity of a fund's portfolio.
     Column 1 of Panel A shows that for corporate bond funds, our measure of perceived
illiquidity, the coefficient on flow volatility, doubled from 0.066 during the pre-crisis period
to 0.124 during the crisis. It then remained elevated in the post-crisis period at 0.160.
     One potential issue in doing time series comparisons is that the carrying costs of cash
may vary over time.23 In the context of our model in Subsection 2.1, optimal cash holdings
are set according to R = -1 (1 - c    i
                                        ) ×  . Carrying costs, i, and illiquidity, c, have opposite
effects on the optimal cash holdings R . To control for changes in the carrying costs i, in
columns 2 and 4 we add the interaction of flow volatility with the liquidity premium (the
direct effect of the liquidity premium is absorbed by our time fixed effects). We define the
liquidity premium following Nagel (2016) as the difference between the rate on the 3-month
general collateral (GC) repo backed by Treasury collateral and 3-month Treasury Bills. As
predicted by the model, the coefficient on the interaction of flow volatility and the liquidity
premium is negative. When the liquidity premium and hence the cost of holding cash is high,
mutual funds hold less cash, with funds subject to more volatile fund flows being particularly
sensitive to liquidity premium because, all else equal, they hold more cash.
     Controlling for the carrying costs of cash generates more intuitive results in column 2:
illiquidity spikes during the crisis, then declines during the post-crisis period but remains
above its pre-crisis level. The economic magnitudes are large: the post-crisis coefficient on
flow volatility is more than 50% larger than the price-crisis coefficient. Columns 3 and 4
of Panel A of Table 8 show that, in contrast to the corporate bond market, the perceived
liquidity of domestic stocks recovers after the financial crisis and may in fact be better than
before the financial crisis.
     In Panel B of Table 8, we examine the time series of perceived illiquidity for different
subsamples of corporate bonds. Columns 1 and 2 split the sample into investment- versus
speculative-grade bonds. The perceived liquidity of both groups deteriorates significantly
during the crisis, with the coefficient on flow volatility increasing from 0.048 to 0.154 for
investment-grade bonds and from 0.092 to 0.219 for speculative-grade bonds. After the crisis,
the perceived liquidity of investment-grade bonds returns to its pre-crisis level. In contrast,
the perceived illiquidity of speculative-grade bonds remains elevated and is about 80% greater
than before the crisis (0.170 versus 0.092). In columns 3 and 4, we split the sample into
23
   Another concern is that the nature of fund flows may have changed over time. In particular, our method-
ology relies on the idea that realized flow volatility is a good proxy for future expected flow volatility. If the
relationship between future flow volatility and past flow volatility has changed over time, then differences
in our estimates may be driven by differences in the behavior of flow volatility rather than changes in bond
market liquidity. Internet Appendix Figure 1 shows that the autocorrelation of flow volatility has remained
remarkably stable over time, ruling out this alternative explanation for our results.



                                                       27
registered bonds versus Rule 144A bonds. We once again see a spike in perceived illiquidity
during the crisis. After the crisis, the perceived illiquidity of registered bonds declines to
0.136, which is about 60% greater than its pre-crisis value of 0.085. In comparison, the
post-crisis perceived illiquidity of Rule 144A bonds, which can be traded only by qualified
institutional buyers, is 140% greater than its pre-crisis value: 0.185 versus 0.076.24
    Finally, Panel C of Table 8 shows the time series of liquidity using a standard, transaction-
based measure. Specifically, we construct the Amihud (2002) measure for corporate bonds
and equities. We then average the bond-level measures, weighting by portfolio share, to
arrive at a portfolio-level measure of illiquidity. We then regress this measure on our period
dummies. Columns 1 and 2 show that by the Amihud measure, corporate bonds are as
liquid postcrisis as they were precrisis. Columns 3 and 4 show a similar pattern for equities.
The contrast between the results in Panels A and C underscores the importance of having
a measure of perceived illiquidity. In addition, Panel C shows that our results in Panel A
are not driven by changes in the composition of mutual fund holdings over time. The key
difference is that the Amihud measure is a transaction-based measure of realized liquidity,
while our measure is a holdings-based measure of perceived liquidity.


5     Conclusion
    This paper proposes a novel measure of bond market liquidity that is based on portfolio
holdings instead of transaction data. Because investors may choose to trade only their
more liquid bonds and because many bonds do not trade much, transaction-based measures
may not fully capture investors' perceptions of bond market liquidity and liquidity risk.
Our measure is based on the intuition that facing uncertain redemption requests, open-end
mutual funds will optimally choose to hold larger cash buffers if their portfolio securities
are less liquid. We can therefore measure perceived liquidity using the coefficient from a
regression of cash-to-assets ratios on flow volatility. Our measure can be applied to asset-
backed securities, syndicated loans, and municipal securities for which publicly available data
on transactions are not available.
    We find greater illiquidity for speculative-grade and Rule 144A bonds. Consistent with
prior literature (Bao, Pan, and Wang (2011), Dick-Nielsen, Feldh¨     utter, and Lando (2012)),
our measure indicates greater illiquidity during the financial crisis. While aggregate liquidity

24
    Note that transactions in corporate bonds issued pursuant to Rule 144A were not disseminated through
TRACE until June 30, 2014. This makes it difficult to construct traditional transaction-based measures of
liquidity in the market for Rule 144A securities. One exception is Bessembinder et al. (2018) who use the
regulatory version of TRACE that includes transactions in Rule 144A securities.



                                                   28
has recovered since the crisis, it has not returned to pre-crisis levels. In particular, the
perceived liquidity of speculative-grade and Rule 144A bonds did not bounce back post-
crisis and remains low.




                                            29
References
Acharya, V. V., and L. H. Pedersen. 2005. Asset pricing with liquidity risk. Journal of
  Financial Economics 77:375­410.

Agarwal, V., and H. Zhao. 2018. Interfund lending in mutual fund families: Role in liquidity
  management.

Amihud, Y. 2002. Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time-series effects. Journal
 of Financial Markets 5:31­56.

Amihud, Y., and H. Mendelson. 2001. Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread. Journal of
 Financial Economics 17:223­49.

Anderson, M., and R. M. Stulz. 2017. Is post-crisis bond liquidity lower? 1­55.

Bao, J., M. O'Hara, and X. Alex Zhou. 2018. The Volcker Rule and corporate bond market
  making in times of stress. Journal of Financial Economics 130:95­113.

Bao, J., J. Pan, and J. Wang. 2011. The illiquidity of corporate bonds. Journal of Finance
  66:911­46.

Bessembinder, H., S. Jacobsen, W. F. Maxwell, and K. Venkataraman. 2018. Capital com-
  mitment and illiquidity in corporate bonds. Journal of Finance 73:1615­61.

Chen, L., D. A. Lesmond, and J. Wei. 2007. Corporate yield spreads and bond liquidity.
 The Journal of Finance 119­49.

Chernenko, S., and A. Sunderam. 2020. Do fire sales create externalities?          Journal of
 Financial Economics 135:602­28.

Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam. 2001. Market liquidity and trading activity.
 Journal of Finance 56:501­30.

Connor, G., and H. Leland. 1995. Cash management for index tracking. Financial Analysts
  Journal 51:75­80.

Corwin, S. A., and P. Schultz. 2012. A simple way to estimate bid-ask spreads. Journal of
  Finance 67:719­59.

Coval, J., and E. Stafford. 2007. Asset fire sales (and purchases) in equity markets. Journal
  of Financial Economics 86:479­512.


                                             30
Dick-Nielsen, J., P. Feldh¨utter, and D. Lando. 2012. Corporate bond liquidity before and
  after the onset of the subprime crisis. Journal of Financial Economics 103:471­92.

Duffie, D., N. G^
                arleanu, and L. H. Pedersen. 2005. Over-the-counter markets. Econometrica
 73:1815­47.

------. 2007. Valuation in over-the-counter markets. Review of Financial Studies 20:1865­
  900.

Ellul, A., C. Jotikasthira, and C. T. Lundblad. 2011. Regulatory pressure and fire sales in
  the corporate bond market. Journal of Financial Economics 101:596­620.

Evans, R. B. 2010. Mutual fund incubation. Journal of Finance 65:1581­611.

Feldh¨utter, P. 2012. The same bond at different prices: Identifying search frictions and
  selling pressures. Review of Financial Studies 25:1155­206.

Fong, K. Y. L., C. W. Holden, and C. A. Trzcinka. 2017. What are the best liquidity proxies
  for global research? Review of Finance 21:1355­401.

Goldstein, M. A., and E. S. Hotchkiss. 2020. Providing liquidity in an illiquid market: Dealer
 behavior in US corporate bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 135:16­40.

Jankowitsch, R., A. Nashikkar, and M. G. Subrahmanyam. 2011. Price dispersion in OTC
  markets: A new measure of liquidity. Journal of Banking and Finance 35:343­57.

Lesmond, D. A., J. P. Ogden, and C. A. Trzcinka. 1999. A new estimate of transaction costs.
  Review of Financial Studies 12:1113­41.

Mahanti, S., A. Nashikkar, M. Subrahmanyam, C.-H. Weymuller, and G. Mallik. 2008.
 Latent liquidity: A new measure of liquidity, with an application to corporate bonds.
 Journal of Financial Economics 88:272­98.

Nagel, S. 2016. The liquidity premium of near-money assets. Quarterly Journal of Economics
  131:1927­71.

Pastor, L., and R. F. Stambaugh. 2003. Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal
  of Political Economy 111:642­85.

Roll, R. 1984. A simple implicit measure of the effective bid-ask spread in an efficient market.
  Journal of Finance 39:1127­39.



                                              31
Schestag, R., P. Schuster, and M. Uhrig-Homburg. 2016. Measuring liquidity in bond mar-
  kets. Review of Financial Studies 29:1170­219.

Schultz, P. 2017. Inventory management by corporate bond dealers.

Shleifer, A., and R. W. Vishny. 1992. Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
  Equilibrium Approach. The Journal of Finance 47:1343­66.

Stein, J. C. 2012. Monetary policy as financial stability regulation. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 127:57­95.

Tobias, A., M. J. Fleming, O. Shachar, and E. Vogt. 2017. Market liquidity after the financial
  crisis. Annual Review of Financial Economics 9:43­83.

Trebbi, F., and K. Xiao. 2016. Regulation and market liquidity 1­41.




                                             32
Appendix

                                        Table A1
                                   Variable definitions

Variable                                                 Definition
Cash/T N A          The level of cash is long positions in cash (C), currency (CH), certificates of deposit
                    (CD), commercial paper (CP), repurchase agreements (CR), money market mutual
                    funds (FM), stable value funds (SV), and Treasury and Agency securities (BD, BG,
                    and BT) with original maturities of less than one year. For municipal bond funds,
                    cash also includes holdings of Variable-Rate Demand Notes (VRDN). The list of
                    VRDNs is obtained from N-MFP filings of municipal money market mutual funds.
                    Cash-to-assets ratio is winsorized at the 99th percentile.
Credit Rating       Credit rating is set to the median of Moody's, S&P, and Fitch when all three ratings
                    are available. Otherwise it is set to the lower rating. Credit ratings are from FISD.
Current YTM         Current yield-to-maturity is calculated based on the coupon and maturity informa-
                    tion from FISD and price from the Morningstar holdings data. We calculate the
                    implied price by dividing the market value of each fund's holdings of a given bond
                    by its par value and average across all funds holding the bond at the end of month
                    t. Current YTM is winsorized at the 99th percentile within each month.
Equity share        The net value of all equity (E) positions divided by TNA.
ETF share           The net value of fund's holdings of ETFs divided by TNA. ETFs are CUSIPs with
                    CRSP share code 73.
Family TNA          The aggregate TNA of all funds within the fund family (identified based on Morn-
                    ingstar's branding name).
Fund age            Time in years since the inception of the fund's oldest share class (from Morningstar).
Gross/Net           Gross value of all positions divided by their net value.
Liquidity premium   The difference between the 3-month GC repo backed by Treasury collateral and 3-
                    month T-Bills (Nagel, 2016). Repo rates are from Bloomberg. We take the average
                    of daily values of the 3-month T-Bill yield (FRED series DTB3) during the month.
Offering amount     Offering amount in millions is from Mergent FISD for corporate bonds and from
                    Capital IQ for municipal bonds.
Offering YTM        Offering yield-to-maturity is from Mergent FISD and is winsorized at the 99th
                    percentile within each month.
No trades           Dummy variable equal to one for municipal bonds without any customer-dealer
                    trades during the last three months. Municipal bond trades are from the MSRB
                    Municipal Securities Transactions Data.




                                           33
                                  Table A1-- Continued

Variable                                                 Definition
Portfolio Amihud   Value-weighted average of Amihud (2002) of portfolio securities. For each securities,
                   Amihud is calculated over the last three months. Amihud is winsorized at the 1st
                   and 99th percentiles within each month.
Redemption fee     Binary variable equal to one if any one of the fund's share classes imposes redemp-
                   tion fees. Redemption fee information is from Morningstar.
 (daily)           Standard deviation of daily fund flows over the last three months. Dollar value
                   of daily fund flows is scaled by TNA at the end of previous month. Fund flows
                   are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles within each month. At least twenty
                   observations are required.
 (monthly)         Standard deviation of monthly fund flows over the last twelve months. Monthly
                                                T N Af,t -(1+rf,t )×T N Af,t-1
                   fund flows are calculated as           T N Af,t-1           . Fund flows are winsorized at
                   the 1st and 99th percentiles within each month. At least nine monthly observations
                   are required.
TBA share          The value of TBA agency MBS divided by TNA. We consider a long position to be
                   a TBA agency MBS if a) its security type is Bond - Government Agency Pass-Thru
                   (BG) and b) it does not have a valid CUSIP.
Fund TNA           Monthly total net assets (in millions) are from Morningstar.




                                           34
                                                                                 Figure 1
                                                                             Simulation Results

This figure reports the results of a simulation of our empirical methodology. Simulation setup is de-
scribed in text. Panel (a) plots the distribution of illiquidity across different bond categories (1­5). Panel
(b) plots the estimated coefficients from the regression 6. Estimated coefficients do a fairly good job of
approximating average illiquidity in each one of the five bond categories.

                   (a) Distribution of illiquidity                                                                  (b) Estimated coefficients

           1                                                                                           1
           2                                                                                           2
           3                                                                                           3
           4                                                                                           4
           5                                                                                           5
           6                                                                                           6
           7                                                                                           7
           8                                                                                           8
           9                                                                                           9
          10                                                                                          10

               0     2    4     6          8                            10        12        14             0        2       4        6           8   10   12   14
                                 Illiquidity                                                                                          Illiquidity




                                                                         Figure 2
                                                               Simulation of Dynamic Model

This figure reports the results of the simulation of our empirical methodology in the dynamic envi-
ronment studied by Connor and Leland (1995). Simulation setup is described in text. The figure plots
the coefficient from the regression of the cash-to-assets ratio on the in-sample flow volatility, estimated
separately for funds in each illiquidity category.

                                                              0.6


                                                             0.55


                                                              0.5
                                    Regression Coefficient




                                                             0.45


                                                              0.4


                                                             0.35


                                                              0.3


                                                             0.25
                                                                    1   2     3        4         5     6        7       8   9   10
                                                                                           Liquidity Category




                                                                                                 35
                                          Figure 3
                        Distribution of Cash/Assets and  over Time

This figure shows the distribution of the cash-to-assets ratio and flow volatility ( ) over time. The
sample of corporate bond mutual funds consists of funds that a) invest at least 50% of their TNA in
corporate bonds, b) are in one of the following Morningstar categories: Corporate Bond, Emerging Markets
Bond, High Yield Bond, Intermediate-Term Bond, Long-Term Bond, Multisector Bond, Nontraditional
Bond, and World Bond, c) have TNA of at least $10 million, d) have the ratio of the market value of
portfolio securities to fund TNA in the [0.5, 1.5] interval, and e) have non-missing value of monthly flow
volatility.

                                                      (a) Cash/TNA

                                    0.10


                                    0.08
                         Cash/TNA




                                    0.06


                                    0.04


                                    0.02


                                    0.00
                                        2002q4    2005q4    2008q4    2011q4    2014q4
                                             2004q2    2007q2    2010q2    2013q2    2016q2

                                               Mean         25th        50th        75th



                                                          (b) 

                                    0.08



                                    0.06



                                    0.04
                         




                                    0.02



                                    0.00
                                        2002q4    2005q4    2008q4    2011q4    2014q4
                                             2004q2    2007q2    2010q2    2013q2    2016q2

                                               Mean         25th        50th        75th




                                                           36
                                              Table 1
                                          Summary Statistics

This table reports summary statistics for the main sample of corporate bonds held by corporate
bond mutual funds during the July 2009­June 2016 period. Corporate bonds are identified based on the
corporate debenture (CDEB) bond type in Mergent FISD. The sample of corporate bond mutual funds
consists of funds that a) invest at least 50% of their TNA in corporate bonds, b) are in one of the following
Morningstar categories: Corporate Bond, Emerging Markets Bond, High Yield Bond, Intermediate-Term
Bond, Long-Term Bond, Multisector Bond, Nontraditional Bond, and World Bond, c) have TNA of at
least $10 million, d) have the ratio of the market value of portfolio securities to fund TNA in the [0.5, 1.5]
interval, and e) have non-missing value of daily flow volatility.  is the standard deviation of daily fund
flows, scaled by last month's TNA, over the last three months. Flows are winsorized at the 1st and 99th
percentiles within each month. At least twenty observations are required.

                                                                                      Percentile
                                    N          Mean         SD           25              50              75
                                           Panel A: Fund-dates
  TNA ($ million)                   9,819 1, 006.11    1, 833.27       117.16          439.91       1, 086.85
  Family TNA ($ million)            9,819 75, 198.73 259, 194.20    8, 122.62      31, 514.21      70, 202.36
  Cash/T N A (%)                    9,819       4.16        4.61         1.35            3.20            5.54
   (%)                              9,819       5.07        2.78         3.20            4.53            6.30
  Fund age                          9,819      15.16       10.32         7.67           13.42           19.25
  Gross/N et                        9,819       1.02        0.07         1.00            1.00            1.01
  TBA share (%)                     9,819       0.13        1.03         0.00            0.00            0.00
  ETF share (%)                     9,819       0.08        0.66         0.00            0.00            0.00
  Equity share (%)                  9,819       0.64        1.71         0.00            0.00            0.46
  Has redemption fees               9,819       0.18        0.38         0.00            0.00            0.00
                                           Panel B: Bond-dates
  Issue size (million $)          386,741     673.53      591.19       300.00         500.00          800.00
  Rating                          382,632       9.35        3.69         7.00           9.00           12.00
  Maturity                        386,752      10.29       10.48         4.67           6.92            9.83
  Bond age                        386,752       3.48        3.81         0.92           2.33            4.50
  Rule 144A                       386,752       0.22        0.41         0.00           0.00            0.00
  Secured                         386,752       0.10        0.30         0.00           0.00            0.00
  Num. funds                      386,752      15.32       17.67         4.00           8.00           20.00
                                   Panel C: Fund-bond-dates (Positions)
  Portfolio weight (bps)        1,960,279      32.28       37.58         9.74           21.32          41.62




                                                     37
                                             Table 2
                            Perceived Illiquidity of Corporate Bonds

This table reports our baseline estimates of perceived illiquidity.           The table reports the results of
the regressions of the cash-to-assets ratio on fund flow volatility:

                                   Cash
                                                  =  +  · f,t +  Xf,t + b,f,t ,
                                   TNA    b,f,t

where b indexes bonds, f indexes funds, and t indexes time in months.  is the standard deviation of daily
fund flows, scaled by last month's TNA, over the last three months. Flows are winsorized at the 1st and 99th
percentiles within each month. At least twenty observations are required. In columns 1­4, observations are
weighted by the bond's portfolio share. Columns 5­8 report equal-weighted regressions. The sample period
is July 2009­June 2016. All continuous variables except for  are standardized. The number of observations
is 1,960,279. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by fund-date. , , and    indicate statistical
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.
                                   Portfolio share-weighted                           Equal-weighted
                            (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)
 f,t                        0.166      0.186        0.186      0.192        0.150     0.153      0.159     0.158
                          (0.015)     (0.016)      (0.014)    (0.015)      (0.016)   (0.017)    (0.016)   (0.017)
 Ln(Fund TNA)f,t            0.179      0.150        0.150      0.133        0.258     0.240      0.229     0.230
                           (0.044)    (0.042)      (0.038)    (0.039)      (0.049)   (0.047)    (0.047)   (0.046)
 Ln(Family TNA)f,t        -0.267 -0.258 -0.165                -0.138 -0.450          -0.331 -0.290        -0.267
                           (0.046)    (0.044)      (0.038)    (0.038)      (0.051)   (0.044)    (0.044)   (0.044)
 Gross/N etf,t              0.428      0.415        0.463      0.446        0.527     0.544      0.510     0.520
                           (0.046)    (0.048)      (0.042)    (0.045)      (0.049)   (0.052)    (0.045)   (0.050)
 Has redemption feesf,t     0.062      0.027       -0.178     -0.147      -0.408     -0.519 -0.539        -0.545
                           (0.093)    (0.092)      (0.082)    (0.083)      (0.092)   (0.092)    (0.092)   (0.093)
 TBA sharef,t               0.195      0.340        0.266      0.316        0.221     0.379      0.264     0.346
                           (0.046)    (0.038)      (0.039)    (0.035)      (0.064)   (0.041)    (0.054)   (0.039)
 ETF sharef,t             -0.050     -0.143 -0.105            -0.130 -0.014          -0.158 -0.081        -0.155
                           (0.034)    (0.035)      (0.031)    (0.032)      (0.029)   (0.033)    (0.029)   (0.033)
 Equity sharef,t          -0.256 -0.279 -0.282                -0.285 -0.279          -0.308 -0.301        -0.306
                           (0.025)    (0.025)      (0.022)    (0.022)      (0.025)   (0.025)    (0.025)   (0.026)
 N                                                                 1,960,279
 Adjusted R2               0.050       0.172        0.256      0.295        0.072     0.201     0.148      0.201
 Bond-date FEs
 Objective-date FEs




                                                        38
                                             Table 3
                      Robustness to Controlling for Fund Flows and Returns

This table shows that the results in Table 2 are robust to controlling for past and future fund flows
and returns:
                                                               3
               Cash
                              = b,t + obj (f ),t +  · f,t +          (h · F lowsf,t+h + h · Rf,t+h ) + b,f,t ,
               TNA    b,f,t                                   h=-2

where b indexes bonds, f indexes funds, and t indexes time.  is the standard deviation of daily fund
flows, scaled by last month's TNA, over the last three months. Flows are winsorized at the 1st and 99th
percentiles within each month. At least twenty observations are required. All regression specifications use a
fixed sample with valid values of both lagged and future fund flows and returns. For brevity the coefficients
on the controls--log of fund TNA, log of family TNA, Gross/Net, redemption fees, TBA share, ETF share,
and equity share--are omitted. Full regression output is reported in the Online Appendix. Observations are
weighted by the bond's portfolio share. All continuous variables except for  are standardized. Standard
errors are adjusted for clustering by fund-date. , , and    indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%,
and 1%.
                                  (1)            (2)                (3)                 (4)        (5)             (6)
 f,t                              0.193          0.155              0.153               0.193      0.193           0.152
                                 (0.015)        (0.015)            (0.015)             (0.015)    (0.015)         (0.015)
 F lowsf,t                                       0.571              0.551                                          0.548
                                                (0.112)            (0.112)                                       (0.111)
 F lowsf,t-1                                     0.118              0.114                                          0.114
                                                (0.044)            (0.044)                                       (0.045)
 F lowsf,t-2                                     0.152              0.138                                          0.138
                                                (0.035)            (0.035)                                       (0.035)
 F lowsf,t+1                                                        0.056                                          0.064
                                                                   (0.030)                                       (0.030)
 F lowsf,t+2                                                        0.015                                          0.021
                                                                   (0.031)                                       (0.031)
 F lowsf,t+3                                                        0.098                                          0.107
                                                                   (0.046)                                       (0.046)
 Rf,t                                                                                   0.121      0.266           0.141
                                                                                       (0.127)    (0.128)         (0.124)
 Rf,t-1                                                                                 0.169      0.198           0.116
                                                                                       (0.124)    (0.124)         (0.119)
 Rf,t-2                                                                                -0.332    -0.282          -0.308
                                                                                       (0.120)    (0.120)         (0.116)
 Rf,t+1                                                                                          -0.623          -0.584
                                                                                                  (0.113)         (0.109)
 Rf,t+2                                                                                          -0.317          -0.368
                                                                                                  (0.119)         (0.114)
 Rf,t+3                                                                                          -0.264          -0.309
                                                                                                  (0.114)         (0.110)
 N                                                                         1,787,870
 Adjusted R2                      0.299          0.333             0.335                0.300      0.304          0.339
 Bond-date FEs
 Objective-date FEs




                                                          39
                                             Table 4
                               Cross-Section of Perceived Illiquidity

This table reports the results of the regressions of the cash-to-assets ratio on fund flow volatility
interacted with bond characteristics
                             Cash
                                            = b,t + obj (f ),t +       j · f,t × Xj
                                                                                  b,t + b,f,t ,
                             TNA    b,f,t                          j

where b indexes bonds, f indexes funds, t indexes time, and j indexes bond characteristics.  is the standard
deviation of daily fund flows, scaled by last month's TNA, over the last three months. Flows are winsorized
at the 1st and 99th percentiles within each month. At least twenty observations are required. For brevity the
coefficients on the controls--log of fund TNA, log of family TNA, Gross/Net, redemption fees, TBA share,
ETF share, and equity share--are omitted. Full regression output is reported in the Online Appendix. All
continuous variables except for  are standardized. Observations are weighted by the bond's portfolio share.
Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by fund-date. , , and    indicate statistical significance at
10%, 5%, and 1%.
                                 (1)           (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)
f,t                            -0.117          0.067      0.057         0.063      0.068      0.062     0.065     0.051
                                (0.048)       (0.017)    (0.017)       (0.017)    (0.017)    (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.017)
f,t × AAb,t                      0.145
                                (0.047)
f,t × Ab,t                       0.130
                                (0.045)
f,t × BBBb,t                     0.199
                                (0.048)
f,t × BBb,t                      0.314
                                (0.051)
f,t × Bb,t                       0.334
                                (0.051)
f,t × CCCb,t                     0.341
                                (0.051)
f,t × U nratedb,t                0.308         0.124      0.135         0.132      0.111      0.109     0.107      0.105
                                (0.054)       (0.029)    (0.029)       (0.030)    (0.029)    (0.029)   (0.029)   (0.028)
f,t × Speculative gradeb,t                     0.142      0.150         0.148      0.138      0.136     0.134      0.139
                                              (0.020)    (0.021)       (0.020)    (0.020)    (0.020)   (0.020)   (0.020)
f,t × Ln(Offering amount)b                                0.018                                                    0.016
                                                         (0.004)                                                  (0.004)
f,t × Ln(Maturity)b,t                                                   0.009                                      0.006
                                                                       (0.005)                                    (0.004)
f,t × Ln(Bond age)b,t                                                            -0.019                          -0.013
                                                                                  (0.004)                         (0.004)
f,t × Rule 144Ab                                                                              0.029                0.019
                                                                                             (0.006)             (0.006)
f,t × Securedb                                                                                          0.055      0.047
                                                                                                       (0.008)   (0.009)
N                                                                         1,960,113
Adjusted R2                     0.296          0.296      0.296        0.296        0.296    0.296     0.296      0.297
Bond-date FEs
Objective-date FEs




                                                           40
                                                    Table 5
                                        Is Perceived Illiquidity Priced?

This table reports the results of the regressions of the cash-to-assets ratio on fund flow volatility
interacted with the bond's yield-to-maturity

              Cash                                                                               j
                             = b,t + obj (f ),t + 0 · f,t + 1 · f,t × Yieldb +        j · f,t × Xb,t + b,f,t ,
              TNA    b,f,t                                                       j

where b indexes bonds, f indexes funds, and t indexes time. The sample consists of investment-grade bonds.
 is the standard deviation of daily fund flows, scaled by last month's TNA, over the last three months.
Flows are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles within each month. At least twenty observations are
required. All continuous variables except for  are standardized. Observations are weighted by the bond's
portfolio share. For brevity the coefficients on the controls--log of fund TNA, log of family TNA, Gross/Net,
redemption fees, TBA share, ETF share, and equity share--are omitted. Full regression output is reported
in the Online Appendix. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by fund-date. , , and    indicate
statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.
                                                 Offering YTM                                  Current YTM
                                        (1)            (2)          (3)               (4)           (5)           (6)
f,t                                     0.062        -0.061        -0.045             0.080       -0.053         -0.032
                                       (0.020)        (0.054)      (0.055)           (0.021)       (0.055)       (0.057)
f,t × Offering YTMb                     0.022          0.021        0.025
                                       (0.011)        (0.012)      (0.014)
f,t × Current YTMb,t                                                                  0.046        0.038            0.048
                                                                                     (0.019)      (0.019)          (0.024)
f,t × AAb,t                                           0.137          0.132                         0.131            0.126
                                                     (0.049)        (0.049)                       (0.049)          (0.049)
f,t × Ab,t                                            0.098          0.090                         0.100            0.094
                                                     (0.049)        (0.049)                       (0.048)          (0.050)
f,t × BBBb,t                                          0.129          0.108                         0.136            0.118
                                                     (0.052)        (0.053)                       (0.052)          (0.054)
f,t × Ln(Offering amount)b                                         -0.010                                         -0.008
                                                                    (0.005)                                        (0.005)
f,t × Ln(Maturity)b,t                                              -0.005                                         -0.009
                                                                    (0.008)                                        (0.009)
f,t × Ln(Bond age)b,t                                              -0.009                                         -0.008
                                                                    (0.008)                                        (0.006)
f,t × Rule 144Ab                                                     0.058                                          0.051
                                                                    (0.012)                                        (0.011)
f,t × Securedb                                                       0.012                                          0.005
                                                                    (0.031)                                        (0.023)
N                                     364,042       364,042        364,042       432,043         432,043         432,043
Adjusted R2                             0.437         0.437          0.438         0.420           0.421            0.421
Bond-date FEs
Objective-date FEs




                                                              41
                                              Table 6
                            Perceived Illiquidity Across Asset Classes

This table reports the results of regressions of the cash-to-assets ratio on fund flow volatility esti-
mated separately for different asset classes:

                                Cash
                                                = s,t + obj (f ),t +  · f,t + s,f,t ,
                                TNA     s,f,t

where s indexes securities, f indexes funds, and t indexes time in months. In column (1) the sample consists
of domestic stocks held by funds that invest at least 50% of their portfolio in domestic stocks. Domestic
stocks are CUSIPs with CRSP share codes 10 and 11, listed on stock exchange codes 1­3. In column (2) the
sample consists of foreign stocks held by funds that invest at least 50% of their portfolio in foreign stocks.
Foreign stocks are CUSIPs that a) are identified by Morningstar as equities and b) are either not in CRSP
or have CRSP share codes 12 or 30­39. In column (3) the sample consists of corporate bonds held by funds
that invest at least 50% of their portfolio in corporate bonds. Corporate bonds are CUSIPs with FISD bond
type equal to CDEB. In column (4) the sample consists of municipal bonds held by funds that invest at least
50% of their portfolio in municipal bonds. Municipal bonds are CUSIPs with Morningstar security types
Muni Bond - General Obligation, Muni Bond - Revenue, and Muni Bond - Unspecified.  is the standard
deviation of daily fund flows, scaled by last month's TNA, over the last three months. Flows are winsorized
at the 1st and 99th percentiles within each month. At least twenty observations are required. Observations
are weighted by the bond's portfolio share. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering by fund-date. , ,
and    indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.
                                                  Stocks                                       Bonds
                                   Domestic                      Foreign           Corporate           Municipal
                                      (1)                          (2)                (3)                 (4)
 f,t                                  0.021                        0.030              0.137               0.336
                                     (0.004)                      (0.007)            (0.018)             (0.016)
 Ln(Fund TNA)f,t                      0.128                        0.161              0.010               0.051
                                     (0.014)                      (0.020)            (0.046)             (0.034)
 Ln(Family TNA)f,t                  -0.411                       -0.237             -0.114              -0.437
                                     (0.016)                      (0.018)            (0.045)             (0.025)
 Gross/Netf,t                         0.318                        0.328              0.299               0.222
                                     (0.023)                      (0.028)            (0.043)             (0.024)
 Has redemption feesf,t               0.445                      -0.008             -0.326                1.101
                                     (0.068)                      (0.064)            (0.102)             (0.454)
 N                                 7,527,311                    5,017,169          1,452,097           1,612,816
 Adjusted R2                          0.111                        0.176              0.279               0.485
 Security-date FEs
 Objective-date FEs




                                                           42
                                                Table 7
                               Perceived Illiquidity of Municipal Bonds

This table shows that municipal bonds that do not trade are perceived by fund managers to be less
liquid than bonds that do trade. The table reports the results of regressions of the cash-to-assets ratio on
fund flow volatility interacted with bond and fund characteristics

                              Cash                                                  j
                                             = b,t + obj (f ),t +        j · f,t × Xb,f,t + b,f,t ,
                              TNA    b,f,t                           j

where b indexes bonds, f indexes funds, and t indexes time. No trades dummy is equal to one if the municipal
bond does not have any customer-dealer secondary market transactions over the last three months. Refunded
bonds are excluded.  is the standard deviation of daily fund flows, scaled by last month's TNA, over the
last three months. Flows are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles within each month. At least twenty
observations are required. Observations are weighted by the bond's portfolio share. Standard errors are
adjusted for clustering by fund-date. , , and    indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.
                                                         No trades                                  No trades  $100K
                                                  (1)                     (2)                   (3)                  (4)
 f,t                                              0.367                   0.271                 0.355                0.258
                                                 (0.026)                 (0.019)               (0.025)              (0.016)
 f,t × No tradesb,t                               0.024                   0.020
                                                 (0.008)                 (0.008)
 f,t × No trades  $100Kb,t                                                                       0.033             0.032
                                                                                               (0.010)            (0.009)
 f,t × General obligationb                        0.049                   0.061                  0.051             0.063
                                                (0.015)                  (0.015)               (0.015)            (0.015)
 f,t × Ln(Offering amount)b                       0.039                   0.039                  0.043             0.044
                                                (0.008)                  (0.008)               (0.008)            (0.008)
 f,t × Ln(Maturity)b,t                            0.004                   0.000                  0.003            -0.001
                                                (0.008)                  (0.008)               (0.008)            (0.008)
 f,t × Ln(Bond age)b,t                          -0.046                   -0.045                -0.048             -0.047
                                                (0.008)                  (0.008)               (0.007)            (0.008)
 f,t × AAb,t                                    -0.072                                         -0.073
                                                 (0.022)                                        (0.022)
 f,t × Ab,t                                     -0.102                                         -0.103
                                                 (0.026)                                        (0.026)
 f,t × BBBb,t                                   -0.131                                         -0.131
                                                 (0.026)                                        (0.026)
 f,t × BBb,t                                    -0.122                                         -0.121
                                                 (0.031)                                        (0.031)
 f,t × Bb,t                                     -0.072                                         -0.070
                                                 (0.034)                                        (0.034)
 f,t × Unratedb,t                               -0.084                    0.015                -0.084               0.016
                                                 (0.027)                 (0.016)               (0.027)             (0.016)
 f,t × Speculative gradeb,t                                               0.004                                     0.006
                                                                         (0.020)                                   (0.020)
 N                                                                                 1,425,275
 Adjusted R2                                      0.466                   0.466                 0.466              0.466
 Security-date FEs
 Objective-date FEs




                                                             43
                                            Table 8
                               Time Series of Perceived Illiquidity

Panel A reports the results of regressions of the cash-to-assets ratio on fund flow volatility inter-
acted with dummies for different periods. Pre is July 2002­August 2008. Crisis is September 2008­June
2009. Post is July 2009­June 2016. Bond fund characteristics include log of fund TNA, log of fund family
TNA, fund leverage, TBA share, ETF share, and equity share. Equity fund characteristics include log of
fund TNA, log of fund family TNA, and fund leverage. Panel B reports the results of subsample splits for
corporate bond funds. In Panel C, we calculate portfolio illiquidity as the weighted-average of Amihud
(2002) of the individual portfolio securities and regress portfolio illiquidity on the period dummies. In
Panels A and B, observations are weighted by the security's portfolio share; standard errors are adjusted
for clustering by fund-date. In Panel C, we estimate equal-weighted regressions with fund-date as the unit
observations; standard errors are adjusted for clustering by date and fund. All continuous variables except
for  are standardized. , , and    indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                          Panel A: Perceived Illiquidity
                                           Corporate bonds                            Domestic stocks
                                      (1)                     (2)               (3)                     (4)
f,t × Pre-crisist                     0.066                   0.117             0.019                   0.019
                                     (0.015)                 (0.020)           (0.005)                 (0.007)
f,t × Crisist                         0.124                   0.245             0.047                   0.048
                                     (0.035)                 (0.046)           (0.015)                 (0.021)
f,t × Post-crisist                    0.160                   0.185             0.016                   0.016
                                     (0.012)                 (0.014)           (0.004)                 (0.005)
f,t × Liquidity premiumt                                    -0.079                                    -0.001
                                                             (0.020)                                   (0.008)
N                                  3,114,558              3,114,558          14,243,594             14,243,594
Adjusted R2                           0.271                   0.272              0.113                  0.113
p-value Pre = Crisis                  0.128                   0.002              0.071                  0.120
p-value Pre = Post                    0.000                   0.001              0.678                  0.671
p-value Post = Crisis                 0.323                   0.178              0.042                  0.096
Security-date FEs
Objective-date FEs
                                            Panel B: Subsample Splits
                                             By Grade                          Registered versus Rule 144A
                                 Investment             Speculative        Registered              Rule 144A
                                     (1)                    (2)               (3)                      (4)
f,t × Pre-crisist                    0.048                  0.092             0.085                    0.076
                                    (0.015)                (0.017)           (0.016)                  (0.017)
f,t × Crisist                        0.154                  0.219             0.222                    0.168
                                    (0.079)                (0.043)           (0.042)                  (0.040)
f,t × Post-crisist                   0.044                  0.170             0.136                    0.185
                                    (0.017)                (0.014)           (0.012)                  (0.014)
f,t × Liquidity premiumt           -0.042                 -0.035            -0.039                   -0.034
                                    (0.009)                (0.010)           (0.010)                  (0.010)
N                                  620,095               2,470,885         2,235,057                879,496
Adjusted 2                           0.400                  0.251             0.283                    0.244
p-value Pre = Crisis                 0.171                  0.004             0.001                    0.028
p-value Pre = Post                   0.864                  0.000             0.013                    0.000
p-value Post = Crisis                0.172                  0.291             0.057                    0.694
Security-date FEs
Objective-date FEs
                                            Panel C: Portfolio Amihud
                                          Corporate bonds                            Domestic stocks
                                     (1)                     (2)              (3)                      (4)
Pre-crisis                           0.017                   0.017            0.007                    0.008
                                    (0.001)                 (0.001)          (0.002)                  (0.002)
Crisis                               0.042                   0.025            0.028                    0.028
                                    (0.005)                 (0.005)          (0.009)                  (0.009)
Post-crisis                          0.015                   0.015            0.004                    0.004
                                    (0.000)                 (0.000)          (0.001)                  (0.001)
N                                  29,977                  29,977           107,812                 107,812
Adjusted R2                          0.322                   0.334            0.004                    0.019
p-value Pre = Crisis                 0.000                   0.000            0.015                    0.016
p-value Pre = Post                   0.126                   0.101            0.036                    0.016
p-value Post = Crisis                0.000                   0.000            0.005                    0.005
Objective FEs
                                                       44
