                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               OFFICE VISITS PREVENTING EMERGENCY ROOM VISITS:
                    EVIDENCE FROM THE FLINT WATER SWITCH

                                      Shooshan Danagoulian
                                       Daniel S. Grossman
                                          David Slusky

                                       Working Paper 27098
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27098


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We thank Glenn Copeland of the Vital Records and Health Statistics Division and Matthew
Schneider of the Medicaid Division of the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services
for providing vital statistics data and facilitating receipt of Medicaid claims data linked to vital
records. We gratefully acknowledge Phillip Levy and the Office of the Vice President of
Research at Wayne State University for financial support. We also thank Antony Hsu, Michael
Morrisey, Michael Kofoed, Valentina Duque, and Janet Currie, as well as conference participants
at AHEC 2018, APPAM 2018, ASHEcon 2019, SEA 2019, NBER Summer Institute Children's
Meetings 2019, and the NBER Health Care Meeting Winter 2019 and seminar participants at the
Wayne State University Department of Economics and Center for Urban Responses to
Environmental Stressors (CURES), Kansas State University, the University of Missouri-Kansas
City, University of Michigan H2D2 and HSOP WIDTH, Indiana University, Cornell University,
and San Diego State University for their helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Shooshan Danagoulian, Daniel S. Grossman, and David Slusky. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Office Visits Preventing Emergency Room Visits: Evidence From the Flint Water Switch
Shooshan Danagoulian, Daniel S. Grossman, and David Slusky
NBER Working Paper No. 27098
May 2020
JEL No. H75,I12,I18,J13,Q53,Q58

                                          ABSTRACT

Emergency department visits are costly to providers and to patients. We use the Flint water crisis
to test if an increase in office visits reduced avoidable emergency room visits. In September 2015,
the city of Flint issued a lead advisory to its residents, alerting them of increased lead levels in
their drinking water, resulting from the switch in water source from Lake Huron to the Flint
River. Using Medicaid claims for 2013-2016, we find that this information shock increased the
share of enrollees who had lead tests performed by 1.7 percentage points. Additionally, it
increased office visits immediately following the information shock and led to a reduction of 4.9
preventable, non-emergent, and primary-care-treatable emergency room visits per 1000 eligible
children (8.2%). This decrease is present in shifts from emergency room visits to office visits
across several common conditions. Our analysis suggest that children were more likely to receive
care from the same clinic following lead tests and that establishing care reduced the likelihood
parents would take their children to emergency rooms for conditions treatable in an office setting.
Our results are potentially applicable to any situation in which individuals are induced to seek
more care in an office visit setting.

Shooshan Danagoulian                             David Slusky
656 W. Kirby St.                                 Department of Economics
FAB 2095                                         University of Kansas
Department of Economics                          1460 Jayhawk Boulevard
Detroit, MI 48202                                Lawrence, KS 66045
fr4523@wayne.edu                                 and NBER
                                                 david.slusky@ku.edu
Daniel S. Grossman
Business and Economics Building,
Box 6025
West Virginia University
Morgantown, WV 26506-6025
daniel.grossman@mail.wvu.edu
Introduction

         Emergency departments (ED) are structured to diagnose and treat emergent conditions. As

such, they may be an expensive alternative to primary care, for both the individual patient and the

health care system. For those who lack access to primary care, however, they are the only option

for healthcare (Grumbach, Keane, and Bindman, 1993). Many of these individuals are of low

socio-economic status, and may be eligible for Medicaid. Those who are of low socio-economic

status and seeking care for their children are almost certainly eligible for Medicaid. While multiple

studies have demonstrated that expanded access to Medicaid increases emergency room usage paid

for by Medicaid (Taubman et al., 2014; Nikpay et al., 2017), 1 no study has been able to isolate the

causal link between increased primary care and emergency room usage for those who are already

eligible for Medicaid.

         In this paper, we exploit a shock to primary care (measured by office visits) resulting from

the Flint water contamination. On April 25, 2014, under state-appointed emergency management,

the city of Flint switched its water source from Lake Huron to the Flint River. Water from the Flint

River required treatment with strong disinfectants, which made it substantially more corrosive than

the old water, leaching lead out of the existing delivery system into residential water (Masten et

al., 2016). However, during the period in which water was sourced from the Flint River, local

officials stressed that the city water was safe for consumption. Despite warnings and boil

advisories in August and September 2014, and an EPA violation for exceeding organic chemical

thresholds in December 2014, the water's high level of lead content was largely unconfirmed until

September 2015. We use this last date as the start of the "treatment" period for our analysis,




1
  Some argue that ED visits increase, while others argue the increase is simply a shift in payer case mix (see, e.g.,
(Antwi et al., 2015; Finkelstein et al., 2016; Sommers et al., 2016; Sommers and Simon, 2017).

                                                         3
because it represents the point at which city officials first issued a lead advisory in the face of a

preponderance of evidence that Flint's drinking water was hazardous to its residents' health. 2 We

treat this public lead advisory as an information shock.

        The goals of this paper are twofold. First, we establish the extent to which knowledge of

the water problems affected health care receipt. Then, we examine whether a change in primary

care use causes a reduction in ED visits or a change in the distribution of those visits when they

are treatable or preventable through primary care visits.

        Whether, and to what extent, environmental disasters result in greater medical expenditures

for affected populations remains an open empirical question. We determine the amount of medical

services received by individuals in the affected areas before, during, and after a water change and

a revelation of exposure to contaminated water. We find that Medicaid enrollees in Flint received

lead tests at rates nearly 50 percent higher than enrollees from control cities following the

information shock. The share of enrollees who had any office visit increased by 4 percent and 11

percent, respectively, in the first two quarters immediately following the shock, before decreasing

in subsequent quarters. ED visits for preventable, non-emergent, and primary-care-treatable

conditions (which we aggregate as "avoidable") decreased by 4.9 visits per 1000 eligible children

per month (8.2%). This decrease is present in shifts from ED visits to office visits across several

common conditions. Flint residents who received lead tests were 15 percentage points (24%) more

likely to visit the clinic where they received their lead test in the 3 months that followed. This

suggests that establishing care at a specific clinic or with a given physician is associated with a

decreased likelihood of receiving care in an ED for a condition that is treatable in an office setting.




2
 We also estimate a flexible time form specification using two time periods ­ January to August 2015 and September
2015 to December 2016 ­ with similar findings. We present these results in Appendix H.

                                                        4
       In this study we contribute to several literatures, including those investigating lead

exposure, the Flint water crisis, the unintended consequences of environmental or informational

shocks on healthcare, and the substitutability of healthcare sources for emergency care. We discuss

each in turn below.

       Prior to the 1980s, lead was used extensively in household paint and plumbing, particularly

in the lining and soldering joints of copper pipes to help avoid leaks. Because of health risks, such

materials have been banned from new housing. Communities with older housing, such as those in

Flint, are particularly vulnerable to lead contamination due to lack of investment in new plumbing.

       Chronic exposure to lead has significant health consequences. High levels of lead in the

bloodstream are associated with cardiovascular problems, high blood pressure, and developmental

impairment affecting sexual maturity and the nervous system (ATSDR, 2007; Zhu et al., 2010).

Newer research, however, shows adverse outcomes at low levels of exposure as well (Canfield et

al., 2003; Jusko et al., 2008; Lanphear et al., 2005; Menke et al., 2006; Navas-Acien et al., 2007;

Tellez-Rojo et al., 2006; Hollingsworth and Rudik, 2019). Reports from Flint suggest that

children's blood lead levels increased within a few months following the water change (Hanna-

Attisha et al., 2016; Zahran et al., 2017), while fertility rates dropped substantially (Grossman and

Slusky, 2019).

       We also contribute to the literature investigating unintended consequences of

environmental and informational shocks. While these unintended consequences are generally

negative, this is not always the case. Deryugina and Molitor (2019) find that Medicare

beneficiaries displaced by Hurricane Katrina who moved to lower mortality areas had lower

mortality rates following the disaster. Additionally, this research relates to a strand of literature

studying behavioral responses to health information. For example, Oster (2018) finds that



                                                 5
individuals decrease calorie count of purchased food immediately after receiving a diabetes

diagnosis and shift to a healthier diet long term, while Chang (2018) finds that parents are more

likely to delay or forego vaccinations for their children following (false) information about autism

risk.

        In our study, we find that the information shock of the lead advisory induced children to

visit a primary care physician. The likelihood of seeking preventive care and access to primary

care physicians are correlated positively with household income (Sommers et al., 2017; Pitts et al.,

2010) and negatively with ED visits (Cecil et al., 2016). Others have attempted to study the causal

effect of primary care on ED visits by incentivizing patients to visit their primary care physician

(Bradley et al., 2012, 2018; Bradley and Neumark, 2017) and by temporally increasing Medicaid

reimbursements (Polsky et al., 2015; Candon et al., 2018; Decker, 2018; Neprash et al., 2018;

Alexander and Schnell, 2019). The effects of these interventions depend on participants' insurance

status. Using an RCT design, Bradley et al. (2018) find that those receiving cash incentives are

more likely to see a primary care physician and less likely to have a preventable ED visit. However,

they find no change in overall costs due to an increase in outpatient visits. We build on this research

by investigating an information shock to explore a similar research question in a quasi-

experimental setting.

        Lastly, this paper studies the effect of creating a linkage to the healthcare system in the

form of having a source of usual care. Children who have a usual source of care are more likely to

receive preventive care and have higher quality of care, as well as less likely to receive care from

the ED (Ettner, 1996; Xu, 2002; Starfield and Shi, 2004; Paustian et al., 2014). This informational

shock induces parents to take children for lead tests and provides them with potential alternate

places of service to the ED. Previous work has focused on the partial Medicaid expansion to study



                                                  6
the effects of gaining insurance coverage on low-income individuals' ED and primary care usage

(e.g., DeLeire et al., 2013; Sharma et al., 2017; Sommers et al., 2016; Gingold et al., 2017; Jacobs,

Kenney, and Selden, 2017; Klein et al., 2017; McConville et al., 2018; Ladhania et al., 2019;

Pickens et al., 2019), or how the availability of retail clinics affects both primary care and ED

utilization (e.g., Ashwood et al. 2016; Alexander, Currie, and Schnell, 2019). Our paper differs

from these studies in multiple ways. First, our population of interest is eligible for Medicaid

throughout this time period, so there are no formal coverage expansions. Second, we know of no

major changes in clinics' locations or availability in this time period. Third, our affected population

experiences an information shock that results in additional primary care usage. We focus our

analyses on this variation.

           The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. First, we summarize the events

surrounding the Flint water contamination. Next, we discuss the data and methods used to identify

changing utilization of medical services. The following section presents results. We then discuss

our findings in the context of the Flint contamination and conclude.



Background on the Flint Water Switch

           In spring 2013, as part of an effort to reduce the budget of a city under emergency

management, the state-appointed manager of Flint ordered the city to change its water supply to

the Flint River by April 25, 2014 (Kennedy, 2016). Previously, the Detroit Water and Sewerage

Department (DWSD) provided water to the city sourced from Lake Huron. The switch was

intended to be a temporary measure until a proposed pipeline could be completed to supply Flint

with water from Lake Huron independently. 3 The Flint Water Service Center (FWSC), however,


3
    The pipeline was expected to take approximately 2 years.

                                                          7
was ill-equipped to supply adequate quality water to the city. It had not supplied the city since

1967 and was not given a sufficient transition period to build up materials, facilities, and expertise

to do so (Masten et al., 2016).

           The shortcomings of the new facility became apparent soon after the switch. Initially, the

water was underchlorinated, resulting in water boil advisories issued in July and August 2014 to

counteract E. coli and coliform bacteria detected in the water supply. While chlorine levels were

adjusted throughout the summer months to address the bacterial presence, corrosion inhibitor

levels were not. In October 2014, the General Motors engine plant in Flint switched to an alternate

water source because the water's corrosiveness was adversely affecting its engine parts.

           During this time, the water supply was highly corrosive, causing red water and other

discoloration throughout the water system, as well as an unusually large number of water main

breaks (Masten et al., 2016). The heavily chlorinated water corroded the lining of city and

residential pipes, leaching lead from the outdated water pipes into the water supply.

           The first high lead measurements in the city were detected in February 2015. City

authorities assured residents that these measurements were outliers and that the water was safe to

drink. By August 2015, Marc Edwards at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University had

analyzed 120 samples from Flint homes, finding that 20% of samples exceeded the EPA action

level of 15 µg/L. In September 2015, city authorities acknowledged the widespread lead

contamination of the water supply and issued a lead advisory. The city switched back to Lake

Huron water treated by the DWSD on October 16, 2015. 4

           The timeline of the water contamination presents an interesting challenge to our analysis.

While the water supply switch occurred in April 2014 and the city first disclosed high lead


4
    A more detailed history of Flint and the water contamination timeline are presented in Appendix A.

                                                           8
measurements in February 2015, residents did not have confirmation of the contamination until

September 2015. Although other studies measure the effect of exposure to lead contamination, we

focus on the behavioral response to knowledge of the contamination. Thus, our analysis focuses

on medical utilization after the city's lead advisory in September 2015, which represents our

"treatment" period.



Data

        Through an agreement with the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services

(MDHHS), we link vital records for all children born in Michigan in 2013-2015 with their

Medicaid claims files for any enrollees in the sample. 5 This unique dataset has several advantages.

First, the dataset includes geocoded maternal residential address at the time of birth. Second, it

contains birth certificate information on parental demographic characteristics (e.g., race, age, and

educational attainment). Third, the Medicaid data is at the claim level, with detailed information

regarding all diagnoses recorded and procedures performed at every visit, as well as provider

information. The data also includes monthly eligibility information, which allows us to create a

longitudinal panel for each enrollee--even those who abstain from medical use. Fourth, the

Medicaid data includes information about payment made for all fee-for-service claims, allowing

us to extrapolate payments to the managed-care claims for complete cost information. 6 Fifth, the

linkage of birth records to claims allows us to track children who were born in Flint, irrespective

of where they received their care in the years that followed, thus avoiding selection due to



5
  The sample includes both fee-for-service and managed care enrollees, as well as those who do not indicate type of
plan.
6
  We apply cost information for managed care claims by matching procedure codes with payment made for fee-for-
service procedures. Therefore, our cost estimates represent the upper range of costs to Medicaid, though they are
closer in line with costs for those who are privately insured.

                                                         9
migration out of the city. These data include Medicaid claims for the years 2013-2016. 7

           We classify all claims for care provided in the emergency department (ED) using the New

York University Emergency Department (NYU ED) visit severity algorithm. 8 To develop the

algorithm, emergency physicians reviewed ED records from the 1990s and categorized diagnosis

codes (that did not include any alcohol, drug, injury, or mental health elements) into the following

categories (Billings, Parikh, and Mijanovich, 2000; validated by Ballard et al., 2010):

               ·   Emergent, ED care needed and non-preventable (e.g., appendicitis)
               ·   Emergent, ED care needed, but would have been preventable given adequate
                   previous non-emergency care (e.g., diabetes, asthma)
               ·   Emergent, care needed within 12 hours, but primary care would suffice (e.g.,
                   heartburn, eye pain)
               ·   Non-emergent, care within 12 hours unnecessary (e.g., rubella, sunburn, jaw pain)

These categories are not mutually exclusive, however. Depending on the complexity of the

presenting patient most diagnoses should include a mix of these categories. For example, based on

other details on the discharge record, out of 100 cases of:

               ·   Croup: 57% are emergent and non-preventable, 19% are primary care treatable, and
                   24% are non-emergent.
               ·   Cough: 12% are emergent and non-preventable, 24% are primary care treatable,
                   and 65% are non-emergent
               ·   Acute tonsillitis: 6% are emergent but preventable, 28% are primary care treatable,
                   and 66% are non-emergent.

Finally, some diagnoses could not be assigned to a category and so are listed as "unclassified". 9




7
 We have received approval to supplement our analysis with Medicaid claims data covering 2017 and 2018 once the
data become available.
8
    https://wagner.nyu.edu/faculty/billings/nyued-background
9
  In Appendix G, we present results incorporating a "patch" that captures and classifies a share of uncategorized
diagnosis codes (Johnston et al., 2017).

                                                         10
Methodology

            This research allows us to track the use of medical services by children born in Flint

between 2013 and 2015, 10 and compare them to similarly aged children born elsewhere in

Michigan. Because we classify children based on the city in which they were born, our estimates

are an intent to treat. A priori, we expect to identify higher incidence of adverse health outcomes,

increased use of primary care, and increased costs for patients and insurers because of care received

following the informational shock described above. 11

            Since the data are observational, we adjust for differences between Flint residents and those

in the rest of the state. We follow the estimation method used by Grossman and Slusky (2019),

which compares Flint to a subset of other large cities in Michigan. We focus exclusively on

Michigan because we have complete Medicaid data for this state. Because we are interested in the

behavioral response to information shocks as well as changes in water quality, we focus on

September 2015, when Flint first released a public lead advisory. 12,13

            We employ the difference-in-differences empirical strategy presented below:

               =  + 1    + 2  + c + t +                                                                         (1)

in which Outcome is the medical service or procedure for individual i in city c at time t aggregated

over the calendar month. Flint*After is a binary variable equal to 1 for claims after September




10
   Given the result of Grossman and Slusky (2019) that the Flint water switch affected fertility rates, one might be
concerned about compositional changes driving our results. In Appendix D, we limit our analysis to the sample of
children born before April 2014 (and so unaffected by the fertility effects of the water switch) and find comparable
results.
11
     i.e. Flint announcing a potential increase in lead in their water source.
12
   Mona Hanna-Attisha, a Flint pediatrician, held a press conference to announce her findings of a substantial increase
in children with high blood lead levels in September 2015; Marc Edwards of Virginia Tech released his team's findings
of high blood lead levels in Flint households in August 2015. Flint switched off Flint River water on October 16, 2015.
13
   In Appendix C, we show that the results are robust to starting the treatment period in January 2016, when the
Governor of Michigan apologized for the crisis.

                                                              11
2015 to children born in Flint and 0 otherwise. We include a binary variable for the city in which

an individual lived at time of birth,  , which controls for time-invariant characteristics of a city,

and year and month of service as well as year and month of birth fixed effects,  , which control

for general trends and seasonality in receipt of medical services. These fixed effects subsume the

main effects for Flint and After.  are individual-level characteristics. A potential confounder in

our study is that the state of Michigan expanded Medicaid coverage through the ACA in 2014. To

the extent that this expansion affected all parts of Michigan equally, time fixed effects will account

for overall trends in Michigan. 14 We investigate the percentage of the sample reporting: any lead

test, any office visit, any vaccine, any ED visit, any claim, and any payment. We also investigate

the total number of lead tests, office visits, vaccines, ED visits, and claims, as well as the total

payments made. Standard errors are clustered at the city level to allow for serial correlation

(Abadie et al., 2017). Additionally, we use wild bootstrap methods to adjust our inference because

we only have one treated area (Cameron, Gelbach, Miller, 2008). 15

        We use a modified version of the above equation to investigate the impact of the water

switch on different types of ED visits, as defined by the NYU algorithm. For each category, we

construct a per capita outcome variable at the individual-month level by summing the fractional

shares of each claim in that category. For example, if an individual had two discharges in a given

month, one that was 20% preventable with primary care and another that was 70% preventable

with primary care, we assign a value of 0.9, representing 90% of a primary-care-preventable visit.

Anyone without an ED claim in that category (or with no ED claims at all) receives a value of 0.



14
  This issue is further mitigated in that the ACA expansion affected adults and did not change federal poverty-level
coverage thresholds for those in our age cohort.
15
   As an additional robustness check, we perform randomized inference permutation tests (see e.g. Fisher, 1935;
Cunningham and Shah, 2018)

                                                        12
         While coding those with no claims as having zero visits in a linear specification may bias

the results (as some of the individuals would ideally have a negative number of emergency room

visits), this bias would be toward zero, and so we consider our set up to be a lower bound on the

true effect. We establish our intuition for this setup with three thought experiments. First, imagine

that all ED visits are 100% preventable with primary care. Then, to estimate the reduction in per

capita ED visit results from a shock to primary care, one would assign 0 to those without an ED

visit, and the number of visits to anyone with an ED visit.

         For the second thought experiment, imagine that some ED visits are 100% non-

preventable. The primary care shock should not affect these visits, and so individuals with only

these visits should still be assigned a value of 0 for the outcome variable.

         Finally, consider our actual situation, in which certain diagnoses are sometimes preventable

and sometimes not. We only care about the preventable parts for our primary estimate, and so in

aggregate we can add up the preventable shares of each one to get the outcome variable.

         A final note is that the NYU ED algorithm is designed for the entire population, not

specifically for children. This is a known limitation of the algorithm, recognized by its developers

(Billings, Parikh, and Mijanovich, 2000). However, lacking a child-specific algorithm, we consider

this a valid starting point for our analysis.

         We estimate the elasticity of substitution by comparing magnitudes of the effect of the Flint

water contamination shock on ED visits and primary care visits relative to their respective means. 16

         A potential challenge to our identification is that the estimated differences could be

attributed to the emergency management in Flint that began in December 2011, rather than the



16
  Appendix J describes in detail the standard procedures for lead tests. While there is a plausible concern that parents
might bring children to the ED for lead tests, our review of provider surveys reported in the literature suggests that
this is rare and that most physicians in these situations refer children to primary care.

                                                          13
water contamination. To rule out a trend in outcomes of interest prior to September 2015, as well

as to explore its dynamics month to month, we estimate an extended form of specification (1)

where the time period is disaggregated into monthly indicators:

               =  +  1    + 2  + c + t +                                                                          (2)

where    is a monthly indicator for an individual residing in Flint and 1 estimates

the difference in claims in month j between children born in Flint and control cities with respect

to September 2015. 17



Results

           Before proceeding with the analysis, we use an event study specification to justify selection

of September 2015 as the beginning of the treatment period. Figure 1 shows results for our event

study specification, showing differences in monthly lead tests for children born in Flint compared

to those in control cities. 18,19 Each point shows the difference in number of lead tests for children

born in Flint compared to control cities with respect to September 2015. 20 The whiskers on each

estimate provide the 95% confidence interval. The graph shows a clear rise in lead tests after


17
     We perform similar analyses at the quarterly level as well. These results are presented in Table 4 and Figure 2.
18
  To ease potential concerns of increased volatility in lead test results before May 2014, Appendix F shows consistent
results starting with the pre-period in May 2014.
19
  The primary control cities are the other most populous cities in Michigan (Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington
Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren,
Westland, and Wyoming). Appendix K shows comparable results using alternative smaller control cities with histories
of high lead levels in their drinking water (Detroit, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Wyoming, Battle Creek, Port
Huron, Hamtramck, and Saginaw; see Urban, 2018).
20
   The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that children be tested for lead levels at ages 1 and 2; it
also suggests lead screening for older children who have not been tested. During the period covered by this study, the
AAP changed its recommendation to venous blood draws for testing, noting that finger-prick sample testing yielded
a high rate of false positives. The AAP lists Lead Screening in Children using CPT Code 83655, which we use in our
analysis. The code does not allow for differentiation between finger-prick or venous blood tests. Because venous
tests are more difficult to administer, this may introduce more heterogeneity among children who receive the test in
Flint compared to other cities after the contamination became known. Though we would like to account for different
methods of testing, we are not able to do so.

                                                            14
September 2015, with a sharp peak in January and February 2016. The graph also shows no

significant trend prior to September 2015, suggesting that despite ongoing speculation, the

announcement of elevated residential tests by city authorities marked the beginning of Flint

residents changing their behavior with respect to health care receipt for their children.

       Table 1 shows summary statistics and unadjusted difference-in-differences estimates. In

Panel A, we see minimal changes in the demographic characteristics in our sample population.

Following the information shock, receipt of any lead test nearly doubles in Flint compared to a

small increase in comparison areas. The unadjusted difference-in-differences results show a 1.6

percentage point increase in lead tests among children in Flint compared to others, but much more

modest changes in other types of health care, except ED visits, which we discuss in greater detail

below. We also see a small increase in payments in Flint compared to other cities. It is important

to note that the after period (9/2015-2016) is much shorter than the lookback period (2013-9/2015).

In Panel B, we find no change in unavoidable ED visits, but decreases in all three of the avoidable

or non-emergent categories.

Main Results

       Table 2 shows our primary difference-in-differences results. Using September 2015 as the

treatment date (when the independent evidence of increases in lead exposure became public), the

likelihood of receiving any lead test increased by 1.7 percentage points (pp), a 49 percent increase.

We estimate a small, statistically insignificant decrease in the share of individuals having any

office visits. Interestingly, given our results below, we see a slight, marginally significant decrease

in the share of children with an ED visit. This is possibly because ED visit is a heterogeneous

measure including unclassified visits, which could be dampening the power of our analysis. Any




                                                  15
claims and any payments increase by 1.8 and 1.7 pp, respectively. These represent a 4 percent

increase in both categories.

        In panel B we examine the total number rather than an indicator for any receipt. The results

are unsurprisingly quite similar for lead claims, as individuals likely only receive at most one lead

test per month. However, vaccinations demonstrate a potential positive spillover effect of receiving

primary care for other services, with vaccinations increasing 13 per 1000 person-months (16%) in

Flint compared to other areas following the information shock (Carpenter and Lawler, 2019).

Finally, claims increase by 7.3 per 1000 person-months (2%), while overall payments increase $12

(3%), which is only marginally statistically significant. This suggests that even if lead tests and

their related office visits are substituting for ED visits, they may be doing so at such a low rate that

overall healthcare spending increases.

        Table 3 contains results using the per capita measures of ED visits calculated using the

method described above. We find no change in the number of non-preventable ED visits. For each

of the other three types, our estimates indicate a decrease of between 1 and 2 visits per thousand

enrollees per month. While our estimate for visits that were treatable in primary care is statistically

insignificant overall, we show later that this hides important increases in office visits immediately

following the information shock (Table 4). We create two composite metrics: (1) PC sensitive, a

combination of primary care treatable and non-emergent; and (2) Avoidable, a combination of

primary care preventable, primary care treatable, and non-emergent. All show strongly statistically

significant decreases in ED visits per capita. The information shock in Flint is associated with

nearly 5 fewer avoidable ED visits per enrollee-month, a decrease of 8.2 percent.

        We perform quarterly analyses on office visits, avoidable ED visits, and payments in Table

4 and Figure 2. The motivation for this analysis is that in Figure 1 we find a very large increase in



                                                  16
lead tests only at specific times, most notably September 2015 and January 2016. To test our

hypothesis that this increase in lead tests should also increase office visits, we separate our results

by post-information shock quarter. Our results suggest that immediately following the information

shock, office visits increase by 0.9 pp (4%), while they increase by 2.7 pp (11%) in the first quarter

of 2016. Office visits decrease in the last two quarters of treatment in Flint compared to control

areas. Avoidable ED visits initially remain constant, but then decrease substantially and with

statistical significance for the rest of the treatment period. This suggests an initial increase in office

visits having a prolonged effect on ED visits. One way to explain these results is that this initial

increase in office visits created a link between the patient (and his or her parents) and the healthcare

system. 21 We explore this idea in more detail in the mechanism section.

           To further explore whether these substitutions are driven by lead-sensitive conditions or

reflect a more general shift in utilization, we repeated the analysis, restricting the sample to the

most common Clinical Classification Software (CCS) 22 categories in the ED prior to September

2015. CCS categories were developed by the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project of the Agency

for Healthcare Research and Quality to classify ICD-9 diagnoses and procedures into clinically

meaningful categories.

           For this analysis, we identified the 10 most commonly occurring CCS categories in the ED

that correspond to claims predating September 2015 with diagnoses classed by the NYU algorithm

as avoidable. 23 These CCS categories encompass over 86% of all avoidable claims in the ED and



21
  For example, care for a child who was previously brought in to the ED for asthma flare-ups has shifted to a
physician's office. An in-office inhaler prescription not only prevents future flare-ups that would necessitate ER
visits, but also reduces future office visits, as the condition is appropriately maintained.
22
     https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/ccs/ccs.jsp
23
   For this classification, we limited claims to those with any avoidable component in diagnoses, then identified the
10 most common CCS categories within that subsample of claims. We chose to focus on CCS categories because
classifying diagnoses is too specific and not sufficiently informative. This also allows us to impute avoidability of

                                                         17
are listed in Table 5. Next we aggregated claims to the person-month-CCS category, so that for

each individual in our data, we have monthly use indicators, now split by CCS category. We

excluded all individuals with no claims in the CCS category for that month. As with the person-

month analysis, we sum the NYU Algorithm indicators for preventable and non-preventable ED

care. We re-estimate our specification for two venues of care: office visits (all diagnoses in each

CCS category) and ED (only avoidable shares as defined above).

           We present results from this analysis in two formats. Figure 3 shows coefficient estimates

by CCS category for any office visits (Panel A), avoidable ED visits (Panel B), and a scatterplot

by category (Panel C). Table 6 then tests the hypothesis that in each CCS category the increase in

office visits is accompanied by a decrease in avoidable ED visits. Looking at Figure 3, we see that

in 6 of 9 CCS categories, office visits (Panel A) increase, with 5 of those 6 increases being

statistically significant. Preventable ED visits (Panel B), on the other hand, decline in 6 of 9

categories. Comparing specific CCS categories, we particularly notice a sharp increase in office

visits for skin and subcutaneous tissue infections, and a decrease in associated preventable ED

visits. Abdominal pain is another category with a sharp increase in office visits and a decrease in

preventable ED visits, as is gastritis and duodenitis. Comparing the office visit and avoidable ED

visits by condition (Panel C), we see a clear negative, linear relationship between the two results,

with a greater increase in the share of children having any office visits causing a greater reduction

in avoidable ED visits per capita. 24

           In Table 6 we present the results of a chi square test that compares the estimated change in

office visits to that of preventable ED visits, (H0:  = - ), by CCS


CCS category based on these most common diagnoses, but by including all diagnoses in a given CCS category we
avoid defining this category too narrowly.
24
     Appendix E shows a similar relationship between total office visits and avoidable ED visits.

                                                           18
category. The chi square test fails to reject the null in any category, suggesting that, indeed, the

increase in office visits is statistically indistinguishable from the decrease in preventable ED visits.

Mechanisms

        To test the role of lead testing in the potential mechanisms for changing medical utilization,

we use individuals' episodes of care to explore choices in primary and ED care following the

administration of a lead test. Our main results suggest that the contamination increased awareness

of primary care through increased interaction with a physician or clinic. To examine this further,

our analysis focuses on treatments received in the three months following a lead test to identify

changing trends in utilization in Flint after September 2015.

        The results of medical utilization in the post-lead test period are reported in Table 7. Here,

the sample is limited to visits in the 3-month period following a lead test (columns (1)-(4)). We

find statistically significant increases in the likelihood of indicators of established care: 3.7pp

increase in immunization, 2.9pp increase in well-visits, 8pp increase in seeing the same provider,

14.8pp increase in using the same clinic. These results strongly suggest that following the

information shock, Flint residents who received a lead test were more likely to continue to receive

regular care from the same clinic. It follows from this result that should a child become ill after

having received a lead test, a parent would likely take the child back to the clinic at which he or

she received this test to see the same physician. Parents who had not taken their child to receive a

lead test would be more likely to take their sick child to the ED.

Pre-Trend Analysis

        To test the validity of our specification, as well as to discern monthly trends of our analysis,

we estimate the event study proposed in equation (2). The estimates of 1 are presented

graphically in Figure 4; each point represents the difference in outcome between Flint and control


                                                  19
cities relative to September 2015. Panel (A) shows results for number of claims, Panel (B)

represents any office visits, and Panel (C) reflects preventable ED visits. All three panels show

that, despite seasonal variation, there is no discernable trend in these outcomes prior to September

2015, validating our use of the difference-in-differences estimation method. Furthermore, we note

a sustained increase in claims and office visits in the treatment period.

(Slightly) Longer Term Effects

           Though quarterly analysis in Figure 2 shows declining office and avoidable ED visits in

the latter half of 2016 following the increase in office visits immediately after the information

shock, it is untested whether the prevention effect of office visits lasts beyond this initial period.

To explore the medium-term changes of the initial rise in office visits we extend the analysis to

2017 in Figure 5. 25 We find that the decline in office and avoidable ED visits persists through

2017, suggesting that the benefits of increased office care are longer lasting. Consistent with the

shorter-term results, however, the decline in avoidable ED visits is larger than the decline in office

visits.



Robustness Checks

           We include several robustness checks in the appendices. This includes stratifying our

sample to children born to black mothers (Table B1), children in fee-for-service Medicaid (Table

B2), and children in managed care plans (Table B3). 26 Our estimates follow a similar pattern; we

continue to see a sizable decrease in avoidable ED visits in each of these samples. We also start

treatment in January 2016 instead of September 2015 (Table C1) and limit the sample to the cohort


25
     Appendix N contains the table form of Figure 5.
26
   The lack of a populated fee-for-service / managed care indicator for half of the claims substantially reduces our
sample size and therefore statistics precision in these tables.

                                                          20
of children born before April 2014 to avoid potential bias from endogenous fertility (Grossman

and Slusky, 2019) and/or worse health at birth following the water change (Abouk and Adams,

2018; Wang et al., 2019) (Table D1). Results are robust to these alternate sample definitions. We

also start the pre-period in May 2014 (Table F1) and use the "patched" NYU Algorithm (Table

G1), per Johnston et al. (2017). Additionally, to test the sensitivity of our findings to the treatment

period, we estimated a flexible form specification, with two treatment periods ­ January to August

2015 and September 2015 to December 2016 ­ and get qualitatively and quantitatively similar

results, which we report in Appendix H.

        To address concerns that the substantial increase in lead tests from our main results is

driven by a non-representative sample of the broader population, we investigate whether those

receiving lead tests after the information shock differ from those receiving tests prior to it. Table

I1 presents results for demographic characteristics including sex, race, and maternal age using a

difference-in-differences framework; it shows no change in characteristics of those seeking lead

tests after the information shock.

        One might also be concerned that choosing comparison cities by population may result in

non-comparable groups with regards to lead levels. Appendix K repeats our main analysis using

an alternate control group of cities (including smaller ones) with histories of high lead levels

(Urban, 2018) and finds comparable results. 27

        To explore when office visits matter, we separately estimate our results by weekday (Table

L1) and weekend (Table L2). Individuals are less likely to get an office visit on a weekend, so we

expect to see our main results driven by changes on the weekday. Overall, we find evidence of




 We additionally perform an analysis adding Pontiac and Muskegon to our main analysis, as these cities may be
27

more comparable to Flint, with consistent results.

                                                      21
this: rates of lead tests, office visits, and avoidable ED visits are higher on weekdays, as expected.

Additionally, the lead test effects on weekdays are nearly identical to our main results, while the

effect on weekends is close to zero (and this difference is statistically significant at the 0.1% level).

While we find some statistically significant results for weekends, these are rare outcomes, thus

very small changes may drive these effects. For avoidable ED visits, the decrease following the

information shock coefficient for Flint on weekdays is approximately twice as large as on

weekends. However, the percentage change in these variables is not as stark (8% on weekdays

compared to 6% on weekends).

        Finally, we perform randomization inference permutation tests for our main results: any

lead test, avoidable visit, and non-preventable visit (following Fisher, 1935; Cunningham and

Shah, 2018; and Grossman and Slusky, 2019). These tests compare the coefficient in our main

analyses to a distribution of coefficients when we systematically assign treatment to each

individual control city. Comparing our actual result for Flint to this distribution of treatment effects

allows us to assign statistical significance if our Flint effect is an outlier. For any lead test, the Flint

coefficient is the most extreme by far, suggesting statistical significance. For avoidable visits, the

Flint coefficient is also the largest negative number, although there are positive coefficients of

greater magnitude. We are less concerned with these positive effects, as our hypothesis is one sided

(i.e., that avoidable visits will decrease). For non-preventable ED visits, the coefficient for Flint is

closer to zero than any of the results for other cities, suggesting no effect.



Discussion

        The results in Figure 2 show that definitive public information about Flint's water supply

led to a 4 percent increase in office visits in quarter 4 of 2015, the first treatment quarter. Office



                                                    22
visits increased by 11 percent in the first quarter of 2016. From Table 3, column (6), we find a

decrease of 4.9 visits per thousand person-months, which on a mean of 59 per thousand represents

an 8% decrease. Dividing the percent change in avoidable ED visits by the percent change in office

visits provides us with an estimate of elasticity of substitution between primary and ED care of

between -0.5 and -2.2.

       Figure 3 then breaks this result down by common diagnosis classifications that are often

avoidable. In addition to our results not being driven by one or two conditions, we generally see a

negative relationship between the magnitude of the effect on office visits for a particular condition

and the magnitude of the effect on avoidable ED visits for that same condition. For upper

respiratory infections; skin and subcutaneous tissue infections; abdominal pain, gastritis, and

duodenitis, we find precisely estimated and opposite effects. A chi-squared test of parity between

the magnitudes of the estimated coefficients (H0:  = - ) yields

statistically insignificant results, suggesting we cannot reject the null that these estimates are of

equal magnitude and oppositely signed. We are hesitant in interpreting this test, as it may lack the

specificity to reject our null hypothesis. However, this lends credence to our postulation that

increased office visits prevent avoidable ED visits.

       Despite this substitution from potentially avoidable ED visits to office visits, we also find

a statistically significant increase in total Medicaid spending. We attribute this to the relative

frequency of each type of visit; given the vast difference in the share of enrollees with any ED visit

(0.091) in a given month vs. any office visit (0.265), the absolute increase in office visits and

associated testing costs more than the savings from prevented ED visits. These results are

consistent with literature that shows that increasing use of preventive care is not associated with

savings in overall cost of care (Danagoulian, 2018; Jones, Molitor, and Reif, 2019). Though we do



                                                 23
not observe reduced costs, we know that establishing usual source of care is welfare improving,

particularly for children (Ettner, 1996; Xu, 2002; Starfield and Shi, 2004; Paustian et al., 2014).

Nevertheless, it is worth estimating the aggregate impact of healthcare costs following the water

switch and comparing it to the proposed savings from the water switch. 1.61 million enrollee

months for the entire 2013-2016 data correspond to 62,258 enrollees. Of those, approximately

3800 enrollees resided in Flint in the treatment period. Taking the $12/month coefficient from

Table 2 and multiplying it by 3800 and by 12 months provides an estimate of approximately

$550,000 additional Medicaid spending per year.

           Flint city officials estimated that the water switch could save the city $2.5 million a year.28

This means that Michigan Medicaid alone spent more than 20% of the projected savings on Flint

enrollees between the ages of 0 and 3. 29 This does not include the future costs of any resulting

health conditions, the current health costs of individuals above the age of 3, or productivity losses

of the Flint labor force. 30



Conclusion

           As the intensity of exposure to environmental pollutants decreases with improved

regulation and control, health outcomes will improve and subsequent treatments associated with

exposure will decrease. This, however, does not negate the burden imposed by such



28
     https://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/01/flints_dilemma_how_much_to_spe.html
29
  According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, the federal government would cover approximately 71% of these
costs. https://www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/federalstate-share-of-
spending/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7D
30
   Future analysis will include testing the impact of the information shock on the flow of eligible Medicaid patients
enrolling in Medicaid. We will also incorporate CMS provider data to enable study of heterogeneity on the physician
side.



                                                         24
contaminations on communities, as the anxiety and uncertainty associated with such exposure

increase, among other things, utilization of all medical services. This paper identifies the

opportunities inherent when such environmental disasters expand awareness of health and health

care.

          Our findings show that residents of affected communities often turn to health care providers

for guidance on appropriate response. Because the population studied here is low-income

Medicaid-covered young children, our findings directly benefit communities and policymakers

attempting to determine what to emphasize (e.g., education, screening, remediation) to counteract

potential negative health effects of environmental pollutant exposure in early childhood.

          Furthermore, the Flint water switch led to increases in lead tests and associated office visits

and gives us a unique opportunity to study the substitution between office visits and potentially

avoidable ED visits. While we find suggestive evidence of substitution, we do not find overall

healthcare cost savings. Our results emphasize that moving care from the ED into the primary care

setting should not be pursued for its cost savings but, rather, for improved quality of care. These

results are specific to a cohort aged 0 to 3 years old and may not be generalizable to the general

public.

          This work documents the important role information can play in improving health care

receipt for disadvantaged populations. Lead tests prompted parents to seek care for their children

at the same clinics from which they received lead tests, reducing their likelihood of going to the

ED for avoidable conditions. This may have important ramifications for any situation in which

individuals are induced to seek care more often in primary care settings.




                                                    25
References
Abadie, A., S. Athey, G. Imbens, and J. Wooldridge. 2017. When Should You Adjust Standard
      Errors for Clustering? NBER Working Paper No. 24003.

Abouk, R., and S. Adams. 2018. Birth Outcomes in Flint in the Early Stages of the Water Crisis.
      Journal of Public Health Policy 39: 68-85.

Alexander, D., and M. Schnell. 2019. The Impacts of Physician Payments on Patient Access,
      Use, and Health. NBER Working Paper No. 26095.

Alexander, D., J. Currie, and M. Schnell. 2019. Check Up Before You Check Out: Retail Clinics
      and Emergency Room Use. Forthcoming, Journal of Public Economics.

Antwi, Y.A., Moriya, A.S. and K.I. Simon. 2015. Access to health insurance and the use of
       inpatient medical care: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act young adult mandate.
       Journal of Health Economics, 39, pp.171-187.

Ashwood, J. S., M. Gaynor, C. M. Setodji, R. O. Reid, E. Weber, and A. Mehrotra. 2016. Retail
     Clinic Visits for Low-Acuity Conditions Increase Utilization and Spending. Health
     Affairs 35(3): 449-55.

ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). 2007. Toxicological Profile for
     Lead. Case No. 7439­92­1. Atlanta, Georgia: ATSDR. Available at:
     http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp13.pdf.

Ballard, D. W., et al. 2010. Validation of an Algorithm for Categorizing the Severity of Hospital
       Emergency Department Visits. Med Care 48(1): 58-63.

Billings, J., N. Parikh, and T. Mijanovish. 2000. Emergency Room Use: The New York Story.
        The Commonwealth Fund Issue Brief: 1-11.

Bradley, C. J., and D. Neumark. 2017. Small Cash Incentives Can Encourage Primary Care
       Visits By Low-Income People With New Health Care Coverage. Health Affairs 36(8):
       1376­1384.

Bradley, C. J., S. O. Gandhi, D. Neumark, S. Garland, and S. M. Retchin. 2012. Lessons for
       Coverage Expansion: A Virginia Primary Care Program for the Uninsured Reduced
       Utilization and Cut Costs. Health Affairs 31(2): 350-9.

Bradley, C.J., Neumark, D. and L. S. Walker. 2018. The effect of primary care visits on other
       health care utilization: A randomized controlled trial of cash incentives offered to low
       income, uninsured adults in Virginia. Journal of Health Economics, 62, pp.121-133.

Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller. 2008. Bootstrap-Based Improvements for
      Inference with Clustered Errors. Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3): 414-427.




                                                26
Candon, M., S. Zuckerman, D. Wissoker, B. Saloner, G. M. Kenney, K. Rhodes, and D. Polsky.
      2018. Declining Medicaid Fees and Primary Care Appointment Availability for New
      Medicaid Patients. JAMA Intern Medicine 178(1): 145-146.

Canfield, R.L., Henderson Jr, C.R., Cory-Slechta, D.A., Cox, C., Jusko, T.A. and B. P. Lanphear.
       2003. Intellectual impairment in children with blood lead concentrations below 10 g per
       deciliter. N Engl J Med, 348(16), pp.1517-1526.

Carpenter, C. S., and E. Lawler. 2019. Direct and Spillover Effects of Middle School
      Vaccination Requirements. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11(1): 95-
      125.

Cecil, E., A. Bottle, T.E. Cowling, A. Majeed, I. Wolfe, and S. Saxena. 2016. Primary Care
        Access, Emergency Department Visits, and Unplanned Short Hospitalizations in the UK.
        Pediatrics, 137(2): e20151492.

Chang, L.V. 2018. Information, Education, and Health Behaviors: Evidence from the MMR
       Vaccine Autism Controversy. Health Economics 27(7): 1043-1062.

Cunningham, S., and M. Shah. 2018. Decriminalizing Indoor Prostitution: Implications for
      Sexual Violence and Public Health. Review of Economic Studies 85, 1683-1715.

Danagoulian, S. 2018. Policy of Prevention: Medical Utilization Under a Wellness Plan. Health
      Economics 27: 1843-1858. https://doi-org.proxy.lib.wayne.edu/10.1002/hec.3806.

Decker, S. 2018. No Association Found Between the Medicaid Primary Care Fee Bump and
      Physician Reported Participation in Medicaid. Health Affairs 37(7): 1092-1098.

DeLeire, T., L. Dague, L. Leininger, K. Voskuil, and D. Friedsam. 2013. Wisconsin Experience
      Indicates That Expanding Public Insurance to Low-Income Childless Adults Has Health
      Care Impacts. Health Affairs 32(6): 1037-1045.

Deryugina, T. and D. Molitor. 2018. Does when you die depend on where you live? Evidence
      from Hurricane Katrina. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
      w24822.

Ettner, S. L. 1996. The Timing of Preventive Services for Women and Children: The Effect of
        Having a Usual Source of Care. American Journal of Public Health 86(12): 1748-54.

Finkelstein, A.N., Taubman, S.L., Allen, H.L., Wright, B.J. and K. Baicker. 2016. Effect of
       Medicaid coverage on ED use--further evidence from Oregon's experiment. N Engl J
       Med; 375:1505-1507.

Fisher, R. A. 1935. The Design of Experiments. Edinburgh, Scotland: Oliver and Boyd.

Gingold, D. B., R. Pierre-Mathieu, B. Cole, A. Miller, and J. Khaldun. 2017. Impact of the
      Affordable Care Act Medicaid Expansion on Emergency Department High Utilizers with


                                              27
       Ambulatory Care Sensitive Conditions: A Cross-Sectional Study. American Journal of
       Emergency Medicine 35(5): 737-742.

Grossman, D., and D. Slusky. 2019. Lead in the Water and Birth Outcomes: The Case of Flint.
      Forthcoming, Demography.

Grumbach, K., D. Keane, and A. Bindman. 1993. Primary Care and Public Emergency
     Department Overcrowding. American Journal of Public Health 83(3): 372-378.

Hanna-Attisha M., J. LaChance, R. C. Sadler, and A. Champney Schnepp. 2016. Elevated Blood
      Lead Levels in Children Associated with the Flint Drinking Water Crisis: A Spatial
      Analysis of Risk and Public Health Response. American Journal of Public Health 106:
      283-290.

Hollingsworth, A., and I. Rudik. 2019. The Social Cost of Leaded Gasoline: Evidence from
       Regulatory Exemptions. SocArXiv, 23 Sept. Web: https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/rdy6g/

Jacobs, P. D., G. Kenney, and T. Selden. 2017. Newly Eligible Enrollees In Medicaid Spend
       Less And Use Less Care Than Those Previously Eligible. Health Affairs 36(9): 1637-
       1642.

Johnston, K. J., L. Allen, T. A. Melanson, and S. R. Pitts. 2017. A "Patch" to the NYU
       Emergency Department Visit Algorithm. Health Services Research 52(4): 1264-1276.

Jones, D., D. Molitor, and J. Reif. 2019. What do Workplace Wellness Programs do? Evidence
       from the Illinois Workplace Wellness Study. Quarterly Journal of Economics 134.4:
       1747-91. ProQuest. Web. 16 Feb. 2020.

Jusko, T.A., Henderson Jr, C.R., Lanphear, B.P., Cory-Slechta, D.A., Parsons, P.J. and R. L.
       Canfield. 2008. Blood lead concentrations< 10 g/dL and child intelligence at 6 years of
       age. Environmental Health Perspectives, 116(2), pp.243-248.

Klein, E., et al. 2017. The Effect of Medicaid Expansion on Utilization in Maryland Emergency
       Departments. Annals of Emergency Medicine 70(5): 607-614.

Ladhania, R., A. Haviland, A. Venkat, R. Telang, and J. Pines. 2019. The Effect of Medicaid
      Expansion on the Nature of New Enrollees' Emergency Department Use. Forthcoming,
      Medical Care Research and Review.

Lanphear, B.P., 2005. Origins and evolution of children's environmental health. Environmental
      Health Perspectives, 113(8-1), p.24.

Masten, S. J., S. H. Davies, and S. P. Mcelmurry. 2016. Flint Water Crisis: What Happened and
      Why? Journal of the American Water Works Association 108(12): 22-34.

McConville, S., M. Raven, S. Sabbagh, and R. Hsia. 2018. Frequent Emergency Department
     Users: A Statewide Comparison Before and After Affordable Care Act Implementation.
     Health Affairs 37(6): 881-889.

                                              28
Menke, A., Muntner, P., Batuman, V., Silbergeld, E.K. and E. Guallar. 2006. Blood lead below
      0.48 mmol/L (10 mg/dL) and mortality among US adults. Circulation, 114(13), pp.1388-
      1394.

Navas-Acien, A., Guallar, E., Silbergeld, E.K. and S.J. Rothenberg. 2007. Lead exposure and
      cardiovascular disease--a systematic review. Environmental Health Perspectives, 115(3),
      pp.472-482.

Neprash, H. T., A. Zink, J. Gray, and K. Hempstead. 2018. Chronic Care, Prescription Drugs &
      More Physicians' Participation in Medicaid Increased Only Slightly Following
      Expansion. Health Affairs 37(7): 1087-1091

Nikpay, S., S. Freedman, H. Levy, and T. Buchmueller. 2017. Effect of the Affordable Care Act
      Medicaid Expansion on Emergency Department Visits: Evidence from State-Level
      Emergency Department Databases. Annals of Emergency Medicine 70(2): 215-225.

Oster, E. 2018. Diabetes and Diet: Purchasing Behavior Change in Response to Health
        Information. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10(4): 308-48.

Paustian, M. L., J. A. Alexander, D. K. El Reda, C. G. Wise, L. A. Green, and M. D. Fetters.
       2014. Partial and Incremental PCMH Practice Transformation: Implications for Quality
       and Costs. Health Service Research 49: 52-74.

Pickens, G. et al. 2019. Changes in Hospital Service Demand, Cost, and Patient Illness Severity
       Following Health Reform. Health Services Research 54(4):739-751.

Pitts, S. R., E. R. Carrier, E. C. Rich, and A. L. Kellermann. 2010. Where Americans Get Acute
         Care: Increasingly, It's Not at Their Doctor's Office. Health Affairs 29(9):1620-9.

Polsky, D., M. Richards, S. Basseyn, D. Wissoker, G. M. Kenney, S. Zuckerman, and K. V.
       Rhodes. 2015. Appointment Availability after Increases in Medicaid Payments for
       Primary Care. New England Journal of Medicine 372: 537-545

Sharma, A., S. Dresden, E. Powell, R. Kang, and J. Feinglass. 2017. Emergency Department
      Visits and Hospitalizations for the Uninsured in Illinois Before and After Affordable Care
      Act Insurance Expansion. Journal of Community Health 42(3): 591-59

Sommers, B. D., B. Maylone, R. J. Blendon, E. J. Orav, and A. M. Epstein. 2017. Three-Year
     Impacts of The Affordable Care Act: Improved Medical Care And Health Among Low
     Income Adults. Health Affairs 36(6):1119-1128.

Sommers, B., R. Blendon, E. J. Orav, and A. Epstein. 2016. Changes in Utilization and Health
     Among Low-Income Adults After Medicaid Expansion or Expanded Private Insurance.
     Journal of the American Medical Association 176(10): 1501-1509.

Sommers, B.D. and K. I. Simon. 2017. Health insurance and emergency department use-a
     complex relationship. N Engl J Med, 376(18), p.1708.


                                               29
Starfield B., and L. Shi. 2004. The Medical Home, Access to Care, and Insurance: A Review of
        Evidence. Pediatrics 113: 1493-1498.

Taubman, S. L., H. L. Allen, B. J. Wright, K. Baicker, and A. N. Finkelstein. 2014. Medicaid
     Increases Emergency-Department Use: Evidence from Oregon's Health Insurance
     Experiment. Science 343(6186): 263-268.

Téllez-Rojo, M.M., Bellinger, D.C., Arroyo-Quiroz, C., Lamadrid-Figueroa, H., Mercado-
       Garcia, A., Schnaas-Arrieta, L., Wright, R.O., Hérnandez-Avila, M. and H. Hu. 2006.
       Longitudinal associations between blood lead concentrations lower than 10 g/dL and
       neurobehavioral development in environmentally exposed children in Mexico City.
       Pediatrics, 118(2), pp.e323-e330.

Urban, N. 2018. Beyond the Water: Lead Exposure in Michigan's Children. Data Driven Detroit.
       Accessed: 11/11/2019. https://datadrivendetroit.org/blog/2018/12/19/lead-exposure-in-
       michigans-children/

Wang, R., X. Chen, and X. Li. 2019. Something in the Pipe: Flint Water Crisis and Health at
      Birth. IZA DP No. 12115.

Xu, K. T. 2002. Usual Source of Care in Preventive Service Use: A Regular Doctor versus a
       Regular Site. Health Service Research. 37(6): 1509-1529.

Zahran, S., S. P. McElmurry, and R. C. Sadler. 2017. Four Phases of the Flint Water Crisis:
       Evidence from Blood Lead Levels in Children. Environmental Research 157: 160-172.

Zhu M., E. F. Fitzgerald, K. H. Gelberg, S. Lin, and C. M. Druschel. 2010. Maternal Low­Level
      Lead Exposure and Fetal Growth. Environmental Health Perspectives 118: 1471-1475.




                                              30
                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics
Panel A: Demographics and Primary Outcomes

                                      Before                          After               Difference-in-
                             Flint              Other       Flint              Other       Differences

  Female                      0.483              0.493       0.489              0.494         0.005*
  Black                       0.610              0.533       0.617              0.536         0.0036
  Maternal Age                24.61              26.08       24.64              26.24       -0.1255***
                             (5.29)              (5.81)     (5.20)              (5.81)
  Any Lead Test               0.030              0.029       0.055              0.038        0.016***
  Any Office Visit            0.388              0.281       0.296              0.198       -0.008***
  Any ED Visit                0.104              0.091       0.091              0.082       -0.0037**
  # of Claims                 3.814              3.766       2.335              2.305         -0.0177
                             (9.53)              (8.41)     (6.40)              (5.81)
  Payment                     825.8              803.6       316.8              248.1          10.43
                            (3463.8)           (3447.4)    (1777.3)           (1985.1)
  Person Months              58927              762858      56549              751713
  Persons                     3699               51091       3913              53914

Panel B: Per Capita Emergency Department Visits by Type
                                                                                         Difference-
                                      Before                          After                  in-
                                                                                         Differences
                              Flint              Other       Flint              Other

  Non-Preventable            0.0093              0.0081       0.007             0.006     -0.0001
                            (0.0674)            (0.0622)    (0.0561)          (0.0510)
  Preventable                0.0088              0.0061      0.0079            0.0071    -0.0019***
                            (0.0630)            (0.0546)    (0.0603)          (0.0635)
  Primary Care
                             0.0378              0.0294     0.0324              0.026    -0.0020**
  Treatable
                            (0.1604)        (0.1384)       (0.1491)      (0.1297)
  Non-Emergent               0.0275          0.0248         0.0239        0.0224     -0.0012*
                            (0.1311)        (0.1249)       (0.1229)      (0.1199)
  PC Sensitive               0.0653          0.0541         0.0563        0.0484    -0.0032**
                            (0.2489)        (0.2274)       (0.2306)      (0.2146)
  Avoidable                  0.0742          0.0602         0.0643        0.0555   -0.0052***
                            (0.2789)        (0.2498)       (0.2588)      (0.2405)
  Person Months              58927           762858         56549         751713
  Persons                     3699            51091          3913          53914
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Standard deviation in parentheses for non-dummy variables



                                                     31
    Table 2: Individual-Level Difference-in-Differences Results for all Enrolled Children

                                 (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)             (5)              (6)

                                Lead          Office
                                                            Vaccines    ED Visits         Claims         Payment
                               Claims         Visits


 Panel A: Any
 Flint*After                 0.017***         -0.003          0.005       -0.003*        0.018***        0.017***
                              (0.001)        (0.006)         (0.003)      (0.002)         (0.004)         (0.004)
                               [0.00]         [0.49]          [0.04]       [0.15]          [0.00]          [0.00]
 R-squared                     0.004          0.074           0.028        0.012           0.091           0.091
 Dependent Variable
                                0.035         0.249          0.064         0.088           0.461            0.46
 Mean

 Panel B: Number per Capita
 Flint*After           0.017***               -0.027        0.013***      0.0010         0.073**          12.130*
                        (0.001)              (0.036)         (0.004)      (0.002)        (0.032)          (6.646)
                         [0.00]               [0.40]          [0.00]       [0.81]         [0.02]           [0.18]
 R-squared               0.004                0.046           0.019        0.007          0.042            0.059
 Dependent Variable
                         0.039                1.058          0.083         0.138           3.067          349.042
 Mean

 Obs.                        1,618,450     1,618,450        1,618,450   1,618,450       1,618,450        1,618,450
 Number of enrollees          61,511        61,511           61,511      61,511          61,511           61,511
 Number of Cities                16            16               16          16              16               16

Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing,
Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each
coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim
month, birth year, and birth month. Total payment is trimmed to exclude the top 1%. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the city level. Brackets contain wild bootstrapped p values.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                       32
                        Table 3: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                             (1)            (2)              (3)         (4)            (5)           (6)
                                                          Primary
                            Non-                                       Non-           PC
                                       Preventable          Care                                  Avoidable
                         Preventable                                  Emergent      Sensitive
                                                          Treatable

                          -0.00001     -0.0020***      -0.0019*       -0.0011**     -0.0030**     -0.0049***
 Flint*After
                           (0.0003)      (0.0002)       (0.0009)       (0.0005)      (0.0010)       (0.0009)
                            [1.00]        [0.01]         [0.28]         [0.01]        [0.06]         [0.01]
 R-squared                   0.004         0.003          0.008          0.006         0.01           0.01
 Obs.                     1,618,450     1,618,450      1,618,450      1,618,450     1,618,450      1,618,450
 Number of enrollees        61,511        61,511         61,511         61,511        61,511         61,511
 Number of Cities             16            16             16             16            16             16
 Dependent Variable
                           0.0072         0.0068           0.0284       0.024         0.0524        0.0592
 Mean

Notes: Primary Care (PC) Sensitive visits include PC Treatable and Non-Emergent. Avoidable visits
include Preventable, PC Treatable, and Non-Emergent. Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all
eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit,
Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling
Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All
regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the city level. Brackets contain wild bootstrapped p values. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     33
          Table 4: Separate Coefficients Estimated for Each Post-Period Quarter

Panel A: Individual-Level Difference-in-Differences Results for all Enrolled Children


                              (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                             Lead        Office
                                                      Vaccines    ED Visits    Claims     Payment
                            Claims       Visits

 Panel A: Any
 Flint*After Qtr 1        0.013***       0.009**       0.003**      0.005**   0.025***    0.024***
                            (0.001)      (0.004)       (0.001)      (0.002)    (0.004)     (0.005)
 Flint*After Qtr 2        0.084***      0.027***      0.012***    -0.009***   0.033***    0.032***
                            (0.001)      (0.004)       (0.002)      (0.001)    (0.006)     (0.006)
 Flint*After Qtr 3        0.006***        0.0003       0.010**     -0.005**   0.016***    0.014***
                            (0.001)      (0.006)       (0.003)      (0.002)    (0.004)     (0.004)
 Flint*After Qtr 4        -0.012***     -0.024**        -0.001     -0.007**    0.007**     0.006*
                            (0.003)      (0.010)       (0.004)      (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)
 Flint*After Qtr 5        -0.007***    -0.033***        0.0003       -0.003     0.009       0.008
                            (0.002)      (0.007)       (0.004)      (0.002)    (0.008)     (0.008)
 R-squared                   0.005         0.074         0.028        0.012     0.091       0.091
 Dependent Variable
                           0.035         0.249         0.064        0.088       0.461       0.46
 Mean
 Panel B: Number per Capita
 Flint*After Qtr 1      0.013***         0.049*       0.013***       0.004    0.132***    23.742***
                          (0.002)        (0.025)       (0.002)     (0.004)     (0.037)     (5.031)
 Flint*After Qtr 2      0.086***        0.062**       0.015***       0.001    0.207***    26.440***
                          (0.001)        (0.022)       (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.043)     (8.183)
 Flint*After Qtr 3      0.004***          0.015       0.019***      -0.002      0.056        8.391
                          (0.001)        (0.041)       (0.005)     (0.003)     (0.040)     (8.305)
 Flint*After Qtr 4      -0.013***       -0.114*        0.011*       -0.004      0.024       -2.286
                          (0.003)        (0.061)       (0.006)     (0.004)     (0.030)     (7.075)
 Flint*After Qtr 5       -0.006**      -0.167***       0.013*        0.002      -0.013      -5.328
                          (0.003)        (0.046)       (0.007)     (0.003)     (0.045)     (9.223)
 R-squared                 0.005          0.046         0.019        0.008      0.043        0.062
 Dependent Variable
                           0.039         1.058         0.083        0.138       3.067      349.042
 Mean
 Obs.                   1,618,450      1,618,450      1,618,450   1,618,450   1,618,450   1,618,450
 Number of enrollees      61,511         61,511         61,511      61,511     61,511       61,511
 Number of Cities            16            16             16          16          16          16




                                                 34
Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Each column is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim
month, birth year, and birth month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1

Panel C: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                            (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)
                                                          Primary
                          Non-                                              Non-              PC
                                        Preventable         Care                                            Avoidable
                       Preventable                                         Emergent         Sensitive
                                                          Treatable

 Flint*After Qtr 1       0.0011*        -0.0008***           0.0004        0.0022**           0.0025           0.0017
                         (0.0006)         (0.0003)          (0.0010)        (0.0009)         (0.0017)         (0.0016)
 Flint*After Qtr 2      0.0004***          -0.0004         -0.0014*       -0.0027***       -0.0040***       -0.0045***
                         (0.0001)         (0.0003)          (0.0007)        (0.0008)         (0.0010)         (0.0011)
 Flint*After Qtr 3        -0.0002       -0.0023***           -0.0006      -0.0028***       -0.0034***       -0.0057***
                         (0.0003)         (0.0001)          (0.0007)        (0.0007)         (0.0009)         (0.0009)
 Flint*After Qtr 4        -0.0008       -0.0030***        -0.0042***      -0.0027***       -0.0069***       -0.0099***
                         (0.0005)         (0.0004)          (0.0014)        (0.0005)         (0.0017)         (0.0020)
 Flint*After Qtr 5        0.0001        -0.0029***         -0.0016*          0.0004           -0.0012       -0.0041***
                         (0.0004)         (0.0007)          (0.0008)        (0.0009)         (0.0013)         (0.0013)
 R-squared                 0.004            0.003             0.008           0.006             0.01            0.01
 Obs.                   1,618,450        1,618,450         1,618,450       1,618,450        1,618,450        1,618,450
 Number of
                          61,511           61,511           61,511           61,511          61,511              61,511
 enrollees
 Number of Cities            16              16               16               16               16                16
 Dependent
                           0.007            0.007            0.028           0.024            0.052              0.059
 Variable Mean

Notes: Primary Care (PC) Sensitive visits include PC Treatable and Non-Emergent. Avoidable visits
include Preventable, PC Treatable, and Non-Emergent. Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all
eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit,
Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling
Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each column is from a separate regression. All
regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     35
                 Table 5: Top CCS Categories for Avoidable Claims in the ED

            CCS      Description                                            % of Claims
            126      Upper Respiratory Infection (URI)                         48.51
            133      Lower Respiratory Infection (LRI)                         10.83
            197      Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue Infection                     7.16
            128      Asthma                                                     6.81
            251      Abdominal Pain                                             3.65
             83      Epilepsy, convulsions                                      3.82
            222      Hemolytic Jaundice and Perinatal Jaundice                  1.74
            140      Gastritis and Duodenitis                                   1.39
            107      Cardiac Arrest and Ventricular Fibrillation                1.28
            125      Acute Bronchitis                                           1.25

Notes: Top 10 most frequently occurring CCS categories in claims for care identified as avoidable by the
NYU Algorithm taking place in the ED prior to September 2015.




                                                  36
        Table 6: Effect Comparison of Substitution Between Office Visits and Avoidable ED Visits by Category of Care

  Description                                        Any Office Visits                 Avoidable ED Visits                      H0
                                                  Coeff             Std. Err         Coeff.          Std. Err        Chi2            p>Chi2
  All                                              0.027              0. 004         -0.003           0. 001         0.020           0.886
  Upper Respiratory Infection (URI)                0.017               0.008         -0.044           0.014          0.030           0.852
  Lower Respiratory Infection (LRI)               -0.027               0.012          0.007           0.016          0.050           0.831
  Skin and Subcutaneous Tissue
  Infection                                        0.086              0.015          -0.036           0.012          0.220           0.636
  Asthma                                           0.002              0.016          -0.031           0.014          0.020           0.877
  Abdominal Pain                                   0.168              0.027          -0.086           0.024          0.110           0.743
  Epilepsy, convulsions                           -0.078              0.018          -0.001           0.020          0.060           0.811
  Jaundice                                         0.058              0.024          -0.007           0.003          0.280           0.596
  Gastritis and Duodenitis                         0.100              0.024          -0.095           0.008          0.000           0.968
  Acute Bronchitis                                -0.020              0.010          -0.003           0.005          0.020           0.902

Note: H0:  = - . Each estimate comes from a separate regression at the enrollee-month level for all children with
claims in the specified CCS category. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids,
Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. All regressions include fixed
effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level.




                                                                     37
                       Table 7: Use of Primary Care Following Lead Testing

                                            (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)
                                                                            Same            Same
                                      Immunization           Well          Provider         Clinic

       Flint*After                       0.0367*         0.0294***        0.0802**        0.1480***
                                         (0.0148)         (0.0050)        (0.0231)         (0.0295)

       R-squared                          0.0252            0.0242           0.24           0.3463
       Obs.                               21,413            21,413          16,820          16,820
       Number of Cities                     16                16              16              16
       Dependent Variable
       Mean                               0.1668            0.2004          0.5383          0.6272

Note: Each column shows estimates for specification for care received within 91 days of a lead test. The
dependent variables are: Immunization ­ immunization as primary reason for visit (CCS code 10); Well ­
well child visit (CCS code 255 and 256); Same provider ­ provider seen was the same (National Provider
Identifier) as the one administering the lead test; Same clinic ­ clinic was the same (National Biller
Identifier) as in the one billing for the lead test. Specifications (1)-(4) limit observations to visits within 91
days of administration of lead test. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit,
Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling
Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. All regressions control for female, maternal race, and
education, and include fixed effects for city, month, year, birth year, and birth month. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                       38
                                            Lead Tests




                  -0.08
                          -0.06
                                  -0.04
                                          -0.02




           -0.1
                                                  0
                                                      0.02
                                                             0.04
                                                                    0.06
                                                                           0.08
                                                                                  0.1




     Sep-13
     Nov-13
     Jan-14
     Mar-14
     May-14
      Jul-14
     Sep-14
     Nov-14
     Jan-15




39
     Mar-15
     May-15
      Jul-15
     Sep-15
     Nov-15
     Jan-16
     Mar-16
     May-16
      Jul-16
     Sep-16
     Nov-16
                                                                                        Figure 1: Number of Lead Tests in Flint Compared to Control Cities
Figure 2: Quarterly Difference-in-Differences Effects on Office Visits, Avoidable ED Visits,
                                      and Payments

               0.2
              0.15
               0.1
              0.05
                 0
  % Change




             -0.05
              -0.1
             -0.15
              -0.2   Office Visits
                     Avoidable ED Visits
             -0.25
                     Payment
              -0.3
                      Qtr 4 2015




                                        Qtr 1 2016




                                                          Qtr 2 2016




                                                                             Qtr 3 2016




                                                                                               Qtr 4 2016
Notes: Effects from regressions for any office visits, avoidable ED visits, and payments at the enrollee-
month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Avoidable visits include Preventable, PC Treatable, and Non-
Emergent. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand
Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren,
Westland, and Wyoming. Each set of effects for an outcome is from a separate regression. All regressions
include child and maternal characteristics and fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year,
and birth month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level.




                                                     40
                                                      Figure 3: Changes in Outcome by Diagnosis Classification

         Panel A: Any Office Visits                                                                                                  Panel B: Per Capita Avoidable ED Visits
           0.25                                                                                                                           0.25
           0.20                                                                                                                           0.20
           0.15                                                                                                                           0.15
           0.10                                                                                                                           0.10
           0.05                                                                                                                           0.05
           0.00                                                                                                                           0.00
          -0.05                                                                                                                          -0.05
          -0.10                                                                                                                          -0.10
          -0.15                                                                                                                          -0.15
                                              Abdom
                        LRI



                                     Asthma



                                                       Epilepsy
                              Skin




                                                                   Jaundice
                  URI




                                                                                        Bronchitis
                                                                              Gastro




                                                                                                                                                                                Abdom
                                                                                                                                                         LRI



                                                                                                                                                                       Asthma



                                                                                                                                                                                        Epilepsy
                                                                                                                                                                Skin




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jaundice
                                                                                                                                                   URI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Bronchitis
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Gastro
                                                             Panel C: Any Office Visits vs. Avoidable ED Visits
                                                                  0.02                                      LRI                          Slope: -0.3961
                                                                                       Epilepsy
                                                                  0.00
                                                                                                     Bronchitis               Jaundice
                                                                  -0.02
                                                                                                         Asthma
                                                                  -0.04                                                           Skin
                                                                  -0.06                                              URI

                                                                  -0.08                                                                     Abdom

                                                                  -0.10                                                  Gastro
                                                                  -0.12
                                                                       -0.20                    -0.10             0.00        0.10          0.20         0.30

Notes: Each point is the coefficient estimate of a separate specification at the enrollee-month level for all children with claims in the specified CCS
category. Treated city is Flint. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the city level. Whiskers show a 95% confidence interval. Panel C plots any office visit on the y-axis and per capita avoidable
ED visits on the x-axis from panels A and B.


                                                                                                                         41
                                                                                                Figure 4: Adjusted Monthly Differences by Outcome

                Panel A: Number of Claims                                                                                                                                                                                                              Panel B: Any Office Visits
                                  0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.2

                                  0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.15

                                  0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Any Office Visits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.05
                  No. of Claims

                                  0.2

                                    0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0

                                  -0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.05

                                  -0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.1

                                  -0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0.15

                                  -0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jun-14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jun-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jun-16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mar-14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mar-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mar-16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sep-13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sep-14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sep-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sep-16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dec-13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Dec-14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-16
                                                                    Jun-14




                                                                                                        Jun-15




                                                                                                                                                        Jun-16
                                                           Mar-14




                                                                                               Mar-15




                                                                                                                                         Mar-16
                                         Sep-13




                                                                             Sep-14




                                                                                                                 Sep-15




                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-16
                                                  Dec-13




                                                                                      Dec-14




                                                                                                                          Dec-15




                                                                                                                                                                          Dec-16
                                                                                                                                                                             Panel C: Preventable ED visit

                                                                                                                                                       0.08
                                                                                                                                                       0.06
                                                                                                                               Preventable ED Visits


                                                                                                                                                       0.04
                                                                                                                                                       0.02
                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                       -0.02
                                                                                                                                                       -0.04
                                                                                                                                                       -0.06
                                                                                                                                                       -0.08
                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-13




                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sep-14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sep-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sep-16
                                                                                                                                                                                   Mar-14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mar-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mar-16
                                                                                                                                                                          Dec-13




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Dec-14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dec-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-16
                                                                                                                                                                                            Jun-14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jun-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jun-16
Notes: Each graph represents estimation results from a separate specification. Each point represents the monthly difference between treated and
control, adjusted for gender, maternal race, and maternal education. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington
Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. All
regressions include fixed effects for city, birth year, and birth month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level. Whiskers show a 95%
confidence interval.

                                                                                                                                                                                                 42
  Figure 5: Quarterly Difference-in-Differences Effects on Office Visits and Avoidable ED
                                    Visits through 2017

             0.2

             0.1

               0
  % Change




             -0.1

             -0.2

             -0.3
                    Office Visits
             -0.4
                    Avoidable ED Visits
             -0.5
                    Qtr 4 2015


                                 Qtr 1 2016


                                              Qtr 2 2016


                                                           Qtr 3 2016


                                                                             Qtr 4 2016


                                                                                          Qtr 1 2017


                                                                                                       Qtr 2 2017


                                                                                                                    Qtr 3 2017


                                                                                                                                 Qtr 4 2017
Notes: Effects are from regressions for any office visits, avoidable ED visits, and payments at the enrollee-
month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Avoidable visits include Preventable, PC Treatable, and Non-
Emergent. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand
Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren,
Westland, and Wyoming. Each set of effects for an outcome is from a separate regression. All regressions
include child and maternal characteristics and fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year,
and birth month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level.




                                                                        43
Appendix A. Background on Flint (adapted from Grossman and Slusky, 2019)

Until 1967, Flint used the Flint River as its water source. The city had shortage concerns given its
expanding population (Carmody, 2016), and so began drawing water from Lake Huron through
the Detroit Water and Sewerage Deparment (DWSD). In 2011, the Governor of Michigan
appointed an Emergency Manager to make fiscal decisions for the city, given its precarious
economic health (Longley, 2011). At this time, DWSD water rates were rising (Zahran, et al.,
2017). To avoid these higher rates, the Emergency Manager explored building a pipeline directly
to Lake Huron (City of Flint, 2015; Walsh, 2014). However, the project would take more than two
years to complete. In the interim, Flint would use water from the Flint River (beginning in April
2014), while Genesee County continued to work with the DWSD (Carmody, 2016).

Flint had to treat the new water source, but it did not use anti-corrosive inhibitors (Pieper et al.,
2017; Olson et al., 2017). Flint citizens were concerned about the appearance and odor of the water
but were repeatedly assured that it was safe to drink (City of Flint, 2015a,b). While the city issued
multiple boil advisories due to a positive fecal coliform tests and an EPA violation for excess
trihalomethanes (TTHM) in the water (Fonger, 2014a, 2014b; Adams, 2014), Flint consistently
reassured citizens the water was safe and that any issues would be fixed soon (City of Flint,
2015a,b).

In the summer of 2015, a team led by Mark Edwards began independently testing Flint's water
and in August reported much higher levels of lead than previously reported, due to extremely
corrosive water. 31 In September 2015, Mona Hanna-Attish, a Flint pediatrician, reported a
substantial increase in children's blood lead levels (Fonger, 2015c; Hanna-Attish et al., 2016). This
finally led the city to switch back to Lake Huron water on October 16, 2015 (Emery, 2015).


References
Adams, D. (2014). Flint officials say 'abnormal' test to blame in E. coli scare, water boil
      advisory remains. Mlive.com, August 18, 2014. Available at:
      http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2014/08/flint_officials_say_abnormal_t.html.
Carmody, T. (2016). How the Flint River got so toxic: Factories and people have been dumping
      sewage, chemicals, and road salt in the Flint River for more than a century. The Verge.
      https://www.theverge.com/2016/2/26/11117022/flint-michigan-water-crisis-lead-
      pollution-history
City of Flint: Water System Questions & Answers. (2015). January 13, 2015 Available at:
        https://www.cityofflint.com/wp-content/uploads/CoF-Water-System-QA.pdf.
City of Flint: Water System Update with Questions & Answers. (2015). February 16, 2015
        Available at: https://www.cityofflint.com/wp-content/uploads/Water-Sysytem-FAQ-
        Update-2-16-151.pdf.


31
     http://flintwaterstudy.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Flint-Corrosion-Presentation-final.pdf

                                                           44
Emery, A. (2015). Flint Reconnects to Detroit Water, may take 3 weeks to clear all pipes.
      Mlive.com, October 16, 2015. Available at:
      http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2015/10/flint_reconnecting_to_detroit.html.
Fonger R. (2014a.) Tests positive for total coliform again in water-boil area on Flint's west side.
       Mlive.com, August 19, 2014. Available at:
       http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2014/08/water_boil_area_in_flint_gets.html.
Fonger, R. (2014b). Flint issues boil water advisory for section of the city after positive test for
       total coliform bacteria. Mlive.com, September 5, 2014. Available at:
       http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2014/09/flint_issues_boil_water_adviso.html.
Longley, K. (2011). Emergency Manager Michael Brown appointed to lead Flint through
      second state takeover. Mlive.com, November 29, 2011. Available at:
      http://www.mlive.com/news/flint/index.ssf/2011/11/emergency_manager_michael_brow.
      html.
Pieper, KJ, M Tang, and MA Edwards. (2017). Flint Water Crisis Caused by Interrupted
        Corrosion Control: Investigating "Ground Zero" Home. Environmental Science &
        Technology, 51(4): 2007-2014.
Walsh, MW. (2014). Detroit's Plan to Profit on Its Water, by Selling to Its Neighbors, Looks
       Half Empty. The New York Times, May 26, 2014. Available at:
       http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/26/business/detroit-plan-to-profit-on-water-looks-half-
       empty.html




                                                45
                 Appendix Figure A1: Timeline of Important Events in Flint

 1897:          1967-         2011:    2009-2013:       March            April 2014:    Aug-Sept
 Flint passes   2014: Flint   Governor Water rates      2014: Flint      Flint          2014:
 ordinance      receives      appoints (prices)         and              changes        Positive
 that all       water from    Emergencyconsistently     Genesee          water          test for
 connections    Detroit       Manager. increase.        County           source to      fecal
 with any       Water and                               plan own         Flint River;   coliform,
 water main     Sewerage                                pipeline to      Genesee        first boil
 be made        Department                              Lake             County         advisory.
 with lead      (DWSD).                                 Huron.           stays with
 pipes                                                                   DWSD.
 (Masten et
 al., 2016).
 Oct 2014:      Jan-Mar 2015:      Jun-Jul 2015: Sept 2015:                             Jan 2016:
                                                                      Oct 2015:         Michigan
 Flint GM       Emergency          Dr. Edwards Dr. Hanna-
                                                                      Flint stops       Governor
 plant          manager            independently Attisha holds
                                                                      receiving         apologizes on
 switches       stresses water     tests Flint waterpress
                                                                      water from        national
 off Flint      is safe, refuses   lead levels,     conference
                                                                      Flint River.      television.
 water          to return to       finding it to be announcing
 supply         DWSD               19 times more higher blood
 because                           corrosive than lead levels in
 of engine                         DWSD.            children.
 corrosion.

Source: Adapted from Grossman and Slusky (2019)




                                                 46
Appendix B: Stratified Analysis
                 Table B1: Sample Limited to Children Born to Black Mothers
Panel A: Individual-Level Difference-in-Differences Results for all Enrolled Children

                              (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)
                           Any lead      Any office         Any       Any ED         # of         Total
                            claims         visit          vaccines     visit        claims     payment ($)

 Flint*After               0.017***       -0.007**        0.013*** -0.009***        0.019        -14.655
                            (0.001)        (0.003)         (0.002)   (0.001)       (0.026)       (8.571)

 R-squared                  0.005          0.049           0.023       0.007        0.041         0.059
 Obs.                      876,835        876,835         876,835     876,835      876,835       866,961
 Number of Cities            16              16             16           16          16             16
 Dependent
                             0.035          0.197          0.066       0.106         3.04        350.767
 Variable Mean

Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing,
Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each
coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim
month, birth year, and birth month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     47
Panel B: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                         (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                     Primary
                       Non-                                          Non-            PC
                                    Preventable        Care                                      Avoidable
                    Preventable                                     Emergent       Sensitive
                                                     Treatable

 Flint*After         -0.0005***     -0.0031***      -0.0021***     -0.0039***     -0.0060***     -0.0091***
                       (0.0001)       (0.0001)        (0.0003)       (0.0006)       (0.0008)       (0.0009)

 R-squared             0.004           0.002            0.005         0.004          0.006          0.005
 Obs.                 876,835         876,835          876,835       876,835        876,835        876,835
 Number of
                         16              16              16             16             16             16
 Cities
 Dependent
                       0.0082         0.0089           0.0353        0.0292         0.0645         0.0734
 Variable Mean

Notes: Primary Care (PC) Sensitive visits include PC Treatable and Non-Emergent. Avoidable visits
include Preventable, PC Treatable, and Non-Emergent. Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all
eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit,
Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling
Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All
regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  48
                 Table B2: Sample Limited to Children in Fee-for-Service Plans
Panel A: Individual-Level Difference-in-Differences Results for all Enrolled Children

                           (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)
                        Any lead      Any office       Any          Any ED        # of          Total
                         claims         visit        vaccines        visit       claims      payment ($)

 Flint*After             0.024**       0.095***      0.020***        -0.019     0.305***     214.064***
                         (0.009)        (0.010)       (0.005)       (0.014)      (0.104)      (18.505)

 R-squared                0.039          0.099         0.029         0.037        0.008         0.057
 Obs.                    170,150        170,150       170,150       170,150      170,150       166,327
 Number of Cities          16             16            16             16          16            16
 Dependent
                          0.041          0.382         0.102         0.138        6.318        911.996
 Variable Mean

Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing,
Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each
coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim
month, birth year, and birth month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1

Panel B: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                           (1)              (2)                (3)             (4)       (5)       (6)
                          Non-                            Primary Care        Non-      PC
                                       Preventable                                              Avoidable
                       Preventable                          Treatable        Emergent Sensitive

 Flint*After             -0.0007          -0.0033            -0.0035           -0.0051      -0.0086    -0.0118
                        (0.0010)         (0.0022)           (0.0041)          (0.0049)     (0.0090)   (0.0111)

 R-squared                0.005           0.014              0.021             0.018        0.026       0.03
 Obs.                    170,150         170,150            170,150           170,150      170,150     170,150
 Number of
                            16               16                16               16           16            16
 Cities
 Dependent
                         0.0123           0.0098            0.0427            0.0365       0.0793      0.0891
 Variable Mean




                                                     49
Notes: Primary Care (PC) Sensitive visits include PC Treatable and Non-Emergent. Avoidable visits
include Preventable, PC Treatable, and Non-Emergent. Regressions are at the at the enrollee-month level
for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit,
Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling
Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All
regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                    50
                 Table B3: Sample Limited to Children in Managed Care Plans
Panel A: Individual-Level Difference-in-Differences Results for all Enrolled Children

                              (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
                           Any lead      Any office         Any       Any ED        # of         Total
                            claims         visit          vaccines     visit       claims     payment ($)

 Flint*After               0.035***       0.024***        0.015**    -0.021**      -0.05         13.503
                            (0.009)        (0.008)        (0.006)     (0.010)     (0.094)       (18.065)

 R-squared                   0.027          0.103          0.044       0.042        0.029         0.074
                                                                                   576,21
 Obs.                       576,213        576,213        576,213     576,213                   564,255
                                                                                      3
 Number of Cities              16             16            16           16          16            16
 Dependent
                             0.085          0.587          0.149       0.208       6.748        722.562
 Variable Mean

Notes: Regressions are at the at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is
Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo,
Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming.
Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year,
claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     51
Panel B: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                      (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                Primary
                    Non-                                        Non-            PC
                             Preventable          Care                                       Avoidable
                 Preventable                                   Emergent       Sensitive
                                                Treatable

 Flint*After        -0.0005      -0.0053**        -0.0036      -0.0078*        -0.0114*       -0.0167*
                   (0.0003)       (0.0019)       (0.0024)      (0.0042)        (0.0065)       (0.0084)

 R-squared          0.007          0.013          0.023          0.019          0.028          0.031
 Obs.              576,213        576,213        576,213        576,213        576,213        576,213
 Number of
                      16             16             16             16             16             16
 Cities
 Dependent
 Variable          0.0166          0.0161         0.0672         0.0565         0.1238         0.1399
 Mean

Notes: Primary Care (PC) Sensitive visits include PC Treatable and Non-Emergent. Avoidable visits
include Preventable, PC Treatable, and Non-Emergent. Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all
eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit,
Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling
Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All
regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  52
Appendix C: Alternative Treatment Starting Date
                          Table C1: Treatment Starting in January 2016
Panel A: Individual-Level Difference-in-Differences Results for all Enrolled Children

                              (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)
                           Any lead      Any office         Any       Any ED         # of          Total
                            claims         visit          vaccines     visit        claims      payment ($)

 Flint*After Jan'16        0.016***         -0.008         0.005     -0.007***       0.051          3.638
                            (0.002)        (0.006)        (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.035)        (7.649)

 R-squared                  0.004          0.074           0.028       0.012        0.042          0.059
 Obs.                      1618450        1618450         1618450     1618450      1618450        1602669
 Number of Cities             16             16              16          16           16             16
 Dependent
                             0.035          0.249          0.064       0.088         3.067        349.042
 Variable Mean

Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing,
Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each
coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim
month, birth year, and birth month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     53
Panel B: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                       (1)         (2)                 (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
                      Non-                        Primary Care        Non-            PC
                               Preventable                                                         Avoidable
                   Preventable                      Treatable        Emergent       Sensitive

 Flint*After
                     -0.0003      -0.0020***        -0.0020**       -0.0023***     -0.0043***     -0.0063***
 Jan '16
                     (0.0002)       (0.0002)        (0.0007)         (0.0006)        (0.0009)       (0.0009)

 R-squared           0.004           0.003           0.008            0.006           0.01           0.01
 Obs.               1618450         1618450         1618450          1618450        1618450        1618450
 Number of
                        16             16               16               16             16             16
 Cities
 Dependent
 Variable            0.0072         0.0068             0.0284          0.024         0.0524         0.0592
 Mean

Notes: Primary Care (PC) Sensitive visits include PC Treatable and Non-Emergent. Avoidable visits
include Preventable, PC Treatable, and Non-Emergent. Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all
eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit,
Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling
Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All
regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  54
Appendix D: Fixed Birth Cohort

             Table D1: Following the Sample of Children Born Before April 2014

Panel A: Individual-Level Difference-in-Differences Results for all Enrolled Children

                              (1)           (2)              (3)         (4)            (5)           (6)
                           Any lead      Any office          Any       Any ED          # of          Total
                            claims         visit           vaccines     visit         claims      payment ($)

 Flint*After              0.030***          -0.012          -0.003     -0.006**     0.111***        6.486*
                           (0.004)         (0.007)         (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.035)        (3.481)

 R-squared                   0.007          0.075           0.028        0.013        0.05           0.08
 Obs.                       856217         856217          856217       856217       856217         849352
 Number of Cities              16            16              16           16           16             16
 Dependent
                             0.035          0.241           0.053        0.086        2.765         301.847
 Variable Mean

Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing,
Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each
coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim
month, birth year, and birth month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      55
Panel B: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                          (1)         (2)                   (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)
                         Non-                          Primary Care     Non-          PC
                                  Preventable                                                     Avoidable
                      Preventable                        Treatable     Emergent     Sensitive

 Flint*After             -0.0004     -0.0026***         -0.0046**       -0.0012     -0.0058**     -0.0084***
                        (0.0005)       (0.0001)          (0.0016)      (0.0008)      (0.0022)       (0.0021)

 R-squared               0.005          0.003             0.009          0.007        0.01           0.011
 Obs.                   856217         856217            856217         856217       856217         856217
 Number of Cities          16             16                16            16           16              16
 Dependent
                        0.0072          0.007            0.0273         0.0235        0.0509        0.0579
 Variable Mean

Notes: Primary Care (PC) Sensitive visits include PC Treatable and Non-Emergent. Avoidable visits
include Preventable, PC Treatable, and Non-Emergent. Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all
eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit,
Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling
Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All
regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  56
Appendix E: Changes in Total Office Visits by Diagnosis Classification
                         Figure E1: Total Office Visits vs. Avoidable ED Visits

            0.02
                                   Epilepsy
                                                           LRI                     Slope: -0.1357
            0.00
                                          Bronchitis                 Jaundice
           -0.02
                                                                     Skin
           -0.04        Asthma

                                                               URI
           -0.06

           -0.08                                                                      Abdom


           -0.10                                                         Gastro


           -0.12
                -0.50     -0.40   -0.30       -0.20    -0.10     0.00       0.10    0.20      0.30

Notes: Each point is the estimate of a separate specification at the enrollee-month level for all children with
claims in the specified CCS category. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit,
Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling
Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year,
claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level. Whiskers
show a 95% confidence interval.




                                                         57
Appendix F: Pre-period Starting in May 2014 for ED Visits Type

                       Table F1: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                         (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)
                                                    Primary
                       Non-                                         Non-             PC
                                   Preventable        Care                                        Avoidable
                    Preventable                                    Emergent        Sensitive
                                                    Treatable

 Flint*After           -0.0001      -0.0016***        -0.0006      -0.0016***      -0.0022**      -0.0038***
                      (0.0003)        (0.0001)       (0.0008)        (0.0005)       (0.0010)        (0.0009)

 R-squared             0.004          0.003           0.009          0.006           0.01            0.01
 Obs.                 1398971        1398971         1398971        1398971        1398971         1398971
 Number of
                         16             16              16             16              16             16
 Cities
 Dependent
                       0.0067          0.007           0.0282        0.0237         0.0519           0.059
 Variable Mean

Notes: Primary Care (PC) Sensitive visits include PC Treatable and Non-Emergent. Avoidable visits
include Preventable, PC Treatable, and Non-Emergent. Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all
eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit,
Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling
Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All
regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  58
Appendix G: Results with "Patched" NYU Algorithm
Using the Johnston et al. (2017) classification of uncategorized visits, we re-estimated
specification (1) for ED visits. Results are presented in Table G1; though the significance of
most estimates is lost and the magnitudes are attenuated, the sign is consistent with our main
results. We choose not to use this "patch" because the new classifications are not validated.
                      Table G1: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                            (1)             (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)
                                                        Primary
                          Non-                                       Non-          PC
                                       Preventable        Care                                Avoidable
                       Preventable                                  Emergent     Sensitive
                                                        Treatable

                          0.0000        -0.001***        -0.0006      -0.0006      -0.0012     -0.0022*
 Flint*After
                         (0.0005)        (0.0001)       (0.0009)     (0.0004)     (0.0013)     (0.0012)

 R-squared               0.0051          0.0027          0.0079    0.0056    0.0089     0.0088
 Obs.                   1,326,764       1,326,764       1,326,764 1,326,764 1,326,764 1,326,764
 Number of
                          67,167          67,167         67,167      67,167       67,167        67,167
 enrollees
 Number of Cities           16              16             16           16           16           16
 Dependent
                          0.0121          0.0072         0.037        0.029        0.066        0.0738
 Variable Mean

Notes: Primary Care (PC) Sensitive visits include PC Treatable and Non-Emergent. Avoidable visits
include Preventable, PC Treatable, and Non-Emergent. Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all
eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit,
Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling
Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All
regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   59
Appendix H: Flexible Form Time Indicator
   Table H1: Flint Dummy Interacted with Multiple Dummies for Multiple Post-Periods
 Panel A: Individual-Level Difference-in-Differences Results for all Enrolled Children

                              (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                                            Any                                                     Total
                          Any lead                        Any         Any ED
                                           office                                  # of claims     payment
                           claims                       vaccines       visit
                                            visit                                                    ($)

 Flint*Jan '15           -0.0031***        -0.0022      -0.0016       0.0015      -0.1813***         -22.66
                           (0.0006)       (0.0061)     (0.0029)      (0.0024)       (0.0337)        (13.29)
 Flint*Sept '15          0.0304***         0.0104      0.0070**       -0.0016        0.0513         42.86*
                           (0.0008)       (0.0063)     (0.0030)      (0.0022)       (0.0429)        (21.02)

 R-squared                 0.0072         0.0683     0.027    0.0098                 0.041         0.0374
 F-Test                    1703.3           7.1       15.8      8.7                   62.6           29.7
 Obs.                     1,330,177      1,330,177 1,330,177 1,330,177             1,330,177      1,330,177
 Number of Cities             16             16        16        16                    16             16
 Dependent
                           0.0328          0.0266         0.0685       0.091          3.336        630.191
 Variable Mean

Notes: Flint*Jan '15 indicates enrollee-month observations in Flint between January and August 2015.
Flint*Sept '15 indicates enrollee-month observations in Flint between September 2015 and December 2016.
F-statistic of joint significance of DiD coefficients is reported. Regressions are at the enrollee-month level
for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit,
Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling
Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All
regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust
standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     60
Panel B: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                             (1)            (2)              (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                          Primary
                           Non-                                        Non-           PC
                                    Preventable             Care                                 Avoidable
                        Preventable                                   Emergent      Sensitive
                                                          Treatable

 Flint*Jan '15           0.0005**          -0.0005         -0.0029    0.0023***      -0.0006       -0.0012
                         (0.0001)         (0.0003)         (0.0018     (0.0004)     (0.0023)      (0.0026)
 Flint*Sept '15           0.0004        -0.0015***         -0.0022      -0.0001      -0.0023     -0.0039**
                         (0.0003)         (0.0001)        (0.0016)     (0.0004)     (0.0017)      (0.0017)

 R-squared                 0.004           0.003        0.0068          0.0052       0.008     0.0082
 F-Test                     9.04           48.81          1.58           13.79        6.84      19.59
 Obs.                    1,330,177       1,330,177     1,330,177      1,330,177    1,330,177 1,330,177
 Number of Cities            16              16            16             16           16        16
 Dependent
                           0.0077         0.0067           0.0295      0.0248        0.0544        0.0611
 Variable Mean

Notes: Flint*Jan '15 indicates enrollee-month observations in Flint between January and August 2015.
Flint*Sept '15 indicates enrollee-month observations in Flint between September 2015 and December 2016.
F-statistic of joint significance of DiD coefficients is reported. Dependent variables: Primary Care (PC)
Sensitive visits include PC Treatable and Non-Emergent. Avoidable visits include Preventable, PC
Treatable, and Non-Emergent. Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children.
Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids,
Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and
Wyoming. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city,
claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     61
Appendix I: Patient Characteristics for Lead Tests
                   Table I1: Characteristics of Patients Receiving a Lead Test

                              Before                           After                Difference-
                                                                                        in-
                          Flint           Other            Flint          Other     Differences

  Female                  0.493           0.476            0.502           0.466        0.018
  Black                   0.559           0.339            0.545           0.352       -0.027
  Maternal Age           24.766          26.842           25.067           27.32       -0.177
                         (5.456)         (5.797)          (5.186)         (5.715)
  Claims                  1300             9511           56549            9063

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 Standard deviation in parentheses for non-dummy variables. Other
cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia,
Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. All regressions
control for female, maternal race and education, and include fixed effects for city, month, year, birth year,
and birth month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level.




                                                     62
Appendix J: Lead Testing in the ED

While testing for blood lead level is possible in the ED, it is done so on suspicion of lead poisoning
in anticipation of inpatient admission. Treatment for exposure to high levels of lead, warranting
hospital admission, is chelation therapy. Our data does not include any claims for chelation
therapy. Thus, we feel confident that admissions on suspected lead exposure did not occur in Flint
during the period covered by our data.

Subacute lead exposure among children presents with nonspecific symptoms that may only involve
irritability, difficulty concentrating, and fatigue. Most commonly, it is associated with
constipation. Beyond admission, the recommended best practice for suspected exposure to lead is
to remove the source of contamination, test for lead in an outpatient setting, and follow up with a
primary care provider. For a child brought by their parent to the ED on suspicion of lead poisoning,
the providers may ascertain that the child is in no immediate danger and take a blood sample to
send to an off-campus testing facility with results sent to a primary care provider for follow up.
Alternatively, the provider may ascertain that the child is in no immediate danger and refer the
parent to primary care for testing.

In an informal survey, 13 emergency physicians were asked: "A parent brings their child to the
ED requesting a lead test. The child has no specific symptoms, maybe a mild rash or mild
abdominal pain. No apparent urgency. Which would you do?" The responses were distributed as
follows:

Order lead test in the ED: 2
Refer to primary care: 6
Test and follow up with primary care: 5

Therefore, we conclude that parents requesting a blood lead test for their child in the ED setting
would be referred to primary care.

Reference:

Williams S. Heavy Metals and Iron Overdose. In: Mattu A and Swadron S, ed. CorePendium.
       Burbank, CA: CorePendium, LLC.
       https://www.emrap.org/corependium/chapter/recGL1d1CsAmcMhdL/Heavy-Metals-and-
       Iron-Overdose. Updated November 7, 2019. Accessed November 7, 2019.




                                                 63
Appendix K: Alternative Control Groups
Table K1: Cities with Highest Rates of Children with Elevated Blood Lead Levels in Michigan:
More than 1,000 Children Tested

 Panel A: Individual-Level Difference-in-Differences Results for all Enrolled Children

                            (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
                         Any lead      Any office       Any          Any ED         # of           Total
                          claims         visit        vaccines        visit        claims       payment ($)

  Flint*After            0.015***         -0.007       0.0001         -0.001       0.126**         22.066
                          (0.001)        (0.005)       (0.003)       (0.001)       (0.039)        (12.054)

  R-squared          0.005               0.062          0.023     0.009     0.043                  0.059
  Obs.             1,379,219           1,379,219      1,379,219 1,379,219 1,379,219              1,364,489
  Number of Cities     11                  11             11        11        11                     11
  Dependent
                     0.036                0.227         0.054         0.096         3.084         356.483
  Variable Mean

Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Control cities are Detroit, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Wyoming, Battle Creek, Port Huron,
Hamtramck, and Saginaw (Urban 2018). Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions
include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Total payment is
trimmed to exclude the top 1%. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      64
Panel B: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                               (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)
                                                           Primary
                             Non-                                        Non-            PC
                                      Preventable            Care                                    Avoidable
                          Preventable                                   Emergent       Sensitive
                                                           Treatable

  Flint*After                0.0003        -0.002***         -0.001      -0.0004      -0.002***       -0.004***
                            (0.0002)        (0.0001)        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.0004)        (0.0005)

  R-squared                  0.005           0.002           0.007     0.005            0.008           0.008
  Obs.                     1,379,219       1,379,219       1,379,219 1,379,219        1,379,219       1,379,219
  Number of Cities             11              11              11        11               11              11
  Dependent
                             0.008           0.007          0.031         0.026          0.058          0.065
  Variable Mean

Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Control cities are Detroit, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Wyoming, Battle Creek, Port Huron,
Hamtramck, and Saginaw (Urban, 2018). Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions
include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Total payment is
trimmed to exclude the top 1%. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      65
Table K2: Main Sample Including Pontiac and Muskegon

 Panel A: Individual-Level Difference-in-Differences Results for all Enrolled Children

                            (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
                         Any lead      Any office       Any          Any ED         # of           Total
                          claims         visit        vaccines        visit        claims       payment ($)

  Flint*After            0.017***         -0.003       0.005*       -0.004**      0.087***        11.221*
                          (0.001)        (0.006)       (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.029)        (6.120)

  R-squared          0.004               0.073          0.027     0.012     0.042                  0.059
  Obs.             1,738,325           1,738,325      1,738,325 1,738,325 1,738,325              1,721,319
  Number of Cities     18                  18             18        18        18                     18
  Dependent
                     0.035                0.251         0.063         0.089         3.091         349.352
  Variable Mean

Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing,
Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, Wyoming, Pontiac, and
Muskegon. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city,
claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Total payment is trimmed to exclude the top 1%.
Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      66
Panel B: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                              (1)             (2)             (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)
                                                           Primary
                            Non-                                        Non-            PC
                                     Preventable             Care                                   Avoidable
                         Preventable                                   Emergent       Sensitive
                                                           Treatable

  Flint*After             -0.00002        -0.002***        -0.002*     -0.001**       -0.003**      -0.005***
                          (0.0003)         (0.0002)        (0.001)     (0.0004)        (0.001)        (0.001)

  R-squared                 0.004           0.003            0.008     0.006           0.009          0.009
  Obs.                    1,738,325       1,738,325        1,738,325 1,738,325       1,738,325      1,738,325
  Number of Cities            18              18               18        18              18             18
  Dependent
                            0.007           0.007           0.028        0.024          0.053          0.059
  Variable Mean

Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing,
Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, Wyoming, Pontiac, and
Muskegon. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city,
claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth month. Total payment is trimmed to exclude the top 1%.
Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      67
Appendix L: Weekday vs. Weekend effects

Table L1: Results Restricted to Only Weekday Visits

 Panel A: Individual-Level Difference-in-Differences Results for all Enrolled Children

                              (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)

                         Lead Claims       Office Visits     Vaccines      ED Visits        Claims        Payment


  Panel A: Any
  Flint*After              0.017***            -0.005          0.004          -0.002      0.015***       0.014***
                            (0.001)           (0.006)         (0.003)        (0.001)       (0.004)        (0.004)

  R-squared                  0.004             0.071           0.027         0.009           0.088         0.088
  Dependent
                             0.034             0.243           0.063         0.065           0.436         0.435
  Variable Mean

  Panel B: Number per Capita
  Flint*After        0.017***                  -0.039        0.013***        0.0020          0.043          16.39
                      (0.001)                 (0.034)         (0.004)        (0.002)        (0.026)       (13.203)

  R-squared                  0.004             0.044           0.018         0.006           0.038         0.026
  Dependent
                             0.038             1.024           0.082         0.097           2.714        435.966
  Variable Mean

  Obs.                    1,621,164         1,621,164       1,621,164      1,621,164      1,621,164      1,621,164
  Number of Cities            16                16              16             16             16             16
Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing,
Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, Wyoming. Each
coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim
month, birth year, and birth month. Total payment is trimmed to exclude the top 1%. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the city level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                       68
Panel B: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                           (1)         (2)                 (3)           (4)           (5)             (6)
                          Non-                        Primary Care      Non-           PC
                                   Preventable                                                     Avoidable
                       Preventable                      Treatable      Emergent      Sensitive

                          0.0002       -0.001***        -0.002**       -0.001***     -0.002***     -0.004***
  Flint*After
                         (0.0002)       (0.0002)         (0.001)        (0.0002)       (0.001)       (0.001)

   R-squared                0.003         0.002           0.006          0.005          0.008         0.009
   Obs.                   1,621,164     1,621,164       1,621,164     1,621,164 1,621,164 1,621,164
   Number of Cities           16           16               16            16             16             16
   Dependent
                            0.005         0.005            0.02          0.017          0.037         0.049
   Variable Mean
Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing,
Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, Wyoming. Each
coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim
month, birth year, and birth month. Total payment is trimmed to exclude the top 1%. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the city level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      69
Table L2: Results Restricted to Only Weekend Visits

Panel A: Individual-Level Difference-in-Differences Results for all Enrolled Children

                                      (1)          (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)              (6)
                                     Lead         Office
                                                               Vaccines       ED Visits        Claims        Payment
                                    Claims        Visits

 Panel A: Any
 Flint*After                        0.0001       0.003***     0.0004***      -0.002***          0.004         0.004
                                   (0.0001)       (0.001)      (0.0001)        (0.001)         (0.003)       (0.003)

 R-squared                          0.0005         0.016         0.001          0.003           0.019            0.019
 Dependent Variable Mean             0.001         0.011         0.001          0.029           0.073            0.073

 Panel B: Number per Capita
 Flint*After                 0.0001              0.013***      0.001***       -0.002**          0.023       20.216**
                            (0.0001)              (0.004)      (0.0001)        (0.001)         (0.014)       (7.437)

 R-squared                          0.0004         0.006         0.001          0.002           0.006         0.008
 Dependent Variable Mean             0.001         0.033         0.002           0.04           0.348        115.428

 Obs.                             1,621,164 1,621,164          1,621,164      1,621,164      1,621,164      1,621,164
 Number of Cities                     16        16                 16             16             16             16
Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing,
Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, Wyoming. Each
coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim
month, birth year, and birth month. Total payment is trimmed to exclude the top 1%. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the city level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      70
Panel B: Changes in Per Capita ED Visits by Type

                                     (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)             (6)
                                                                   Primary
                                   Non-                                            Non-            PC
                                                 Preventable         Care                                        Avoidable
                                Preventable                                       Emergent       Sensitive
                                                                   Treatable

                                 -0.0002**        -0.001***          -0.0003        -0.0003      -0.0007*        -0.002***
 Flint*After
                                  (0.0001)         (0.0001)         (0.0002)       (0.0002)      (0.0003)          (0.001)

 R-squared                         0.001            0.001            0.002          0.002     0.003     0.007
 Obs.                            1,621,164        1,621,164        1,621,164      1,621,164 1,621,164 1,621,164
 Number of Cities                    16               16               16             16        16        16
 Dependent Variable
                                    0.002            0.002           0.008           0.007         0.015           0.034
 Mean
Notes: Regressions are at the enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint.
Control cities are Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing,
Livonia, Rochester Hills, Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, Wyoming. Each
coefficient is from a separate regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim
month, birth year, and birth month. Total payment is trimmed to exclude the top 1%. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the city level.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      71
Appendix M: Randomized Inference

Figure M1: Average treatment effect of random assignment of treatment city

Panel A: Any Lead

                              0.02

                             0.015
  Average Treatment Effect




                              0.01

                             0.005

                                 0

                             -0.005

                              -0.01

                             -0.015
                                      Flint




                                              Comparison Cities




                                                       72
Panel B: Avoidable Visits

                             0.012
                              0.01
  Average Treatment Effect



                             0.008
                             0.006
                             0.004
                             0.002
                                 0
                             -0.002
                             -0.004
                             -0.006
                                      Flint




                                              Comparison Cities




                                                       73
Panel C: Non-Preventable Visits

                             0.0025
                              0.002
  Average Treatment Effect




                             0.0015
                              0.001
                             0.0005
                                  0
                             -0.0005
                              -0.001
                             -0.0015
                                       Flint




                                               Comparison Cities




                                                       74
Appendix N: Quarterly Estimates Extended

                                               (1)                 (2)                 (3)

                                          Any Office        Avoidable ED
                                                                                   Any Lead
                                            Visits             Visits


  Flint*After Qtr 1                          0.008*               0.002            0.013***
                                             (0.004)             (0.002)             (0.001)
  Flint*After Qtr 2                         0.026***           -0.004***           0.084***
                                             (0.004)             (0.001)             (0.001)
  Flint*After Qtr 3                           -0.001           -0.006***           0.006***
                                             (0.006)             (0.001)             (0.001)
  Flint*After Qtr 4                         -0.025**           -0.010***           -0.012***
                                             (0.010)             (0.002)             (0.003)
  Flint*After Qtr 5                        -0.033***           -0.004***            -0.007**
                                             (0.007)             (0.001)             (0.002)
  Flint*After Qtr 6                        -0.028***           -0.014***            -0.012**
                                             (0.007)             (0.002)             (0.004)
  Flint*After Qtr 7                        -0.042***           -0.013***            -0.013**
                                             (0.010)             (0.002)             (0.005)
  Flint*After Qtr 8                         -0.037**           -0.014***              -0.005
                                             (0.013)             (0.004)             (0.006)
  Flint*After Qtr 9                        -0.033***           -0.019***              -0.004
                                             (0.008)             (0.002)             (0.003)

  R-squared                                  0.065               0.011                0.004
  Dependent Variable Mean                    0.231               0.054                0.034

  Obs.                                     2,207,819           2,207,819           2,207,819
  Number of Cities                             16                  16                  16

Notes: Avoidable visits include Preventable, PC Treatable, and Non-Emergent. Regressions are at the
enrollee-month level for all eligible, enrolled children. Treated city is Flint. Control cities are Ann Arbor,
Dearborn, Detroit, Farmington Hills, Grand Rapids, Kalamazoo, Lansing, Livonia, Rochester Hills,
Southfield, Sterling Heights, Troy, Warren, Westland, and Wyoming. Each column is from a separate
regression. All regressions include fixed effects for city, claim year, claim month, birth year, and birth
month. Robust standard errors are clustered at the city level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     75
