                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DROPOUTS NEED NOT APPLY? THE MINIMUM WAGE AND SKILL UPGRADING

                                       Jeffrey Clemens
                                         Lisa B. Kahn
                                        Jonathan Meer

                                     Working Paper 27090
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27090


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We thank Brad Hershbein, Dan Aaronson, and seminar participants at Ben Gurion University, the
Brookings Institution, the China Summer Institute of Public Economics at Tsinghua University,
Copenhagen Business School Workshop on University Education and Innovation, Cornell
University, Duke University, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, George Mason University,
George Washington University, Joe-Fest 2018, University of Illinois, University of Maryland,
Southwestern University of Finance and Economics, Tel Aviv University, World Bank, Yale
University, and the IFS/CEP Conference on Wages, Labour Market Policy and the Safety Net.
We are especially indebted to Dan Restuccia, Matt Sigelman, and Bledi Taska for providing the
Burning Glass Technologies data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jeffrey Clemens, Lisa B. Kahn, and Jonathan Meer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dropouts Need Not Apply? The Minimum Wage and Skill Upgrading
Jeffrey Clemens, Lisa B. Kahn, and Jonathan Meer
NBER Working Paper No. 27090
May 2020
JEL No. J23,J24,J3,J42

                                        ABSTRACT

We explore whether minimum wage increases result in substitution from lower-skilled to slightly
higher-skilled labor. Using 2011-2016 American Community Survey data (ACS), we show that
workers employed in low-wage occupations are older and more likely to have a high school
diploma following recent statutory minimum wage increases. To better understand the role of
firms, we examine the Burning Glass vacancy data. We find increases in a high school diploma
requirement following minimum wage hikes, consistent with our ACS evidence on stocks of
employed workers. We see substantial adjustments to requirements both within and across firms.


Jeffrey Clemens                                Jonathan Meer
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego            TAMU 4228
9500 Gilman Drive #0508                        College Station, TX 77843
La Jolla, CA 92093                             and NBER
and NBER                                       jmeer@econmail.tamu.edu
jeffclemens@ucsd.edu

Lisa B. Kahn
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
280 Hutchison Rd
P.O. Box 270156
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
lisa.kahn@rochester.edu
1     Introduction

    The minimum wage remains a hotly debated topic among economists, policymakers,
and the public. Most research focuses on the equilibrium employment effects of increases
in wage floors, though there is recognition that other margins of adjustment may play
a role.1 One important avenue by which firms may adjust in the face of minimum
wage increases is through substitution towards higher-skilled labor. If the minimum
wage exceeds the value of a worker's output, a firm can potentially find a replacement
worker whose productivity meets or exceeds the floor. This phenomenon of "labor-
labor substitution" may have important distributional consequences, even when effects
on aggregate employment are modest.
    To the extent that jobs shift towards higher skilled workers, those who are replaced
(or never hired) may be disproportionately from already disadvantaged groups. Broadly
speaking, such groups may include the young, less-educated, uncredentialed, and those
living in low-income households. Evidence on transitions from minimum wage jobs to
higher earnings (Smith and Vavrichek, 1992; Even and Macpherson, 2010) and on the
returns to early career labor-market experience (Lemieux, 2006; Kahn, 2010) suggest that
increases in the difficulty of finding a first job can have long-run impacts (Neumark and
Nizalova, 2007).
    We examine labor-labor substitution in response to minimum wage increases through

    1 See Clemens et al. (2018), Vistnes et al. (2018), and Simon and Kaestner (2004) on non-wage compen-
sation; Hamermesh (1996), Aaronson and Phelan (2017), Lordan and Neumark (2018), Chen (2018); Hirsch
et al. (2015) on capital-labor substitution; Basker et al. (2017) on customer-labor substitution; Adams et al.
(2018) on supply-side responses; Aaronson (2001), Aaronson et al. (2008), Harasztosi and Lindner (2019)
for evidence of incidence on consumers; Harasztosi and Lindner (2019), Draca et al. (2011),and Bell and
Machin (2018) for evidence of incidence on firm owners; Coviello et al. (2018) and Ku (2018) on incidence
through increases in worker effort. Although not directly related to the incidence of the minimum wage,
the analyses of Altonji and Paxson (1988, 1990) point to an additional margin of interest, namely that firms
might offer workers a rigid menu of hours-wage combinations. A minimum wage increase may render
some of these combinations (flexible hours with low throughput and hence a low wage, for example)
illegal. Incidence may thus be borne in part by the worker through changes in schedule-related amenities,
as illustrated by Clemens and Strain (Forthcoming) using a simple model.

                                                      1
two analyses. First, using American Community Survey (ACS) data, we document that
employment shares of young adults and those without a high school degree fall in low-
wage occupations after minimum wage increases. Our difference-in-differences identifi-
cation strategy exploits the many statutory minimum wage increases that occurred from
2014-2016. Our results are robust to the inclusion of extensive controls, including state-
time varying labor market conditions as well as occupation-by-time and occupation-by-
state fixed effects. We categorize individuals who are more exposed to minimum wage
increases based on the pay distribution of their occupation (Clemens et al., 2018). We
find that effects are concentrated among individuals employed in low-wage occupations.
Following recent statutory minimum wage increases, which averaged around $1.70 over
the course of our sample, individuals in these groups are, on average, a quarter of a year
older and 4 to 5 percent less likely to be a young adult (age 16 to 21) or to lack a high
school degree. We see no impacts on employment shares for other demographic groups,
including those defined by race, gender, and country of birth.
   To better understand the role that firms play in this "upskilling" process, we turn to
data from Burning Glass Technologies (BGT) for the 2011-2016 period. The BGT data
contain the near universe of online job postings in the United States. We show that
the prevalence of requirements for a high school diploma increase following minimum
wage hikes. The effect is concentrated among postings for low-wage occupations, where
the diploma requirement increases by about 10 percent. We find no effects for higher
levels of education, like college degrees, that should be unaffected by minimum wage
increases. We also find little impact on experience and other skill requirements.
   Previous research has explored employment impacts of the minimum wage on mul-
tiple population subgroups, with a goal of understanding whether losses for one group
are offset by gains for others.2 Recent work highlights that more detailed data may be

   2 This   discussion goes back at least as far as Smith (1907). Early 20th century empirical work found

                                                     2
required to estimate labor-labor substitution with precision, since coarse demographic
groupings do a highly imperfect job of tracking minimum wage workers (Clemens and
Wither, 2019; Horton, 2017).
   We contribute to this literature by going beyond equilibrium employment outcomes
to provide an in-depth look at the demand-side response for labor. Our analysis of
vacancy postings allows us to examine the flow of jobs rather than the stock, which can
be slow to reflect the totality of a minimum wage change's effects (Meer and West, 2016).
Research on recent minimum wage changes has found evidence that firms adjust their
hiring to a far greater degree than their firing (Jardim et al., 2018; Gopalan et al., 2018).
Consequently, flows of job vacancy postings can provide a valuable lens for examining
firm responses to minimum wage increases.
   In general, it is difficult to know whether changes in equilibrium employment stocks
are driven by supply-side responses, the composition of firms, within-firm demand, or
by changes in the nature of the jobs within each occupation code. The BGT data allow
us to examine effects both across and within firms. We find that changes in high school
diploma requirements occur along both margins. That is, the composition of postings
shifts towards firms that always tended to require more credentials, but upskilling effects
are also present within firms.3 Within-firm responses thus complement the margins of
firm-level exit and entry, which have been emphasized in recent work by Sorkin (2015)
and Aaronson et al. (2018).
   This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a discussion of the theory under-
lying potential effects of interest. Section 3 describes the minimum wage changes we

that the introduction of minimum wages for experienced female workers led to "the dismissal of particular
women rather than others, because they... must be paid a higher wage if retained" (Obenauer and von der
Nienburg, 1915). More recently, Neumark and Wascher (1996), Ahn et al. (2011), and Dube et al. (2016)
focus on teenagers and Luttmer (2007) examines effects by skill groups.
   3 Our within-firm analysis expands on the existing body of research that analyzes in-depth surveys
on small groups and/or administrative data on individual firms (Card and Krueger, 1995; Fairris and
Bujanda, 2008; Hirsch et al., 2015; Giuliano, 2013).

                                                   3
analyze and our approach to estimating their effects. Section 4 presents our analysis of
worker skills using ACS data and section 5 presents our analysis of skill requirements
using BGT data. Section 6 concludes.



2    Conceptual Framework

    This section illustrates the channels through which a minimum wage increase can
generate labor-labor substitution, i.e., an increase in the skill level of workers and the
skill requirements in job postings in low-wage occupations. Consider a set of firms that
produce in a low-skilled market (e.g., retail or fast food). At baseline, firms may differ
with respect to the skill composition of their workforces, such that some firms have
workers with very low marginal products while others do not. That is, even though all
workers in this market are relatively unskilled, the latter firms may be producing with a
combination of low- and slightly higher-skilled workers.
    We say that a minimum wage "binds" for a firm if it falls above the wage that firm
pays out to at least some workers. When the government introduces or raises the mini-
mum wage, it will be more likely to bind for firms that employ the least-skilled workers.
The minimum wage's effects depend on the degree to which it binds as well as whether
the labor market is perfectly or imperfectly competitive. A barely-binding minimum
wage may trivially affect employment. In a classic monopsony model, the minimum
wage's initial bite may even generate an increase in the least-skilled workers' employ-
ment. As the minimum wage binds further, firms with low-skilled workers may exit or
contract, while firms with higher skilled workers may remain similar in scale. They may
even expand if their competitors contract due to the binding cost shock. This "between-
firm labor substitution" pushes towards a decline in the relative employment rates of the
least skilled.



                                            4
   Further, firms with low-skilled workers may try to increase productivity through
several channels. They may increase effort requirements for existing workers, they may
replace some of their existing workforce with higher skilled workers, and they may sub-
stitute away from labor and towards capital. The second margin, namely "within-firm
labor substitution," can occur whenever high- and low-skilled workers are substitutes in
production.4 The array of firms' potential responses can generate a relationship between
the skill of employed workers and the level of the minimum wage that is highly non-
linear. A small increase in the minimum wage may lead firms to demand greater effort
from existing workers, for example, while a moderate increase might lead to substitution
towards higher skilled workers and a large increase might lead firms to replace jobs with
capital or scale back on operations.
   A simple task framework provides an illustration. In the retail context, a task could
be an order processed at a cash register. Skill in this context could be synonymous with
speed, or the ability to show up on time and take fewer breaks. That is, higher-skilled
workers are more productive in terms of the orders they process per hour. When facing
a binding minimum wage, a firm might try to increase productivity by replacing their
slowest workers with faster, higher-skilled workers. Firms might also encourage their
existing workforce to exert more effort so as to process orders faster. Finally, firms might
replace labor with capital by transitioning to self-serve kiosks.
   The extent to which these effects occur depends on the degree of substitutability
across worker skill and the elasticity of labor supply. Labor supply may shift in response
to minimum wage increases. A larger pool of workers may make themselves available,
either because the minimum wage has made the labor market more attractive, or because
some firms shut down, leaving their workers to return to the job market. Supply-side

   4 Forinstance, standard Cobb-Douglas and Constant Elasticity of Substitution production functions
can generate this type of response, with magnitudes depending on either type of production function's
parameters. See Hamermesh and Grant (1979).

                                                 5
effects may either dampen or magnify the more direct demand-side effects of a minimum
wage increase on the skill mix of those who are employed.5
   What do these forces imply for the skill requirements observed in vacancy postings?
Vacancy postings may reflect both demand- and supply-side factors. Demand-side forces
are the most direct: when firms seek higher-skilled workers, the requirements in their
vacancy postings should rise. Supply-side forces may also be relevant, as posted skill
requirements serve a pre-screening function. The supply-side forces discussed above
might result in an increase in job applicants. In response, firms may increase their posted
skill requirements even if they do not desire to alter the skill mix of their workforce.6 The
posted requirement would then serve the function of deterring an influx of applications
that would ultimately be unsuccessful. Notably, this provides a mechanism through
which the minimum wage can affect vacancy postings at firms that do not actually
employ minimum wage workers.
   In summary, this section illustrates two primary channels that could increase the
skill level of workers employed in minimum wage jobs: shifts in employment between
firms and the substitution of higher-skilled workers for the least-skilled workers within
firms. Qualitatively, we note that the relationship between the skill mix of workers and
the size of the minimum wage change could be non-linear. Finally, while job posting
requirements should tend to mirror employer demand for skill, they may also adapt to
the supply side of the market as a means of signalling the firm's needs to an evolving
pool of potential applicants.




   5 Adams   et al. (2018) show that the unemployed increase time spent searching for work following a
minimum wage hike. Phelan (2016) shows that a minimum wage increase can alter the mix of wages and
amenities for a job such that some workers who were initially in modest-wage jobs now prefer jobs that
were previously low-wage jobs.
   6 Kuhn and Shen 2013 discuss conditions when skill requirements in vacancy postings should increase,
one of which being an increase in the total number of applicants.

                                                  6
3     Empirical Approach

    We examine data from 2011-2016, which has several benefits. First, it is a time period
during which there is substantial state variation in minimum wage policies. Second, it
falls cleanly after the Great Recession and the federal minimum wage increases of 2007
to 2009. Finally, our analysis period allows us to analyze ACS employment data and
vacancy posting data from Burning Glass Technologies in parallel.
    In section 3.1, we describe variation in state minimum wage policies over the time
period we analyze. In section 3.2, we describe our approach to identifying minimum
wage occupations. In section 3.3, we present our estimation framework.


3.1    Minimum Wage Variation

    As in Clemens et al. (2018), we focus our attention on state-level minimum wage
changes that occur after 2011.7 There was a lull in minimum wage legislation between
the end of the Great Recession and December 2013 (Clemens and Strain, 2017). Since Jan-
uary 2014, a substantial number of states have increased their minimum wages through
new legislation. Data from 2011-2013 thus provide a base period after which states'
minimum wage policies diverged substantially.
    Table 1 summarizes minimum wage changes by state, listing the total minimum wage
change across our analysis period for each state that enacted a change through new
legislation. We also list the number of years in which a change occurred and the year of
the first change. For example, Alaska saw a total increase of $2.00 over the period 2011-
2016 that occurred through two consecutive $1 increases in January 2015 and January
2016. Notably, all states in the table had multiple increases over our analysis period.
Because the second (and in some cases third) increase was typically enacted through

    7 Thesources underlying our minimum wage series include Meer and West (2016), Vaghul and Zip-
perer (2016) and Clemens and Strain (2017).

                                               7
the same piece of legislation as the first, it would generally have been forecastable by
firms. This leads us to pursue a difference-in-differences analysis centered on the first
minimum wage change for each state. We also explore the timing of any impacts we
observe through dynamic event study analyses.
    In addition to the states listed in table 1, there are 8 states that had inflation index-
ing provisions over this time period. In a typical year, these states enact forecastable
minimum wage increases on the order of $0.15 to $0.20.8 Because the minimum wage
increases in these states are both small and forecastable, they are not our primary focus.9
We report separate effects for inflation indexers in several appendix tables.



3.2        Occupation Groups

    Our analysis focuses on groups of occupations that are most likely to be impacted
by minimum wage legislation. Our occupation-based approach follows Clemens et al.
(2018), and is well-suited for investigating the phenomenon of labor-labor substitution.10
Using the 2006 wave of the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) data, we clas-
sify occupations based on the 10th percentile of their occupation-specific wage distribu-
tions.11 We choose 2006 because it predates both the minimum wage increases we study
and the Great Recession. Our analysis focuses on the bottom 10 percent of occupations
(as sorted based on the 10th percentile of each occupation's 2006 wage distribution).
These occupations are most likely to be mechanically impacted by minimum wage law,

    8 Thesestates are Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Missouri, Montana, Ohio, Oregon, and Washington.
Rhode Island and Vermont switched from indexed to statutory increases over the time period we study;
we focus on only the statutory increases for these states.
    9 Increasesof this sort are of little interest in part because it is already known that they have very
modest effects at the time each increase is implemented.
   10 It
      is also a necessity for our analysis of the Burning Glass data, which contain sparse data on pay and
no data on demographics.
   11 We    use four-digit SOC occupations, balancing the need for granularity against sample size con-
straints.

                                                    8
as they are particularly low-earning.12 We henceforth refer to the lowest decile as "low-
wage occupations." For most of our analysis, we group higher-paying occupations into
"modest wage" (deciles 2-4), "medium wage" (deciles 5-7) and "high wage" (deciles
8-10) categories, though we also explore finer groupings.
    Table 2 lists the low-wage occupations in order of their 10th percentile wage in 2006.
The low-wage occupations include those typically associated with minimum wage jobs,
such as waiters, retail clerks, and cleaners. The table illustrates how the recent statutory
minimum wage increases compare to prevailing wages. For each state-occupation cell,
we calculate the gap between wages in the 2013 OES wave and the state minimum
wage in 2016.13 We summarize this gap for the 10th, 25th, and 50th percentiles of
wages. We average across states using OES employment weights and imputing zeros
for negative gaps. This gives us the amount that, for example, the 10th percentile wage
would have needed to increase in a given occupation to be in mechanical compliance
with the eventual minimum wage, averaged across all states with statutory increases.
Note that these estimates do not take into account any nominal wage growth that might
otherwise have occurred over our analysis period. Our calculations simply illustrate the
occupations for which we should expect to see the largest mechanical wage increases
due to compliance with new minimum wage law.
    In panel A, we estimate that low-wage occupations should see sizable wage increases
at the lower half of their wage distribution. For food and beverage serving workers (SOC
code 3530), for example, the 10th percentile wage would need to rise by an average of
$1.27 to be in compliance with the average increase. This is three-quarters of the actual
minimum wage increase seen over this time period: $1.68 (the average among statutory


   12 Thecategories we describe here are slightly different than in Clemens et al. (2018) to better align with
categories found in the BGT data. See below for more discussion and robustness to other definitions.
   13 OES data are three-year rolling averages, so the 2013 wave corresponds to the 2011-2013 "pre" period
in our data before any statutory legislation.

                                                      9
increasers). Workers in some locations were earning slightly above the prevailing mini-
mum wage in 2013, such that the effective wage increase imposed by the minimum wage
hikes was lower than the full increase. At the 25th percentile, wages in this occupation
would only have needed to increase by $0.87; at the median the gap is just $0.30. Across
low-wage occupations, the average increases required at the 10th percentile range from
$0.38 to $1.34, while expected increases at the median are almost always close to zero. A
portion of our analysis focuses on the three lowest-paying occupations (food and bever-
age serving, other food preparation and serving, and entertainment attendants) because
these occupations exhibit substantial exposure to the minimum wage across a larger
range of their occupation-specific wage distributions.14
    Panel B presents summary statistics on the wage distributions for each of the broader
occupation groups. For most occupation groups and for most parts of the pay distribu-
tion, pre-period wages are well above the eventual minimum wage. Low-wage occupa-
tions stand out as the most likely to be impacted directly by minimum wage legislation.
In 2013, a substantial share of their wage distributions fell below the eventual minimum
wage.



3.3     Methodology

    We estimate regressions of the form specified in equation 1. The subscripts indicate
individuals, i, occupations, o, states, s, and time periods, t. In our analysis of ACS
data, observations are at the individual level.15 For BGT job ads data, we aggregate to

   14 Workers in many of these low-wage occupations receive tips as part of their compensation. OES
wage estimates are inclusive of tips. In Current Population Survey data, nearly half of individuals in the
three lowest-paying occupations and about 15 percent of the remaining low-wage occupations respond
"yes" to a question about whether they receive overtime, tips, or commissions. Importantly, while a lower
"pre-tips" minimum wage may apply (as it does in most states), the sum of the base wage and tips is also
required to equal or exceed the full minimum wage.
   15 As  individuals are only observed in one occupation, state, and time period, the notation o (i ), s(i ),
and t(i ) is understood and suppressed for ease of exposition.

                                                     10
the occupation-state-month, as explained in more detail in section 5. For both our ACS
and BGT analyses, we estimate equation 1 separately for each of the occupation groups
discussed above (i.e., "low," "modest," "medium," and "high" wage).

               Yiost =  0 + [ Increasers × a f terst ]  1 + s + t + o + Xst  +            iost           (1)

    The outcomes of interest, Y , include variables describing the age and education levels
of employed workers, as well as the desired skill level expressed by employers in their
job postings. Increasers is an indicator equalling 1 if the state has a minimum wage
change through new legislation at some point during our sample period (table 1). State
categories are fixed throughout our sample period. The indicator a f terst equals 1 if the
time period, t, is on or after the date of the first minimum wage change in the state, s.16
    All of our specifications include state, date, and occupation fixed effects (s , t ,
and o, respectively).  1 is therefore a difference-in-differences estimate of the effect
of changes in the minimum wage on the outcome, Y . This most basic specification ac-
counts for national-level time shocks and baseline differences in outcomes across states
and occupations. The identifying assumption is that the outcome of interest would have
followed similar trends across states if not for differential changes in their minimum
wage policy regimes. As we will show, we do not see evidence of differential trends
prior to the first minimum wage increase in the outcome variables. Standard errors are
clustered by state.
    We augment our most basic specification with controls for state-by-occupation and
occupation-by-year fixed effects. These additional controls allow for baseline differences
in outcomes across states within a given occupation and for differential trends across
occupations at the national level. We further include a range of controls that vary at the
state-time level (Xst ). Specifically, we control for state-level employment rates (obtained

   16 We also include an interaction between an indicator for indexer states and the after period, and report
these results in the appendix.

                                                     11
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics), log income per capita (from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis), and a median house price index (from the Federal Housing Finance Agency).
We also control for multiple factors related to the evolution of health insurance markets
across states.17
     The difference-in-differences regression in equation 1 treats all observations within
a pre- or post-period the same, and all statutory minimum wage increases the same,
regardless of the size of or distance in time from the increase. We explore alternative
approaches below, including a linear specification for the minimum wage, as well as
allowing for more flexible time dynamics within event-study specifications. With respect
to both the structure of our estimators and our checks for threats to identification, our
analysis quite closely mirrors analyses from recently published research in the minimum
wage literature.18



4      The Minimum Wage and Worker Demographics

     In this section, we analyze the impact of state-level minimum wage changes on the
skill level of employed workers using American Community Survey (ACS) data. We
first describe the dataset, then provide results on worker demographics, then explore

    17 Specifically,
                  we control for state take-up of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) Medicaid expansion (an
indicator for whether the state has an expansion in effect in the given year, and a second indicator allowing
this effect to vary after 2013, when ACA key coverage provisions were in effect). We also control for
state-time variation in market concentration across the providers of insurance to both large and small
employers from Kaiser: https://www.kff.org/state-category/health-insurance-managed-care/insurance-
market-competitiveness/. These controls are used in Clemens et al. (2018), where we show that the
same minimum wage hikes explored in the current paper reduce the likelihood that workers in low-wage
occupations have employer provided health insurance. The benefits environment is important to control
for here as well because, as we have shown, the interaction of minimum wages and benefits provision is
complex.
    18 Carefulexamination of event-study estimates to check for pre-existing trends, for example, is a key
element of the argument for econometric identification in both Cengiz et al. (2019) and Monras (2019).
Examination of high-skilled or high-wage groups as a form of "falsification test" or "within-state control"
is also familiar from Cengiz et al. (2019), as well as from Clemens and Wither (2019) and Clemens and
Strain (2018b).

                                                     12
employment effects.



4.1    Data

    The ACS is a household-based survey with relatively large samples, even within
state-time-occupation cells. We restrict attention to the years 2011-2016 to align our ACS
and BGT analysis samples. We limit our analysis sample to individuals between the
ages of 16 and 64. We link ACS data for a given year to the state-level minimum wage
applicable in July.19
    The primary focus of our ACS analysis is on characterizing observable proxies (age
and education) for the skill level of the individuals employed in low-wage occupations.20
The top panel of Table 3 provides summary statistics for our key outcomes in each
occupation group. Age and education levels rise, as one would expect, moving from
low- to high-wage occupations. In low-wage occupations, the average age is 35, roughly
20 percent of workers are aged 16 to 21, a similar fraction lack a high school diploma, and
10 percent have completed a college education. In high-wage occupations, the average
age is 43, only 1 percent of workers are aged 16 to 21 or lack a high school diploma, and
65 percent have completed a college education.



4.2    Results on Worker Demographics

    Figure 1 gives a general sense of the relationship between state-level minimum wage
changes and changes in one of our key outcome variables: the average age of the em-

   19 Respondents  in the ACS may be surveyed at any time during the calendar year, but the survey date is
not available in the public-use files. We therefore impute the prevailing minimum wage at time of survey
with that at the midpoint of the year. This problem is small, since all but a handful of minimum wage
changes over this time period were in January of a given year.
   20 Aaronson and Phelan (2017) similarly focus their analysis on occupations in an investigation of the re-
lationship between minimum wage increases and technological substitution, and in particular, definitions
based on routine, manual, and cognitive tasks.

                                                     13
ployed. Each panel presents this relationship for one of the four occupation groups.21
States with minimum wage increases driven by inflation indexing provisions show up
with small increases, totalling less than $1 across 6 years. For states with no minimum
wage changes, the dividing point is 2014, which is the modal year in which states with
statutory increases implemented their first change.
   For low-wage occupations (top left), the best-fit line is upward sloping: states with
larger minimum wage increases saw larger increases in worker age, while in states with
no minimum wage change, average age decreased. The remaining panels show that the
slope of the relationship between minimum wage changes and age is essentially flat for
higher-paid occupation groups. These relationships are consistent with our expectation
that effects will be concentrated among workers who are earning close to the minimum
wage.
   Table 4 presents regression estimates of equation 1 for those employed in low-wage
occupations. The five panels correspond to different dependent variables: age and in-
dicator variables for young adults (age 16-21), older adults (age 50-64), those without a
high school diploma, and those with a high school or some college (but no college de-
gree). The specification in column 1 controls for state, year, and occupation fixed effects.
Column 2 adds two-way fixed effects at the occupation-by-year and occupation-by-state
levels. Column 3 adds macroeconomic and health insurance market controls.
   We find that states with statutory increases in the minimum wage see the average age
increase in these occupations, rising by about a quarter of a year following a minimum
wage hike. Panel B shows that the age effect primarily manifests through a nearly 1
percentage point drop in the young adult employment share (or 5 percent off a base of
21 percent). Panel C shows that about half of the shift away from young adults loads

  21 The age change is the average difference between the period before a given state enacted its first
minimum wage increase to the period from the first change onwards (see Table 1). Minimum wage
changes on the x-axis are the total change for the state over the full time period.

                                                  14
onto increases in employment of older adults (age 50 plus), implying that the remainder
is split among prime-age workers. These age effects are generally significant at the
1 percent level and remain fairly consistent in magnitude with the addition of more
controls.
    We also find effects on average education. Specifically, low-wage workers are more
likely to have a high school diploma or some college education following a minimum
wage hike. The decline in employment share for those without a high school diploma
is just over half of a percentage point (4 percent on a base of 17 percent), is statistically
significant at the 5 percent level, and is almost exactly offset by the increase for high
school and some college.
    A back-of-the-envelope calculation using estimates from Mincerian earnings regres-
sions puts these numbers into perspective (Mincer, 1974; Lemieux, 2006). Estimated on
ACS data from our sample period, an earnings regression for full-time workers yields
an annual earnings gain of roughly 7 percent per year of experience among the young.
We estimate that workers in low-wage occupations are roughly a quarter of a year older
following minimum wage increases. This translates into roughly a 1.75 percent increase
in dollar terms, as implied by the Mincer regression (7 × 0.25). Table 2 can be used to
contrast this estimate with the magnitude of the wage increases made necessary by the
minimum wage changes we analyze. Across all workers in low wage occupations, the
required increase averaged around $0.30.22 This dollar value corresponds to a roughly
3 percent increase from the $11 mean wage for low wage occupations. The dollar in-
crease associated with having older workers implied by the Mincer estimate thus has a
magnitude of just over half the wage increase required by the minimum wage changes


   22 This estimate requires rough integration over the percentiles that are reported in the OES data. At the
10th, 25th, and 50th percentiles for low wage occupations, the average minimum wage increase we analyze
forced wages to rise by roughly $1, $0.50, and $0.10, respectively. For the top half of the distribution, there
is essentially no effect.

                                                      15
(comparing 1.75 percent to 3 percent).
   Therefore, although the level of our effect is quite small, the implied effect per dollar
minimum wage increase is quite large. The equivalent estimate for changes in edu-
cational attainment are much more modest. We estimate that workers in low wage
occupations are 0.6 ppts less likely to lack a high school diploma following a minimum
wage increase. In the Mincer regression, we estimate a 35 log point return to having
high school or some college education. Multiplied by the modest 0.6 ppt estimate, this
implies a 0.2 percent increase in dollar terms which is on the order of 7 percent of the
wage increase required by the minimum wage changes.
   Thus the education effects are much smaller in magnitude than the age effects in
dollar terms as well. When we probe these effects further, we find that the high school
diploma effect operates primarily via the age effects. In panel B of Appendix Table A.2,
we do not see effects for older adults without a high school diploma, but rather among
young workers who may not have completed their schooling yet. We return to this point
in section 6 after discussing the job vacancy results.
   We next estimate a version of equation 1 that tracks the dynamics of the minimum
wage effect. Specifically, we allow for interactions between state group ( Increasers ) and
indicators for each year in event time before and after the first minimum wage change.
The omitted category is the year prior to the first minimum wage change. We plot the
coefficients in Figure 2 for three dependent variables: Age, Young Adult, and Dropout.
The other outcomes (Older Adult and High School/Some College) mirror these. For
all outcomes, effects emerge only after the first minimum wage increase ­ we see no
evidence of differential trends prior to minimum wage increases. Furthermore, effects
widen with time since the first minimum wage increase took effect. It could be that the
employment stock updates more slowly than, say, new hires, or because firms make a
variety of gradual adjustments (for example, it may take time to adopt different pro-


                                            16
duction technologies that necessitate more-skilled workers).23 Effects may also widen
because minimum wage policy compounds ­ each state had at least two increases over
this time period. In section 5, we obtain a better understanding of the underlying mech-
anisms for these dynamics with the BGT data.
   We also explore different functional forms. Appendix Table A.1 reports results from
regressions that use the linear, contemporaneous minimum wage (including inflation-
pegged increases) as the key explanatory variable. We also report coefficients on the
Indexer*After variable from the main specification. In the linear specification, age ef-
fects remain strongly statistically distinguishable from zero, while education effects are
small and insignificant. Results are attenuated in the linear specification because ef-
fects for inflation-indexed minimum wage changes tend to be small and insignificant.
As in Brummund and Strain (2018), it is clear that states operating under inflation in-
dexing regimes have had different experiences than states implementing new statutory
increases. Another way to see this is in appendix figure A.1, which explores whether
effects vary with the size of the minimum wage increase (also including inflation-pegged
increases). Consistent with the non-linearities discussed above, we find only small effects
for the smallest minimum wage increases, and larger effects (of similar magnitudes) for
medium and large minimum wage increases.24
   We next examine whether effects are present for higher earning occupations. Figure
3 provides a summary of this analysis. Here we present estimates separately for each
wage decile. We also disaggregate the low-wage group into the bottom three occupations
("very low") and the remainder (labeled with "1"). We estimate equation 1 separately

  23 See   Meer and West (2016), Sorkin (2015), and Aaronson et al. (2018).
  24 As  noted above, the labor-labor substitution channel falls in the middle of the chain of effects one
might naturally anticipate as the minimum wage becomes increasingly binding. For example, to accommo-
date a small minimum wage change a firm might impose stronger effort requirements, before substituting
for higher-skilled labor, and then finally replacing workers with capital or shutting down production. As
jobs disappear altogether, the minimum wage's effects on the skill mix of those employed may flatten or
even reverse.

                                                     17
for each group using the full set of controls. The very low and the remainder of the
low-wage occupations exhibit pronounced responses, with magnitudes for the very low
wage group roughly double the magnitudes for the remainder. For higher deciles, the
estimates are, with few exceptions, very close to zero. Appendix Table A.3 provides
regression coefficients for the aggregated occupation groups and confirms that occupa-
tions that earn well above the minimum wage see no effect. This result is reassuring in
that if states that implement minimum wage hikes were already seeing broad-based skill
increases, we would expect to see these trends in higher-paying occupations as well.
   Finally, Appendix Table A.4 reports results for other outcomes. We explore a range
of demographic characteristics, including race, gender, foreign-born status, and whether
the individual recently migrated from another U.S. state. With few exceptions, estimates
are small in magnitude and statistically insignificant.25



4.3    Employment

   We have presented evidence of modest upskilling among those employed in low-
wage jobs. The average skill level could rise either because the least-skilled are replaced
with higher-skilled workers or because the jobs held by the least-skilled individuals
simply disappear. Table 5 presents evidence on the employment, hours, and weeks
worked in each of the occupation groups.26 We find that the impacts of the minimum
wage on each of the outcomes are small, economically and/or statistically.
   In Panel A, we explore the population share of those employed in a given occupa-
tion group. There is a marginally significant positive effect for low-wage occupations;


  25 The immigration margin is of potential interest in light of analysis by Smith (2012), who finds evi-
dence that adult immigrants sometimes replace teenagers upon their arrival in a labor market. However,
we do not see a relationship between the minimum wage and this type of substitution.
  26 We include full controls except the employment rate and occupation fixed effects, since the dependent
variables in this analysis involve occupation-specific employment.

                                                   18
the magnitude is small and we can rule out employment declines larger than one hun-
dredth of one percentage point and employment increases larger than one quarter of one
percentage point with 95 percent confidence. This is accompanied by a small decline in
employment within modest wage occupations. Panel B shows that, among the em-
ployed, low-wage occupations do not lose their employment share following minimum
wage increases. It also gives an indication that the more-skilled workers found in low-
wage occupations might be coming from those previously employed in modest-wage
occupations. The latter lose employment share, though the magnitudes are small.27
   Panels C and D show that, conditional on being employed, hours and weeks worked
by workers in low-wage occupations remain fairly constant. In the low-wage occupations
we see a modestly significant increase in weeks worked ­ on the order of one-fifth of
a week increase over the year ­ significant at the 5 percent level. In the high-wage
occupations we see a decrease of less than one-tenth of a week. Although this increase
is statistically significant, it is quite small, amounting to just over a 0.1 percent decrease
in weeks worked among individuals in high-wage occupations. Given the prevalence
of statistically insignificant point estimates in this table, we suspect this result is best
explained as a product of sampling variations.
   Overall, the effects we estimate on occupation-level employment are small. This
suggests that our results on the skills of those employed within low-wage occupations
are driven by a replacement of lower-skilled workers with higher-skilled workers, rather
than jobs held by the least-skilled workers simply disappearing.
   Thus far, we have found that total employment in low-wage occupations remains
fairly constant following a minimum wage increase, but that there is a decrease in the
likelihood that these jobs are held by the young and less educated. This makes it natural

  27 This is consistent with a supply-side force emphasized by Phelan (2016), whereby minimum wage
increases lead workers to prefer jobs in which wages rise to jobs which previously had modestly higher
wages but worse non-wage amenities.

                                                 19
to ask two questions. First, has overall employment among low-skilled groups declined,
and second, who are the slightly higher-skilled workers who have taken their place?
Table 6 speaks to these questions. Here we examine employment-to-population ratios
(epop) and the out-of-labor-force (olf) population share by demographic group. Panel
A provides a benchmark for the overall epop and olf share and shows that both dimen-
sions were unaffected by new minimum wage legislation. Estimates for the epop are
economically very small and, with full controls, we can rule out effect sizes outside of
plus or minus 0.4 percentage point with 95 percent confidence. Point estimates for the olf
share are small and statistically insignificant, though our 95 percent confidence interval
of [-0.2ppt, 0.8ppt] includes some increases that are fairly sizable.
   Panel B shows differential impacts by age group. All specifications include age group
main effects as well as our baseline or full sets of controls (columns 1 and 3, respectively).
To these controls, we add interactions of demographic group indicators with our mini-
mum wage policy variables, as well as interactions with the state and year fixed effects.28
   Focusing first on the coefficient for Increaser*After, we see that the epop fell for the
omitted category, Age 16-21. For example, in column 3 with full controls, we find a
nearly 1 ppt drop in employment probability for this group following a new minimum
wage law.29 Columns 3-6 show increases in the olf rate for young adults that are almost
the same magnitude as the epop declines. This result implies that the epop decline
largely manifests through an increased propensity to be out of the labor market, as
opposed to being unemployed.


  28 Weexclude occupation fixed effects and the employment rate because the dependent variable is
employment. All regressions in panel B also include indexer indicators interacted with demographic
group.
  29 Thisestimate is in line with prior estimates from Clemens and Strain (2018a), who analyze the same
minimum wage changes using the same data with a modestly different specification. In panel B of table 7,
Clemens and Strain (2018a) report an estimate of negative two percentage points for employment among
individuals ages 16 to 21 in states that enacted particularly large minimum wage changes, and an estimate
just under one percentage point in states that enacted relatively modest minimum wage changes.

                                                   20
    The interaction terms indicate the differential impact of minimum wage changes on
older workers. Estimates for the epop are positive, significant, and at slightly larger
magnitudes than the main effect. Thus, the reduction in employment of the young is
drawn from slightly higher epops of prime age workers. The overall effects for these
older age groups (the sum of the coefficient for their own category and the main effect)
are modestly positive, and offset the impact on the young. Because these overall effects
are small, it is difficult to tease out whether increased employment of older workers is
sourced from those who were previously out of the labor force or the unemployed. Point
estimates on the interaction terms for the olf rate suggest that older workers were drawn
mainly from the unemployed, though this conclusion depends on the specification; stan-
dard errors are such that we cannot rule out the effects are driven entirely by one margin
or the other.



5    The Minimum Wage and Skill Requirements in Vacancy

     Postings

    Results from the ACS indicate a shift in the composition of the low-wage workforce.
However, these outcomes are equilibrium effects on the stock of employment. Minimum
wage increases may have effects on the supply of workers as well as employers' labor
market practices (Acemoglu, 2001; Flinn, 2006; Adams et al., 2018). Consequently, the
underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Further, because the ACS contains no informa-
tion on the firms that employ these workers, it is difficult to examine whether within-
or between-firm changes are driving the results. We now focus on job postings, which
allow us to make progress on these issues while investigating one of the first channels
through which firms might act, should they desire to change their skill mix.



                                           21
5.1    Burning Glass Data

   Our data consist of over 100 million electronic job postings in the United States from
2011-2016. These job postings were collected and assembled by Burning Glass Technolo-
gies (BGT), an employment analytics and labor market information firm. BGT obtains
job postings from some 40,000 online job boards and company websites. It then parses
and de-duplicates the postings into a systematic, machine-readable form. Thanks to
the breadth of coverage, BGT believes its database captures a near-universe of online
job postings. The posting-level data were first used by Hershbein and Kahn (2018) to
study changes in skill requirements and production technology following the Great Re-
cession.30
   The key advantages of our data are its breadth and detail. The BGT data contain
about 70 possible fields for each vacancy. We exploit detailed information on occupa-
tion, geography, skill requirements, and firm identifiers. The codified skills include the
traditional stated education and experience requirements.31 They also include thou-
sands of "key word" skills standardized from open text in each job posting.32 Deming
and Kahn (2018) distill these thousands of words into a categorization of 10 general
skills. We use three of these in our analysis, namely "Customer Service," "Cognitive,"
and "Non-cognitive," and also add an English-language requirement and a computer



  30 The dataset used in the current paper was provided in April 2017. Although BG's algorithms for
removing duplicates and coding ad characteristics changes over time, each iteration is applied to all
postings in the data. The database also includes years 2007 and 2010, but unfortunately lacks postings
from 2008 and 2009. We focus on the window around the recent statutory minimum wage increases that
also avoids the Great Recession and its early recovery. Results are similar if we include the 2010 data.
  31 Ads  can specify a minimum requirement and a preferred requirement. We use the minimum, as it is
much more prevalent, and classify an ad to a single category based on the minimum necessary (e.g., an
ad for a job requiring a Ph.D. will not also be coded as requiring a high school diploma).
  32 For example, an ad might ask for a worker who is bilingual or who can organize and manage a team.
BGT cleans and codes these and other skills into a taxonomy of thousands of unique but standardized
requirements. Beginning with a set of pre-defined possible skills, BGT uses machine learning technology
to search text in an ad for an indication that the skill is required.

                                                  22
skill requirement.33
   The BGT data are not without disadvantages. First, vacancy postings represent the
stated preferences of firms rather than details of the process by which the position was
actually filled. We view these data as capturing a potential first line of firms' responses
to minimum wage policy.
   A second issue to consider is representativeness. That the BGT data only cover post-
ings on the internet is a drawback, though by 2014 between 60 and 70 percent of all job
postings could be found online (Carnevale et al., 2014).34 Vacancies in general will be
somewhat skewed towards certain areas of the economy since they overrepresent grow-
ing firms (Davis et al., 2013). However, two-thirds of hiring is replacement hiring (Lazear
and Spletzer, 2012). In the high-churn, low-paying occupations of primary interest for
minimum wage analyses, we have a good deal of coverage.
   Figure 4 shows the occupation distribution of BGT compared to the employment
distribution in OES over the same years. Of course, stock of employment does not nec-
essarily equal vacancy postings for a number of reasons, but it gives some intuition for
where BGT might be lacking in coverage. Note that all low-wage occupations (indicated
with red triangles) are below the 45-degree line, meaning they are underrepresented in
BGT relative to OES employment. However, they still have a large presence: for example,
cashiers (SOC code 4120) make up 4 percent of all ads posted and servers (SOC code


  33 The  Customer Service requirement includes any ad with one of the following key words: "customer,"
"sales," "client," "patient." Non-cognitive skill requirement includes the key words "organized," "detail-
oriented," "multi-tasking," "time management," "meeting deadlines," "energetic." Computer require-
ment is a range of programs and languages that BGT classifies. Cognitive skill requirements involve the
keywords "research," "analy*," "decision," "solving," "math," "statistic," or "thinking." English requires
the ad to have the keyword "English."
  34 Carnevale  et al. (2014) show that the occupation-industry composition of the BGT data are similar
to that of the Conference Board's Help Wanted Online Index. Moreover, the authors audited a sample
of job postings in the BGT database and compared them to the actual text of the postings, finding that
the codings for occupation, education, experience were at least 80 percent accurate. This figure should be
higher in our extract since BGT regularly revises and attempts to improve its algorithms, applying them
retroactively on the complete historical database of postings.

                                                   23
3530) make up 1.6 percent. Importantly, panel B shows that there are few changes to the
composition of the data over time. Here, we map the 2011-13 deviation of occupation
share between BGT and OES on the 2014-16 deviation. If representation has remained
constant over the two time periods, points will line up on the 45 degree line. For the
most part, this is exactly what we see. That there are not large shifts in the BGT occu-
pation distribution, relative to OES employment, over our time period is reassuring that
results using BGT are internally valid.35
   To better understand any changes to representativeness as a function of minimum
wage law, we compare the occupation ad share in the state and year in BGT data to
the occupation employment share in OES data. We regress the deviation between the
two occupation shares on our key right hand side variables. Results are reported in Ap-
pendix Table A.5, panel A.36 The coefficient on Increaser*After indicates whether there
is a systematic change in representativeness in BGT for the baseline occupation group,
low-wage occupations, and the interactions with other occupation groups show whether
there is any differential effect. The coefficients tend to be very small and statistically in-
significant in our baseline specifications. The dependent variable (the deviation between
occupation shares) averages zero with a standard deviation of roughly 0.01. The point
estimates are all at least an order of magnitude smaller than 0.01 and the standard errors
are one to two orders of magnitude smaller. In the specification with the fewest controls,
the coefficients are statistically significant, though still very small in magnitude. But the
magnitudes fall and become statistically insignificant with the inclusion of the two-way
fixed effects. Once we control for the small differential changes in representativeness


  35 See also Hershbein and Kahn (2018) who discuss the representativeness of the BGT data at great
length in their data appendix. They show that the distribution of ads across occupations is fairly stable
over time.
  36 Because OES data are a three-year moving average, we restrict attention to OES years 2013 and 2016,
and link to BGT averages from 2011-2013 and 2014-2016, respectively. Similarly, our "after" variable and
applicable control variables are three-year averages.

                                                   24
across occupations over time (occupation-by-year effects), we see no differential changes
in our comparisons between states that enacted new statutory minimum wage increases
and states that did not. Appendix Table A.5 is therefore reassuring that our analysis
using the Burning Glass data is internally consistent.
    With ad-level data, we can measure the relationship between skill requirements and
the minimum wage at fairly high frequencies. We aggregate to the monthly level and
continue to classify occupations at the four-digit SOC level. We therefore link state
minimum wage variables on a monthly basis. We estimate regressions at either the
occupation-state-date (year-month) level, weighting by OES employment to peg the BGT
sample more closely to the ACS, or the firm-occupation-state-date level, weighting by ad
share within occupation-state-date multiplied by OES employment for precision. Our
weighting for the more disaggregated cells allows us to estimate regression specifications
at any level of aggregation and obtain the same result.
    We restrict our main BGT sample to observations for which the variable linking the
ad to an employer is non-missing. We further restrict to employers that regularly post
jobs in low-wage occupations, defined as those that post in at least 20 months and 20
states.37 We show below that these criteria generally do not impact our main results, but
are helpful for interpreting specifications in which we include firm fixed effects. Fur-
thermore, panels B and C of Appendix table A.5 shows that the probability of meeting
our sample criteria does not vary systematically with minimum wage changes, again,
once we include occupation-by-year effects.38
    The bottom panel of Table 3 summarizes skill requirements found in the BGT data.
There is a clear positive correlation between the likelihood of an education requirement

  37 The restriction on non-missing firm drops 35 percent of low-wage ads, while the coverage restriction
drops 25 percent of remaining ads. Ads with a missing firm are likely posted by a recruiter's website.
  38 These panels report regression analysis for the share of ads in an occupation-state-month cell that
meet various sample selection criteria. Once occupation-by-year fixed effects are included, coefficients on
our key minimum wage variables are tiny and insignificant.

                                                    25
and an occupation's position in the wage distribution; for example, 30.4 percent of low-
wage job ads have an explicitly-stated education requirement, while 69.2 percent of high-
wage jobs have one. Hershbein and Kahn (2018) show that the prevalence of education
requirements are strongly correlated with the education level of employed workers at the
occupation and MSA levels. At the same time, requirements that appear in job postings
may not translate one-for-one into the requirements imposed in practice.
   The bottom rows of Table 3 give cell sizes and the number of ads posted overall and
within each occupation-state-month cell. For low-wage occupations, we have over 37,000
cells, nearly 5.7 million ads, and an average of 150 ads per cell.
   Our empirical analysis focuses primarily on the high school diploma requirement
because it is objective and has substantial relevance to minimum wage occupations. It
translates directly into the demographics analyzed in the ACS: increases in an enforced
high school requirement will both reduce employment by high school dropouts and
reduce employment among individuals 18 and younger. We also present results for the
other skill requirements summarized in Table 3. However, at baseline, some of these
requirements (computer skills, cognitive skills, and English language) are much less
prevalent among low-wage occupations, so we might not expect as much of a response.



5.2   Results on Skill Requirements

   Figure 5 presents the raw relationship between state-level changes in the minimum
wage and the prevalence of the high school diploma requirement. A positive correlation
is most evident for low-wage occupations. States with large minimum wage increases
saw larger increases in the prevalence of the high school requirement, on average, than
either states with small minimum wage increases or states with no minimum wage
increases. In contrast, the best-fit lines are fairly flat for the modest-, middle-, and
high-wage groups, as presented in the remaining panels.


                                            26
    We next present estimates of equation 1 for the BGT data, where each observation
is an occupation-state-month cell. Table 7 shows the results for low-wage occupations,
with the high school requirement as the dependent variable. We find a positive, and sta-
tistically significant increase in the prevalence of the high school diploma requirement
in states that enacted new statutory minimum wage increases. In our least-controlled
specification, the estimated effect is an increase of 1.9 percentage points in the share of
jobs with a high school diploma requirement. Column 3 shows that we obtain a moder-
ately larger estimate, of 3.2 percentage points, when we control for state-time variation
in macroeconomic conditions, as well as for occupation-by-date and occupation-by-state
fixed effects. This 3.2 ppt increase translates into a 12 percent increase (off a base of 26
percent).39
    We can again benchmark the magnitude of this skill increase using the earnings dif-
ferentials that are predicted by a Mincerian regression of earnings on age and education.
The differential associated with having a high-school educated worker is 35 log points.
A 3.2 ppt increase in the skill requirement thus corresponds with a 1.1 percent earnings
differential (3.2 × 0.35 = 1.1 percent). This is roughly a third the size of the average
increase in wages imposed by the minimum wage hikes in our sample (that is, the im-
posed wage increase averaged roughly 3 percent). This falls between the estimates we
found for increases in age (1.75 percent) and education (0.2 percent) among individuals
employed in low-wage occupations in the ACS.
    Figure 6 shows the event study version of equation 1 for high school requirements.
We include the controls listed in column 3. To reduce noise, we aggregate from the


   39 Thefact that the inclusion of macroeconomic controls results in a larger point estimate is not entirely
surprising, as the statutory minimum wage increases were more prevalent in states that experienced
strong housing recoveries and overall economic growth (Clemens and Strain, 2017). Failing to control for
these developments will tend to attenuate estimates of the effects of minimum wage increases over this
time period. Notably, however, the inclusion of these controls has only modest implications for the ACS
analysis presented in the previous section.

                                                     27
month to the quarter level. The omitted category is the quarter prior to the first minimum
wage change. There are no obvious trends prior to that first change, but there is a
marked increase immediately following that first change. The elevated level is consistent
through the full range of the post-increase data (20 months). Estimated effects are fairly
constant here, while in the ACS data we observed impacts on worker demographics that
increased with time since the first minimum wage increase (Figure 2). This combination
of findings is consistent with the interpretation that stock variables take time to reflect
changes in employment flows. The sharp response of text in job postings may also
be related to lags between the legislation and enactment of minimum wage increases.
That is, forward looking firms may begin contemplating personnel changes when wage
increases are legislated, then implement those change when increases go into effect.
   Appendix Table A.6 explores robustness to our main sample selection criteria for
low-wage occupations. Here we explore samples that relax or strengthen the require-
ment that firms post regularly in low-wage occupations. With full controls (column 3),
results are very similar across samples regardless of the restriction. Failing to control
for variations in macroeconomic conditions results in statistically insignificant point es-
timates in analyses of two of the alternative samples.40 Looking across samples, the
analysis reveals further that changes in skill requirements were stronger among firms
that advertise for low-skilled workers with regularity, compared to those that hire such
workers sporadically.
   Appendix Figure A.1 and Table A.1 explore how effects vary with the size of the mini-
mum wage increase. In general, we do not see effects for states that had inflation-indexed
increases and effects level off for large compared to medium increases. Nonetheless, we
report results from a linear specification in panel D of Appendix Table A.1. With the full

  40 This reveals, once again, the importance of accounting for the fact that recent minimum wage in-
creases have been enacted primarily by states that were experiencing relatively strong economic expan-
sions.

                                                 28
set of controls included, a one-dollar increase in the minimum wage is associated with
a statistically significant increase of 1.4 percentage points in the share of low-wage job
postings that require a high school diploma.
   Figure 7 shows estimates separately by decile of the occupation's 10th percentile
wage. We again break the bottom three occupations out into a "Very Low" category.
Effects are concentrated at the bottom of the distribution, with the largest impact seen
among bottom-decile occupations excluding those we classify as "Very Low." One pos-
sible explanation is that high school diploma requirements are a less important screen-
ing mechanism for those three lowest-ranked occupations, as evidenced by their lower
prevalence at baseline: only about 16 percent of Very Low wage occupations post a high
school requirement, compared to 31 percent for the remainder. Expressed as percent
changes, our point estimates are thus quite similar for the "Very Low" and "Low" wage
groups.
   Coefficients for the remaining deciles in the distribution are smaller and tend to be
statistically insignificant. The third, fourth, and fifth deciles have sizeable point estimates
that are marginally significant. The modest and middle wage occupation groups have
the largest propensity to post a high school requirement. In percent changes, effects
are monotonically decreasing with the decile of the occupation's 10th percentile wage
(except for the second decile where we see no effect). Appendix Table A.3 provides re-
gression results for ads across broader occupation groups. Coefficients are uniformly
smaller for modest-, middle-, and high-wage occupations than for low-wage occupa-
tions, and tend to be statistically insignificant. The average point estimate across these
higher-skilled groups is less than one-fifth of the point estimate associated with the low-
wage occupations and has a t-statistic of less than 1.
   Appendix Table A.7 examines other outcomes. Reassuringly, we see no effect on the
propensity to require a college degree. Given the low representation of college graduates


                                              29
and college degree requirements among low-wage occupations (Table 3), we would not
have expected to see any adjustment on this margin.
   With respect to other skill requirements, our preferred specification yields a statisti-
cally significant and positive point estimate on the "customer service" requirement and
statistically significant and negative point estimates on the "cognitive" and "computer
skills" requirements. We interpret these results with caution, as these estimates are less
stable than our high school diploma finding across alternative specifications. Further,
the observed mix of positive and negative point estimates makes it difficult to connect
this set of results to a coherent theory. One pattern of potential note is that we find an
increase in the most common of the remaining skill requirements following minimum
wage hikes (customer service), while we observe a decrease in two of the least common
of the remaining skill requirements (computer and cognitive skill). This pattern could
be viewed as consistent with the idea that minimum wage occupations become more
specialized following minimum wage increases. Specialization may, in turn, be associ-
ated with a decrease in opportunities for improving on skills outside of the relatively
narrow customer service function. Finally, the customer service result is consistent with
the idea that minimum wage hikes may increase investments in capital equipment, like
automated ordering kiosks, which come with hands-on customer service requirements
in their initial years (Lordan and Neumark, 2018; Aaronson and Phelan, 2017).41
   Finally, we investigate whether the increase in high school requirements is being
driven by changes within or between firms. Recall, above we discussed that labor-labor
substitution might occur because the composition of jobs shifts towards firms that em-
ploy slightly higher skilled workers (between firm) or because a given firm substitutes
its lower skilled workers for slightly higher skilled (within firm). For this analysis, we
disaggregate the data to state-month-occupation-firm cells. In table 8, we present esti-

  41 We   thank an anonymous referee for highlighting this connection.

                                                   30
mates of equation 1, beginning with the full controls specification that was discussed
previously. As replicated in column 1, statutory minimum wage increases are associated
with a 3.2 percentage point increase in the prevalence of high school requirements. To
this specification we then sequentially add firm, firm-by-state, and firm-by-year fixed
effects.
    In specifications that include firm fixed effects, we find that new statutory minimum
wage increases predict a 1 percentage point ( p < .05) increase in the prevalence of
the high school requirement. This means that the between-firm margin of adjustment
can account for roughly two-thirds of the overall effect, while the within-firm margin
accounts for roughly one-third. This is consistent with recent work by Sorkin (2015)
and by Aaronson et al. (2018), who emphasize the importance of firm-level exit and
entry for understanding the minimum wage's long-run effects. That being said, even
accounting for variation across firms in posting behavior, average differences within a
firm across states, and changes within firm over time, we still find a sizable role for
within firm responses to minimum wage policy. The effect is statistically significant and
economically meaningful. This latter specification also helps to alleviate concerns that
omitted variables drive our result. Controlling for the typical posting behavior of a firm,
controlling for how the firm typically posts in a given state, and controlling flexibly for
nationwide changes in firm posting behavior over time, we still find evidence of a shift
towards more productive workers within firms.



6    Discussion

    In this section we discuss how our analyses of data from the ACS and BGT relate
to one another, as well as how they relate to the conceptual framework we sketched in
section 2. We first discuss the potential mix of supply and demand side forces underlying



                                            31
our results. We then discuss the relationship between the results we find on age and
education in the ACS and BGT data. Finally, we discuss the magnitudes of our estimates
as they relate to the cost increases firms experience following minimum wage increases.



6.1   The Roles of Labor Demand and Supply

   There are several potential explanations for the changes we observe in both employ-
ment and posted skill requirements. The most direct demand-side explanation is that
employers are searching for and finding more-productive employees in response to in-
creased labor costs. A second, complementary explanation is that there may also be a
change in the composition of firms that choose to post vacancies and make hires. Firms
that use unusually low-skilled labor, for example, might be replaced by firms who use
higher-skilled workers for similar occupations.
   Among these demand side explanations, our analysis suggests important roles for
both. Both our ACS and BGT analyses are consistent with the view that demand shifted
towards higher-skilled workers both within and across firms. Either margin may explain
our findings in the ACS, which capture the stocks of workers employed in low-wage
occupations. Our BGT analysis, which allows us to track firms across both time and
space, can affirmatively rule in both the within- and across-firm margins (see table 8).
The between firm margin operates through an increase in employment share of firms
employing higher skilled workers. Because we found no overall change in employment
levels or shares across occupation groups, it must be that the firms employing higher
skilled workers saw an increase in their employment levels, while firms employing lower
skilled workers saw a reduction.42 As posited above, the gain among higher skilled firms
can happen because their competitors face a binding cost shock.


  42 Additionalanalysis of the number of postings in the BGT data is consistent with this result. In
Appendix Table A.8, we report no change in the number of postings across occupation groups.

                                                32
    Two of our findings point to likely roles for supply side factors. First, our ACS
analysis finds that young and low education workers are replaced by older workers.
This appears to involve some combination of labor market entry and shifts of older
workers across occupations.43 Because employment increases are quite diffuse across
individuals in higher age groups, however, we cannot speak with precision to who these
individuals are.
    Second, our BGT analysis suggests that minimum wage increases led to changes in
skill requirements for some occupations that are not directly affected by the minimum
wage. As noted in the discussion of our conceptual framework, the pre-screening func-
tion of vacancy postings can lead posted requirements to change in response to actual
or expected changes in the supply of applicants. If a minimum wage increase leads
low-skilled individuals to apply for jobs for which they are not qualified, pre-screening
requirements may rise even if firms do not plan to alter the skill mix of the workers they
ultimately hire. Notably, the occupations in which we observe these responses made
extensive use of the high-school diploma requirement at baseline. The pre-screening
margin thus appears to be a plausible rationale for these increases in requirements.



6.2    Age vs. Education

    We see robust evidence that employers increase stated preferences for a high school
diploma immediately following a minimum wage increase. In the ACS, we see commen-
surate decreases in employment probabilities for the young and less educated. As noted
previously, however, those results load primarily on age and not on education per se. It
is thus natural to ask how these analyses connect.
    Why might firms post education requirements as a means to, in practice, increase the


  43 This combination of factors is implied by the fact that we see neither a decline in overall employment
nor a decline in employment within low-wage occupations.

                                                    33
age of their typical employee? Several factors may be at work. First, it is important to
note that high school diploma requirements will mechanically impact the young, who
are precisely the age group within which we observe declines in employment. The
linkage between our ACS and BGT findings is thus more direct than one might initially
think. A second point is that the expected impact of a skill requirement depends on how
it will be interpreted by potential applicants. It is not unreasonable to speculate, as firms
seemingly do, that a high school diploma requirement may be an effective way to convey
that the very least-skilled applicants need not apply. Third, although the young are not
a protected class under federal anti-discrimination law (which explicitly protects those
over the age of 40), the young are nonetheless a protected class in several states. Given
that the federal law introduces age as a protected class, firms may simply prefer not
to appear to discriminate by age even in cases where it is not, strictly speaking, illegal.
They can instead accomplish a reduction in youth applications by posting a diploma
requirement.



6.3   Quantifying Adjustments in the Context of Firms' Costs

   We conclude this section by attempting to quantify the magnitudes of our estimates
relative to the cost increases firms experience as a result of minimum wage changes. On
this score, the analysis in the current paper complements our analysis in Clemens et al.
(2018). There, we provide evidence that this same set of minimum wage increases predict
modest declines in the likelihood that workers in low-wage occupations have employer
provided health insurance. While cost savings from reductions in coverage may help
firms to offset the added expense generated by minimum wage hikes, we estimate that
such cost savings are modest. The estimated reduction in health benefits offsets roughly
10 to 15 percent of the wage increase on an annual basis.
   Our analysis in the current paper finds that minimum wage increases lead to in-


                                             34
creases in the age and education of workers in low-wage jobs. In section 4.2, we used
a simple Mincerian earnings regression to assign a value to the estimated effects. There
we found that the age effect amounted to more than 50 percent of the mechanical min-
imum wage increase. In section 5.2, we conducted a similar exercise for increases in
posted high school diploma requirements. There we found that the effect on postings
amounted to roughly one third of the mechanical minimum wage increase. Were we to
equate Mincerian earnings differentials with productivity, we could then say that labor-
labor substitution allowed firms to offset a much larger fraction of the cost increase than
offsets associated with health insurance benefits.
    Between upskilling and declines in employer provided health insurance, our analyses
can thus account for roughly half to two-thirds of the increase in the cost of workers
in low-wage occupations. Other non-wage aspects of compensation, as well as non-
compensation job attributes like effort requirements, may bring this fraction closer to
one. Personnel policies thus appear capable of going a long way towards explaining
how firms respond to minimum wage changes.



7    Conclusion

    We investigate whether changes in firms' skill requirements are channels through
which labor markets respond to minimum wage increases. We present evidence on
two sets of outcomes: observable skill proxies and the skill requirements firms include
in online job postings. Data from the American Community Survey show that recent
minimum wage changes resulted in increases in the average age and education of the
individuals employed in low-wage jobs. Data on job vacancy postings show that the
prevalence of a high school diploma requirement increases at the same time. The shift
in skill requirements begins within the first quarter of a minimum wage hike. Further,



                                            35
it results from both within-firm shifts in postings and across-firms shifts towards firms
that sought more-skilled workers at baseline.
   Given the poor labor market outcomes of individuals without high school diplomas,
these findings have substantial policy relevance. This possibility was recognized well
over a century ago by Smith (1907), who noted that the "enactment of a minimum wage
involves the possibility of creating a class prevented by the State from obtaining employ-
ment." Further, negative effects may be exacerbated for minority groups in the presence
of labor market discrimination (Becker, 2010; Agan and Starr, 2017; Doleac and Hansen,
2016).
   Our analysis of the stock of employment is limited in at least two respects. First, ACS
data provides a fairly coarse look at the demographic characteristics of the employed,
and may thus miss many interesting margins along which employment patterns change.
Second, like most analyses of employment stocks, our ACS analysis is inevitably limited
to capturing short-to-medium run responses of margins that may take years to fully
adjust.
   While our data on vacancy postings allow us to shed light on a unique aspect of firms'
hiring behavior, there are limitations here as well. For instance, the BGT data do not
provide a perfectly representative picture of the job-vacancy landscape. Furthermore,
without being able to match stated requirements to realized hires, we cannot discern
whether firms successfully implement their formal requirements and we also cannot
observe whether firms without formal requirements achieve the same skill distribution
via informal hiring policy. However, the combination of an immediate shift in stated
requirements, as seen in the BGT data, accompanied by a gradual increase in the skill
level of the employed, as seen in the ACS data, suggests that we are indeed observing
labor-labor substitution in response to minimum wage hikes.
   In Clemens et al. (2018), we showed that these same minimum wage increases re-


                                           36
sulted in lower provision of employer provided health insurance in low-wage occupa-
tions. Our estimates imply that savings from reductions in coverage offset about 10
percent of wage increases generated by the minimum wage hikes, leaving a sizable role
for the shifting of rents to workers. The current paper's evidence on labor-labor substi-
tution suggests that productivity in minimum wage jobs simultaneously increased due
to changes in firms' hiring policies. We estimate that these effects can account for an
additional offset of roughly a third to 50 percent, based on standard Mincerian returns
to education and experience. Additional research on firms' hiring policies, production
processes, and compensation packages has the potential to further advance our under-
standing of firm-level responses to minimum wage increases.




                                           37
References
Aaronson, Daniel, "Price pass-through and the minimum wage," Review of Economics
 and statistics, 2001, 83 (1), 158­169.

   and Brian J Phelan, "Wage Shocks and the Technological Substitution of Low-Wage
  Jobs," The Economic Journal, 2017.

  , Eric French, and James MacDonald, "The minimum wage, restaurant prices, and
  labor market structure," Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43 (3), 688­720.

  , , Isaac Sorkin, and Ted To, "Industry Dynamics and the Minimum Wage: A Putty-
  Clay Approach," International Economic Review, 2018, 59 (1), 51­84.

Acemoglu, Daron, "Good Jobs versus Bad jobs," Journal of Labor Economics, 2001, 19 (1),
 1­21.

Adams, Camilla, Jonathan Meer, and Carly Will Sloan, "The Minimum Wage and
 Search Effort," NBER Working Paper 25128, 2018.

Agan, Amanda and Sonja Starr, "The effect of criminal records on access to employ-
 ment," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (5), 560­64.

Ahn, Tom, Peter Arcidiacono, and Walter Wessels, "The distributional impacts of min-
 imum wage increases when both labor supply and labor demand are endogenous,"
 Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2011, 29 (1), 12­23.

Altonji, Joseph G and Christina H Paxson, "Labor supply preferences, hours con-
  straints, and hours-wage trade-offs," Journal of labor economics, 1988, 6 (2), 254­276.

  and , "Labor supply, hours constraints and job mobility," Technical Report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research 1990.

Basker, Emek, Lucia Foster, and Shawn Klimek, "Customer-employee substitution: Ev-
  idence from gasoline stations," Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 2017, 26
  (4), 876­896.

Becker, Gary S, The economics of discrimination, University of Chicago press, 2010.

Bell, Brian and Stephen Machin, "Minimum wages and firm value," Journal of Labor
  Economics, 2018, 36 (1), 159­195.

Brummund, Peter and Michael R Strain, "Does Employment Respond Differently to
  Minimum Wage Increases in the Presence of Inflation Indexing?," Journal of Human
  Resources, 2018, pp. 1216­8404R2.

Card, David and Alan B. Krueger, Myth and measurement: the new economics of the mini-
  mum wage, Princeton University Press, 1995.

                                           38
Carnevale, Anthony P, Tamara Jayasundera, and Dmitri Repnikov, "The Online Col-
  lege Labor Market: Where the Jobs Are.," Georgetown University Center on Education
  and the Workforce, 2014.

Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer, "The effect of
  minimum wages on low-wage jobs," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (3),
  1405­1454.

Chen, Yuci, "Capital-Labor Substitution in Low-Skilled Labor-Intensive Manufacturing
 Industries in the United States," Working Paper, 2018.

Clemens, Jeffrey and Michael R. Strain, "Estimating the Employment Effects of Recent
  Minimum Wage Changes: Early Evidence, an Interpretative Framework, and a Pre-
  Commitment to Future Analysis," NBER Working Paper 23084, 2017.

   and , "Minimum Wage Analysis Using a Pre-Committed Research Design: Evidence
  through 2016," Technical Report, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) 2018.

  and Michael R Strain, "The Short-Run Employment Effects of Recent Minimum Wage
  Changes: Evidence from the American Community Survey," Contemporary Economic
  Policy, 2018, 36 (4), 711­722.

   and Michael R. Strain, "Implications of schedule irregularity as a minimum wage
  response margin," Applied Economics Letters, Forthcoming.

   and Michael Wither, "The minimum wage and the Great Recession: Evidence of
  effects on the employment and income trajectories of low-skilled workers," Journal of
  Public Economics, 2019, 170 (February), 53­67.

  , Lisa B Kahn, and Jonathan Meer, "The Minimum Wage, Fringe Benefits, and Worker
  Welfare," NBER Working Paper 24635, 2018.

Coviello, Decio, Erika Deserranno, and Nicola Persico, "Minimum Wage and Individ-
 ual Worker Productivity: Evidence from a Large US Retailer," Unpublished Working
 Paper, 2018.

Davis, Steven J, R Jason Faberman, and John C Haltiwanger, "The establishment-level
 behavior of vacancies and hiring," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (2),
 581­622.

Deming, David and Lisa B Kahn, "Skill requirements across firms and labor markets:
 Evidence from job postings for professionals," Journal of Labor Economics, 2018, 36 (S1),
 S337­S369.

Doleac, Jennifer L and Benjamin Hansen, "Does "ban the box" help or hurt low-skilled
 workers? Statistical discrimination and employment outcomes when criminal histories
 are hidden," NBER Working Paper 22469, 2016.

                                           39
Draca, Mirko, Stephen Machin, and John Van Reenen, "Minimum wages and firm
 profitability," American economic journal: applied economics, 2011, 3 (1), 129­51.
Dube, Arindrajit, T William Lester, and Michael Reich, "Minimum wage shocks, em-
 ployment flows, and labor market frictions," Journal of Labor Economics, 2016, 34 (3),
 663­704.
Even, William E and David A Macpherson, "The Teen Employment Crisis: The Effects
  of the 2007-2009 Federal Minimum Wage Increases on Teen Employment," Employment
  Policies Institute, Washington, DC, 2010.
Fairris, David and Leon Fernandez Bujanda, "The dissipation of minimum wage gains
  for workers through labor-labor substitution: evidence from the Los Angeles living
  wage ordinance," Southern Economic Journal, 2008, pp. 473­496.
Flinn, Christopher J, "Minimum wage effects on labor market outcomes under search,
  matching, and endogenous contact rates," Econometrica, 2006, 74 (4), 1013­1062.
Giuliano, Laura, "Minimum wage effects on employment, substitution, and the teenage
 labor supply: evidence from personnel data," Journal of Labor Economics, 2013, 31 (1),
 155­194.
Gopalan, Radhakrishnan, Barton H Hamilton, Ankit Kalda, and David Sovich, "State
 minimum wage changes and employment: Evidence from one million hourly wage
 workers," Available at SSRN 2963083, 2018.
Hamermesh, Daniel S, Labor Demand, Princeton University Press, 1996.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. and James Grant, "Econometric Studies of Labor-Labor Substi-
 tution and Their Implications for Policy," The Journal of Human Resources, 1979, 14 (4),
 518­542.
             eter and Attila Lindner, "Who Pays for the minimum Wage?," American
Harasztosi, P´
 Economic Review, 2019, 109 (8), 2693­2727.
Hershbein, Brad J and Lisa B Kahn, "Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-Biased Tech-
 nological Change? Evidence from Vacancy Postings," American Economic Review, 2018,
 108 (7), 1737­72.
Hirsch, Barry T, Bruce E Kaufman, and Tetyana Zelenska, "Minimum wage channels of
 adjustment," Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 2015, 54 (2), 199­239.
Horton, John, "Price Floors and Employer Preferences: Evidence from a Minimum Wage
 Experiment," Technical Report, CESifo Group Munich 2017.
Jardim, Ekaterina, Mark C Long, Robert Plotnick, Emma van Inwegen, Jacob Vigdor,
  and Hilary Wething, "Minimum Wage Increases and Individual Employment Trajec-
  tories," Working Paper 25182, National Bureau of Economic Research October 2018.

                                            40
Kahn, Lisa B, "The long-term labor market consequences of graduating from college in
 a bad economy," Labour Economics, 2010, 17 (2), 303­316.

Ku, Hyejin, "Does Minimum Wage Increase Labor Productivity? Evidence from Piece
 Rate Workers," Unpublished Working Paper, 2018.

Lazear, Edward P and James R Spletzer, "Hiring, churn, and the business cycle," Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 2012, 102 (3), 575­79.

Lemieux, Thomas, "The "Mincer Equation" Thirty Years After Schooling, Experience,
  and Earnings," Jacob Mincer A Pioneer of Modern Labor Economics, 2006, pp. 127­145.

Lordan, Grace and David Neumark, "People versus machines: the impact of minimum
  wages on automatable jobs," Labour Economics, 2018, 52, 40­53.

Luttmer, Erzo FP, "Does the minimum wage cause inefficient rationing?," The BE Journal
  of Economic Analysis & Policy, 2007, 7 (1).

Meer, Jonathan and Jeremy West, "Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment Dy-
 namics.," Journal of Human Resources, 2016, 51 (2).

Mincer, Jacob A, "Schooling, Experience, and Earnings," NBER Books, 1974.

Monras, Joan, "Minimum wages and spatial equilibrium: Theory and evidence," Journal
 of Labor Economics, 2019, 37 (3), 853­904.

Neumark, David and Olena Nizalova, "Minimum wage effects in the longer run," Jour-
 nal of Human resources, 2007, 42 (2), 435­452.

  and William Wascher, "The Effects of Minimum Wages on Teenage Employment and
  Enrollment: Estimates from Matched CPS Data," Research in Labor Economics, 1996,
  pp. 25­64.

Obenauer, Marie Louise and Bertha Marie von der Nienburg, "Effect of Minimum-
 wage Determinations in Oregon," Bulletin of the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1915, July
 (176).

Phelan, Brian J, "Hedonic-Based Labor Supply Substitution and the Ripple Effect of
  Minimum Wages," Technical Report, Discussion paper, DePaul University 2016.

Simon, Kosali and Robert Kaestner, "Do minimum wages affect non-wage job at-
  tributes? Evidence on fringe benefits," ILR Review, 2004, 58 (1), 52­70.

Smith, Christopher L, "The impact of low-skilled immigration on the youth labor mar-
 ket," Journal of Labor Economics, 2012, 30 (1), 55­89.

Smith, HB Lees, "Economic theory and proposals for a legal minimum wage," The
 Economic Journal, 1907, pp. 504­512.

                                           41
Smith, Ralph E and Bruce Vavrichek, "The wage mobility of minimum wage workers,"
 Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1992, pp. 82­88.

Sorkin, Isaac, "Are there long-run effects of the minimum wage?," Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 2015, 18 (2), 306­333.

Vaghul, Kavya and Ben Zipperer, "Historical state and sub-state minimum
  wage data," Washington Center for Equitable Growth. http://equitablegrowth.
  org/workingpapers/historical-state-and-sub-state-minimum-wage-data, 2016.

Vistnes, Jessica, Kosali Simon, and Angshuman Gooptu, "The Impact of Minimum
  Wage Increases on the Provision of Employer-Sponsored Fringe Benefits," Working
  Paper, 2018.




                                        42
                                                    Figures and Tables


                                           Low Wage                                              Modest Wage
              1




                                                                        1
                                                                                                        SD
                                           DE
                            NH
              .5




                                                                        .5
                            SC                  MD NE
                                                         RI                           ME
                                                                                      WY
                            MS
                            TX
                            IA
                            PA       OR NJ SD      MN CA
                                                   NY
                                                      MA           DC
                                                                                      ND
                                                                                      ID
                                                                                      OK
                                                                                      KS
                                                                                      TX            NJ
                                                                                                          VT NE
                                                                                                           WV       RI
                            IL
                            LA
                            NV       WA     HI VT                                     IL      MT
                                                                                              FL              MN CA
              0




                                                                        0
                            TN
                            NM      FL       CT WV                                    UT
                                                                                      IA
                                                                                      NM      AZ DE MI           MA
                            KY
                            GA
                            AL      OH   MI                                           NC
                                                                                      AL
                                                                                      LA
                                                                                      NV
                                                                                      TN
                                                                                      WI
                                                                                      PA
                                                                                      VA      OHWA
                                                                                               AR      HI     NY
                            VA
                            ID
                            IN   MO AR                                                MS
                                                                                      KY
                                                                                      IN          CO CT    MD
                                                                                                                             DC
              -.5




                                                                        -.5
                            WI
                            OK      MT                                                GA
                                                                                      SC   MO                    AK
                            NC
                            WY
                            KS
                            UT                                                        NH       OR
                            ME      AZ CO
                                                      AK
              -1.5 -1




                                                                        -1.5 -1
                            ND
 Age Change




                        0              1            2         3                   0               1            2         3


                                       Middle Wage                                                 High Wage
              1




                                                                        1
                                                WV
              .5




                            KS
                            WI
                                                                        .5
                            MS
                            WY           DE SD MD                                     UT
                            UT
                            ND
                            NV
                            LA
                            GA
                            NC   MO MT                                                VA
                                                                                      NC
                                                                                      AL         AR DE      MD
                                                                                      PA        MT   NJ
              0




                                                                        0
                            IA
                            VA
                            OK                     NE CA                                        AZ
                            IL
                            TN
                            TX
                            PA
                            AL      FL
                                    AZ
                                    OHWA
                                     AR
                                        CO
                                          NJ CTVT NY MA                               LA
                                                                                      KY
                                                                                      GA
                                                                                      IL
                                                                                      TN   MO             CT   MN MARI
                                                                                                               NY
                            ME       OR MI  HI           RI                           TX
                                                                                      MS
                                                                                      NV
                                                                                      WI
                                                                                      KS
                                                                                      IN
                                                                                      ID
                                                                                      SC
                                                                                      IA        OH
                                                                                                FL      HI        CA
                            KY
                            IN
                            NM
                            SC                     MN              DC                 NH
                                                                                      NM
                                                                                      OK         ORCOMI     WV               DC
              -.5




                                                                        -.5


                            ID                                                                                 NE AK
                                                                                                  WA
                            NH                                                        ME                 SDVT
                                                        AK                            WY
                                                                                      ND
              -1.5 -1




                                                                        -1.5 -1




                        0              1            2         3                   0               1            2         3

                                                         Minimum Wage Change

Figure 1: Changes in Age of Employed (ACS) and Minimum Wage by State
Note: The figure presents scatter plots of the state-level change in average age of employed workers on the
state-level change in the minimum wage, separately by occupation group, using American Community
Survey (ACS) data. The age change is the average difference between the period before a given state en-
acted its first minimum wage increase to the period from the first change onwards (see Table 1). Minimum
wage changes on the x-axis are the total change for the state over the full time period. For states with no
minimum wage change, we use the modal change date of statutory increasers, 2014. We group occupa-
tions based on their decile of the 10th percentile wage distribution, as measured in the 2006 Occupational
Employment Statistics. "Low", "Modest", "Medium", and "High" wage occupations correspond to the
1st, 2-4, 5-7, and 8-10 deciles, respectively; see Table 2.




                                                                  43
                                         ACS effects in Low-Wage Occs (Statutory Increasers)
                                                         Age                                      Young Adult




                                                                                 .01
               .6
               .4




                                                                                 0
               .2




                                                                                 -.01
               0




                                                                                 -.02
               -.2
 Coefficient




                                         -3   -2    -1         0      1     2           -3   -2     -1   0      1   2


                                              High School Dropout
               -.015 -.01 -.005 0 .005




                                         -3   -2    -1         0      1     2

                                                                   Years Since First Change

Figure 2: Minimum Wage and Worker Skills (ACS) by Time Since First Increase
Note: The figure reports results of a version of Equation (1), with the full set of controls described in the
text, that allows for interactions between Increaser and each year before and after the first minimum wage
hike. The omitted category is the year before the first change. We plot coefficients and 95% confidence
bars, restricting the sample to low-wage occupations, using American Community Survey (ACS) data.




                                                                            44
                                                        Age                                                         Young Adult




                                                                                   -.03-.02-.01 0 .01
                 1
                 .5
                 0
                 -.5
                                        w




                                                                                                        w
                                                                            10




                                                                                                                                            10
                                        1

                                            2

                                                3

                                                    4

                                                        5

                                                            6

                                                                7

                                                                    8

                                                                        9




                                                                                                        1

                                                                                                            2

                                                                                                                3

                                                                                                                    4

                                                                                                                        5

                                                                                                                            6

                                                                                                                                7

                                                                                                                                    8

                                                                                                                                        9
                         Lo




                                                                                          Lo
 Coefficient
                ry




                                                                                   ry
               Ve




                                                                                  Ve
                                                    Dropout
                 -.03 -.02 -.01 0 .01
                                        w




                                                                            10
                                        1

                                            2

                                                3

                                                    4

                                                        5

                                                            6

                                                                7

                                                                    8

                                                                        9
                         Lo
                 ry
               Ve




                                                                Decile of 10th Ptile Wage

Figure 3: Worker Skill Outcomes (ACS) by Occupation Group
Note: The figure reports results of Equation (1), estimated separately by decile of their 10th percentile
wage (the bottom decile is split into the lowest three occupations, "very low", and the remainder in the
low category, "1"). We include full controls in all regressions and use American Community Survey (ACS)
data. We report coefficients and 95% confidence bars.




                                                                             45
                                                            Panel A: BGT and OES Occupation Shares
                                                                    Occupation Shares in BGT and OES



                                   .15
                                                                                              computer
                  BGT Occupation Share
                                 .1



                                                                                                         nurses
                    .05




                                                                                           driver
                                                              mgr     sales rep                                                  cashier
                                                                                   record clerk
                                                                 super-sales consultantadmin
                                                                                                                  server
                                                             super-cook                         material movers
                                                                                           teacher
                                                                             cook  janitor
                                                                        construction trades
                                   0




                                                      0                     .02                  .04                       .06
                                                                                    OES Occupation Share

                                                                          Low         Modest             Medium    High


                       Panel B: Changes in BGT-OES Deviation in Occupation Shares
                                                                                  Changes over Time
                                                .1
               2014-16 OES-BGT Share Difference




                                                                                                                                      computer
                                  .05




                                                                                           nurses
                                                                                  driver                 mgr
                                                                                                     sales rep

                                                                                          super-sales
                                                                                     consultant
                                                                                      super-cook
                                                                                    record clerk
                        0




                                                                               admin
                                                                         construction trades
                                                                         cook
                                                                       janitor
                                                                   teacher
                                                               cashier
                                                                     material movers
                                                             server
                                -.05




                                                     -.05                     0                  .05                             .1
                                                                           2011-13 OES-BGT Share Difference

                                                                         Low          Modest             Medium   High


Figure 4: Occupation Distributions in BGT and OES and Changes over Time
Note: Figure A plots occupation shares in Burning Glass (BGT) on occupation shares in Occupational
Employment Statistics (OES) for four-digit SOC occupations codes, averaged from 2011-2016. Figure B
plots the average deviation between OES and BGT in 2014-16 occupation shares on the average deviation
in 2014-16. Both figures include a 45 degree line.




                                                                                               46
                                                                   Low Wage                                                    Modest Wage
                                  .05 .1 .15                           HI




                                                                                                    .05 .1 .15
                                                                                AK
                                                   SC                                RI
                                                   NM
                                                   KS                                                                KY
 High School Requirement Change



                                                   NC
                                                   ME        OH           NE MA                DC                    TN            MI
                                                   TX
                                                   ID
                                                   GA
                                                   UT                                                                TX
                                                                                                                     SC            NJ
                                                                                                                                  DE  HI     NY MA RI
                                                   OK
                                                   TN
                                                   KY
                                                   AL
                                                   LA        OR DE
                                                                 MI SD
                                                                     CT
                                                                      VT
                                                                       MD
                                                                          NY CA                                      NC
                                                                                                                     GA
                                                                                                                     ID      OH                 CA
                                                   VA
                                                   MS        AR
                                                              WA
                                                              FL NJ                                                  NM
                                                                                                                     KS
                                                                                                                     IN
                                                                                                                     VA
                                                                                                                     NH
                                                                                                                     PA      MT
                                                                                                                             AZFLCO CT
                                                                                                                              OR
                                                   NH
                                                   PA
                                                   IN                  WV                                            UT
                                                                                                                     IL       AR          MD NE AK           DC
                                                   IA                                                                LA
                                                                                                                     AL
                                                                                                                     OK
                                                                                                                     NV        WA         WV        MN
                                                   ND
                                                   IL
                                                   WY        AZ                      MN                              MS
                                                                                                                     WI
                                  -.1 -.05 0




                                                                                                    -.1 -.05 0
                                                   NV        MT                                                      ME
                                                                                                                     WY
                                                                                                                     IA
                                                   WI                                                                ND   MO             VT
                                                        MO
                                                                  CO                                                                  SD



                                               0               1            2             3                      0              1             2          3


                                                               Middle Wage                                                       High Wage
                                  .05 .1 .15




                                                                                                    .05 .1 .15
                                                   SC
                                                                 NJ
                                                                 MI                                                  LA
                                                   MS
                                                   GA
                                                   NH                CT
                                                                    HI                         DC                    TX
                                                                                                                     SC                         AK
                                                   KY
                                                   NC
                                                   VA
                                                   NM
                                                   IL
                                                   KS
                                                   OK
                                                   TN
                                                   TX
                                                   AL
                                                           OHWADE
                                                            AR          MD NY CA RI                                  KS
                                                                                                                     IL
                                                                                                                     MS
                                                                                                                     IN
                                                                                                                     AL
                                                                                                                     KY
                                                                                                                     NV
                                                                                                                     PA
                                                                                                                     TN
                                                                                                                     VA
                                                                                                                     WI       AR DENJ HI MD     CA
                                                   ME
                                                   PA
                                                   NV      AZFL         WV NE MA
                                                                       VT                                            GA
                                                                                                                     NH
                                                                                                                     ID          COMI   CT   NE MARI
                                                                                                                                                   MN
                                                   IN
                                                   LA                             MN                                 NC
                                                                                                                     IA
                                                                                                                     OK       OR
                                                                                                                             OHWA      SD WV NY              DC
                                                                                                                     NM
                                                                                                                     UT
                                                        MO OR
                                  -.1 -.05 0




                                                                                                    -.1 -.05 0
                                                   WI                                                                        MTFL
                                                   ND
                                                   WY
                                                   UT          CO             AK                                     ME      AZ
                                                   ID
                                                   IA                                                                     MO
                                                                                                                     ND                  VT
                                                                                                                     WY
                                                                       SD
                                                             MT

                                               0               1            2             3                      0              1             2          3

                                                                                 Minimum Wage Change

Figure 5: Changes in High School Requirement (BGT) and Minimum Wage by State
Note: The figure presents scatter plots of the state-level change in the prevalence of high school require-
ments from Burning Glass (BGT) on the state-level change in the minimum wage, separately by occupation
group. The skill requirement change is the average difference between the period before a given state en-
acted its first minimum wage increase to the period from the first change onwards (see Table 1). Minimum
wage changes on the x-axis are the total change for the state over the full time period. For states with no
minimum wage change, we use the modal change date of statutory increasers, 2014. We group occupa-
tions based on their decile of the 10th percentile wage distribution, as measured in the 2006 Occupational
Employment Statistics. "Low", "Modest", "Medium", and "High" wage occupations correspond to the
1st, 2-4, 5-7, and 8-10 deciles, respectively; see table 2.




                                                                                              47
                                BGT High School Requirement
               .1
               .05
 Coefficient

               0
               -.05




                      -20          -10                    0                    10                   20

                                      Months Since First Change

Figure 6: Minimum Wage and Skill Requirements (BGT) by Time Since First Increase
Note: The figure reports results of an expanded version of Equation (1) with full controls that allows
for interactions between Increaser and each quarter before and after the first minimum wage hike. The
omitted category is the quarter before the first change. We display point-estimates and 95% confidence
bars for each quarter at their midpoint month in event time, restricting the sample to low-wage occupations
in Burning Glass Technologies (BGT) data.




                                                    48
                .06
                .04
                .02
 Coefficient

                0
                -.02
                -.04
                       w




                                                                                                10
                           1


                               2


                                   3


                                           4


                                                    5


                                                             6


                                                                      7


                                                                               8


                                                                                        9
                    Lo
                ry
               Ve




                                       Decile of 10th Ptile Wage

Figure 7: High School Requirement (BGT) by Occupation Group
Note: The figure reports results of equation (1), estimated separately by decile of their 10th percentile
wage (the bottom decile is split into the lowest three occupations, "Very Low", and the remainder in the
"Low" category). We include full controls in all regressions and use Burning Glass Technologies (BGT)
data. We report coefficients and 95% confidence bars.




                                                   49
                  Table 1: States with Minimum Wage Changes 2011-2016

              State                  Total Change ($) # Changes      Year of First Change
                                     Panel A: Statutory Increasers

              Alaska                      2.00               2              2015
              Arkansas                    0.75               2              2015
              California                  2.00                2             2014
              Connecticut                 1.35                3             2014
              Delaware                    1.00                2             2014
              District of Columbia        3.25                3             2014
              Hawaii                      1.25                2             2015
              Maryland                    1.50                2             2015
              Massachusetts               2.00                2             2015
              Michigan                    1.10                2             2015
              Minnesota                   1.75                2             2015
              Nebraska                    1.75                2             2015
              New Jersey                  1.13                2             2014
              New York                    1.75                3             2014
              Rhode Island                1.60                2             2015
              South Dakota                1.30                2             2015
              Vermont                     0.87                2             2015
              West Virginia               1.50                2             2015
              Mean                        1.68              2.22            2014
                                      Panel B: Inflation Indexers

              Arizona                      0.70             4               2012
              Colorado                     0.95              5              2012
              Florida                      0.74              4              2012
              Missouri                     0.40              3              2013
              Montana                      0.70              4              2012
              Ohio                         0.70              4              2012
              Oregon                       0.75              4              2012
              Washington                   0.80              4              2012
              Mean                         0.72            3.99             2012

              Overall mean                 1.34            2.84             2014
Note: The table summarizes minimum wage changes among states that had minimum wage increases
through statutory legislation between 2011 and 2016. The first column lists the total change across the
full time period. The second column lists the number of years within the time period where the July
minimum wage of that year differed from the July minimum wage in the preceding year. The last column
provides the year of the first minimum wage change within the time period. Means are based on American
Community Survey sample weights.




                                                  50
                       Table 2: Description of Low-Wage Occupations
     Occupation (SOC code)                         10th Ptile    Effective Min Wage Change
                                                     Wage     10th Ptile 25th Ptile 50th Ptile
                                    Panel A: Low Wage Occupations

     Food and Beverage Serving (3530)               $5.85      $1.27           $0.87       $0.30
     Other Food Prep/Serving (3590)                 $6.00      $1.34           $0.95       $0.39
     Entertainment Attendants (3930)                $6.04      $1.16           $0.64       $0.01
     Other Personal Care/Service (3990)             $6.40      $0.62           $0.03        $0
     Cooks and Food Prep (3520)                     $6.41      $0.90           $0.34        $0
     Retail Sales (4120)                            $6.57      $1.05           $0.47        $0
     Animal Care and Service (3920)                 $6.65      $1.03           $0.38        $0
     Building Cleaning/Pest Control (3720)          $6.66      $0.80           $0.18        $0
     Personal Appearance (3950)                     $6.71      $0.94           $0.29        $0
     Tour and Travel Guides (3970)                  $6.74      $0.45           $0.09        $0
     Baggage Porters/Bellhops/Concierges (3960)     $6.79      $0.38           $0.02        $0
     Textile/Apparel/Furnishing (5160)              $7.13      $0.89           $0.28        $0
                              Panel B: Aggregated Occupation Groups

     Low-Wage Occupations                                $6.39     $1.01       $0.47       $0.08
     Modest-Wage Occupations                             $8.17     $0.18       $0.05       $0.02
     Medium-Wage Occupations                            $10.83     $0.01        $0          $0
     High-Wage Occupations                              $18.52      $0          $0          $0
     All                                                $11.40     $0.22       $0.09       $0.02
Note: We group occupations based on their decile of the 10th percentile wage distribution, as measured in
the 2006 Occupational Employment Statistics (OES). "Low" wage occupations correspond to the bottom
decile, "Modest" to the 2-4th deciles, "Medium" to the 5-7th deciles, and `High" to the 8-10th deciles.
Panel A lists each 4-digit occupation in the "Low" group, and the 10th percentile wage of that occupation
in 2006 (from OES). We also provide the "Effective Minimum Wage Change", which gives the mechanical
amount that wages need to increase from their 2011-13 average level to comply with 2016 minimum wage
levels. Specifically, for state-occupation pairs, we calculate the gap between the OES 2013 wage and the
minimum wage in 2016 (or impute zero if wages in 2013 are already above the eventual minimum wage
in 2016), then average across states using OES employment weights. Panel B summarizes these estimates
for each occupation group. We choose 2013 as the benchmark year because OES data reflect 3-year rolling
averages and thus our benchmark year represents the 2011-2013 period.




                                                   51
                                    Table 3: Summary Statistics

              Occupation Group                    Low     Modest      Middle      High
                                       Panel A: ACS Variables

              Age                                  35.47     39.43      41.58     42.86
                                                  (14.07)   (13.11)    (12.21)   (11.51)
              Young adult (16-21)                  0.211    0.0900     0.0358    0.0126
                                                  (0.408)   (0.286)    (0.186)   (0.112)
              Older adult (50+)                    0.218     0.276      0.310     0.328
                                                  (0.413)   (0.447)    (0.462)   (0.469)
              High Dropout                         0.175     0.126     0.0534    0.0146
                                                  (0.380)   (0.332)    (0.225)   (0.120)
              High or Some College                 0.721     0.730      0.678     0.333
                                                  (0.448)   (0.444)    (0.467)   (0.471)

              Observations                        1224134 2188901     1832915    2660420
                                        Panel B: BGT Variables

              Any Education Requirement            0.304     0.462      0.549      0.692
                                                  (0.184)   (0.217)    (0.210)    (0.174)
              HS Requirement                       0.260     0.366      0.366      0.154
                                                  (0.154)   (0.198)    (0.212)    (0.183)
              College Requirement                 0.0248    0.0690      0.124      0.369
                                                 (0.0575)   (0.121)    (0.163)    (0.234)
              Any Experience Requirement           0.242     0.349      0.562      0.616
                                                  (0.146)   (0.189)    (0.203)    (0.174)
              Customer Service Requirement         0.483     0.392      0.410      0.355
                                                  (0.334)   (0.254)    (0.277)    (0.248)
              Non-Cognitive Skill Requirement      0.247     0.274      0.306      0.285
                                                  (0.134)   (0.186)    (0.202)    (0.173)
              Computer Requirement                0.0935     0.256      0.350      0.403
                                                 (0.0946)   (0.206)    (0.223)    (0.204)
              Cognitive Skill Requirement          0.138     0.206      0.293      0.397
                                                  (0.109)   (0.153)    (0.198)    (0.214)
              English Requirement                 0.0965     0.117     0.0704     0.0724
                                                 (0.0984)   (0.122)   (0.0947)   (0.0968)

              Number of Cells                     37402      88747     91347      98365
              Number of Ads                      5654233    6149536   5510750    8162036
              Ads per Cell                        151.2       69.3      60.3       83.0
Note: This table presents means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for key dependent variables, by
occupation group. We group occupations based on their decile of the 10th percentile within-occupation
wage distribution, as measured in the 2006 Occupational Employment Statistics. "Low", "Modest",
"Medium", and "High" wage occupations correspond to the 1st, 2-4, 5-7, and 8-10 deciles, respectively.
American Community Survey (ACS) variables are restricted to employed respondents and summarized
using sample weights. Burning Glass (BGT) data on job vacancy postings are at the 4-digit occupation-
state-date (year-month) level and summarized using OES state-occupation-year employment weights.
Customer service, non-cognitive skill, computer, cognitive skill, and English requirements are defined
in the manuscript; see Deming and Kahn (2018) for additional details.


                                                  52
      Table 4: Worker Skills (ACS) and Minimum Wages: Low Wage Occupations
                                                            Low Wage Occupations
                                                        (1)          (2)         (3)
                    Panel A:                                        Age
                    Increaser*After                   0.301***    0.259***    0.262***
                                                      (0.0796)    (0.0741)    (0.0785)

                    Panel B:                                 Young Adult (16-21)
                    Increaser*After                 -0.00886*** -0.00814*** -0.00972***
                                                     (0.00229)   (0.00226)     (0.00265)

                    Panel C:                                 Older Adult (50-64)
                    Increaser*After                 0.00648***   0.00552***    0.00554**
                                                     (0.00231)    (0.00204)    (0.00232)

                    Panel D:                               No High School Degree
                    Increaser*After                 -0.00622**   -0.00615**  -0.00589**
                                                     (0.00293)    (0.00287)   (0.00270)

                    Panel E:                             High School or Some College
                    Increaser*After                  0.00710*     0.00745*    0.00482*
                                                     (0.00370)    (0.00375)   (0.00278)

                    Observations                     1,224,134     1,224,132      1,224,132
                    Occ, State, and Year FE             Yes           Yes            Yes
                    Occ-by-Yr, Occ-by-State FE          No            Yes            Yes
                    Macroeconomic Controls              No            No             Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Each panel
reports a different dependent variable for regressions of the form specified in equation 1. Observations
are from the ACS 2011-16 waves, restricted to those age 16-64 who are employed in low-wage occupations
(see table 2). "Increaser*After" is an indicator equalling one if the state has any minimum wage increase
through statutory legislation AND the current year is on or after the first such increase. Macroeconomic
controls are the log of personal income, a housing price index, the employment rate in the state-year, an
indicator for whether an ACA Medicaid expansion is in effect in the state-year, the expansion indicator in-
teracted with an after 2013 indicator, and the health insurance market concentration for providers to large
and small firms. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Regressions also include an Indexer*After
interaction.




                                                       53
        Table 5: Minimum Wages and Employment (ACS), by Occupation Group

       Occupation Group              Low      Modest          Medium                           High
                                                   Wage Occupations
                                      (1)        (2)              (3)                           (4)
       Panel A:                   Employment Probability in the Population
       Increaser*After             0.00121*  -0.00275**        0.00134                      0.000529
                                  (0.000714) (0.00119)       (0.000954)                     (0.00125)

       Observations               11,936,824 11,936,824     11,936,824   11,936,824
       Panel B:                          Employment Share among the Employed
       Increaser*After              0.00159  -0.00387***      0.00189     0.000228
                                   (0.00103)  (0.00118)      (0.00126)    (0.00166)

       Observations               7,939,968  7,939,968     7,939,968      7,939,968
       Panel C:                     Usual Hours Worked Conditional on Employment
       Increaser*After             -0.0683     -0.0408       -0.0614       -0.00539
                                   (0.110)    (0.0704)      (0.0707)       (0.0501)

       Observations               1,224,134   2,188,901      1,832,915    2,660,420
       Panel D:                         Weeks Worked Conditional on Employment
       Increaser*After              0.196**    0.00504        0.00639      -0.0643**
                                   (0.0848)    (0.0665)       (0.0393)      (0.0281)

       Observations               1,224,134        2,188,901            1,832,915           2,660,420
       Full Controls                 Yes              Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. See Table
4. The table reports estimates of Equation (1). The dependent variable in panel A is an indicator equalling
1 if the individual is employed in the indicated occupation group and zero otherwise ­ column 1 is Low,
column 2 modest, column 3 medium, column 4 high wage occupations (see table 2). It is estimated on the
full American Community Survey sample (age 16-64). In panels B, C and D, the samples are restricted to
employed individuals. Panel B estimates employment shares for the indicated occupation group, within
the sample of employed. Panels C and D estimate hours and weeks worked conditional on employment
in the indicated occupation group. Because the dependent variables in this table involve employment, we
exclude the aggregate employment rate in the control set, as well as all controls involving occupation fixed
effects, but include all other controls from column 4 of table 4. Regressions also include an Indexer*After
interaction.




                                                       54
                                       Table 6: Minimum Wages and Labor Force Outcomes (ACS)

              Dependent Variable:                               Employed                               Out of the labor force
                                                      (1)         (2)               (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)
              Panel A:                                                                 Overall
              Increaser*After                      0.00333                      0.000425   -0.000128                           0.000532
                                                  (0.00230)                     (0.00187) (0.000889)                           (0.00121)

              State, and Year FE                     Yes                            Yes         Yes                               Yes
              Macroeconomic Controls                 No                             Yes         No                                Yes
              Panel B:                                                               by Age Group
              Increaser*After                    -0.0258***       -0.00717      -0.00965** 0.0381***           0.00704**       0.00721**
                                                  (0.00894)      (0.00440)       (0.00408)  (0.00887)           (0.00303)       (0.00307)
              Increaser*After*Age 22-30          0.0302***       0.00870**      0.00864** -0.0358***           -0.00595**      -0.00594**
                                                  (0.00813)      (0.00403)       (0.00404)  (0.00839)           (0.00290)       (0.00290)
              Increaser*After*Age 31-40          0.0339***       0.0128***       0.0128*** -0.0421***          -0.00807**      -0.00808**
                                                  (0.00967)      (0.00422)       (0.00422)  (0.00995)           (0.00360)       (0.00360)




55
              Increaser*After*Age 41-49          0.0304***       0.0130***       0.0132*** -0.0406***         -0.00837***     -0.00839***
                                                  (0.00919)      (0.00322)       (0.00320)  (0.00935)           (0.00278)       (0.00278)
              Increaser*After*Age 50+            0.0346***       0.00998**       0.0103*** -0.0495***          -0.00667**      -0.00669**
                                                   (0.0110)      (0.00386)       (0.00383)   (0.0115)           (0.00317)       (0.00317)

              State and Year FE                      Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
              Demo group interactions                No             Yes            Yes             No             Yes             Yes
              Macroeconomics Controls                No             No             Yes             No             No              Yes
              Observations                       11,936,824     11,936,824     11,936,824      11,936,824     11,936,824      11,936,824
     Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. The table reports a version of equation 1
     estimated on the full American Community Survey sample (age 16-64). The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the individual is
     employed (columns 1-3) or out of the labor force (columns 4-6). Columns 1 and 4 control for state and year fixed effects (we exclude occupation
     fixed effects because they are closely related to employment) and age group or education group main effects in panel B. Columns 2 and 5
     include interactions between the age groups and the state and year fixed effects. Columns 3 abd 6 include the macroeconomic and health
     insurance controls listed in table 4 except the employment rate, again because it is closely related to the dependent variable. Regressions also
     include an Indexer*After interaction and, where applicable, interactions with age group.
              Table 7: BGT High School Requirements and Minimum Wages

             Dependent Variable                      High School Diploma Requirement
                                                         (1)        (2)         (3)
             Panel A:                                        Low-wage occupations
             Statutory*After                          0.0186** 0.0200**     0.0322***
                                                     (0.00733) (0.00779)    (0.00731)
             Indexer*After                           -0.00558 -0.00604       -0.00412
                                                      (0.0182)   (0.0180)    (0.0194)

             Observations                              37,402    37,402     37,402
             Panel B:                                     Modest-wage occupations
             Statutory*After                          0.0159**  0.00947     0.00694
                                                     (0.00648) (0.00602)   (0.00657)
             Indexer*After                           -0.00298 -0.00287     -0.00225
                                                     (0.00772) (0.00809)   (0.00866)

             Observations                              88,747    88,711     88,711
             Panel C:                                     Medium-wage occupations
             Statutory*After                          0.00775   0.00669    0.00972*
                                                     (0.00537) (0.00580)  (0.00526)
             Indexer*After                           -0.0177** -0.0179**   -0.0163*
                                                     (0.00866) (0.00841)  (0.00918)

             Observations                              91,347    91,339      91,339
             Panel D:                                       High-wage occupations
             Statutory*After                         0.000870 0.00384       -0.00380
                                                     (0.00635) (0.00663)    (0.00460)
             Indexer*After                            -0.0130* -0.0127*    -0.0152***
                                                     (0.00703) (0.00664)    (0.00506)

             Observations                              98,365        98,364           98,364
             Occ, State, and Date FE                    Yes           Yes              Yes
             Occ-by-Date, Occ-by-Date FE                No            Yes              Yes
             Macroeconomic Controls                     No            No               Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. We report
results for regressions of the form specified in Equation 1, for occupation-state-date (month-year) cells in
the 2011-2016 waves of Burning Glass Technologies (BGT) job vacancy data. Observations are restricted to
ads posted in low-wage occupations (see Table 2). The dependent variable is the share of ads within the
cell that have a high school diploma requirement. Observations are weighted by OES occupation-state-
year employment. Macro controls are listed in table 4 notes. Regressions also include an Indexer*After
interaction.




                                                       56
              Table 8: BGT High School Requirements and Minimum Wages

                                              High School Diploma Requirement
                                              (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
               Panel A:                            Low Wage Occupations
               Statutory*After            0.0322*** 0.00988** 0.0119** 0.0108**
                                          (0.00723) (0.00491) (0.00566) (0.00493)
               Indexer*After              -0.00412 -0.00913 0.000280 -0.00534
                                           (0.0192) (0.00812) (0.00860) (0.00565)

               Observations                917,892       917,892        911,839       911,627
               Full Controls                 Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
               Firm Fixed Effects            No            Yes            Yes           Yes
               Firm-by-State FEs             No            No             Yes           Yes
               Firm-by-Year FEs              No            No             No            Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. See tables
4 and 7. Observations are at the firm-occupation-state-date level, restricted to low-wage occupations, for
2011-2016 Burning Glass Technologies (BGT) job vacancy data. The dependent variable is the share of ads
within the cell that have a high school diploma requirement. Observations are weighted by the ad share
within state-occupation-date times OES occupation-state-year employment. Macro controls are listed in
table 4 notes. Regressions also include an Indexer*After interaction.




                                                       57
                           A    Appendix Tables and Figures


                            Age (ACS)                                                Young Adult (ACS)




                                                          .005
               .6
               .4




                                                          -.015 -.01 -.005 0
               .2
               0
               -.2
 Coefficient




                      .5    1        1.5           2                           .5          1       1.5         2


                           Dropout (ACS)                                       High School Requirement (BGT)

                                                         .02
               .01




                                                         .01
               0




                                                         0
               -.01




                                                         -.02 -.01
               -.02




                      .5    1        1.5           2                           0      .5       1         1.5   2

                                     Average Min Wage Change

Figure A.1: Outcomes by Size of Minimum Wage Increase
Note: The figure reports results of Equation (1), allowing interactions between "after" and indicators for
each tertile of state minimum wage increases over the full time period, with no change as the omitted
category. We restrict to workers in low-wage occupations and estimate specifications with full controls,
using American Community Survey (ACS) or Burning Glass Technologies (BGT) data as indicated. We
plot coefficients for the interaction terms on the average minimum wage change in each tertile and 95%
confidence bars.




                                                   58
       Table A.1: Worker Skills/Requirements and Minimum Wages: Robustness
                                                              Low Wage Occupations
    Specification:                                 Event                                     Linear
                                       (1)          (2)              (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)
    Panel A:                                                            ACS ­ Age
    Increaser*After                 0.301***        0.259***      0.262***
                                    (0.0796)        (0.0741)      (0.0785)
    Indexer*After                    -0.108         -0.0927        -0.105
                                    (0.0809)        (0.0824)      (0.0786)
    Minimum Wage                                                                0.218***    0.183***      0.160**
                                                                                (0.0635)    (0.0618)     (0.0707)
    Panel B:                                                  ACS ­ Young Adult (16-21)
    Increaser*After                -0.00886***   -0.00814*** -0.00972***
                                    (0.00229)      (0.00226)     (0.00265)
    Indexer*After                    0.00124       0.000746       0.00144
                                    (0.00337)      (0.00345)     (0.00288)
    Minimum Wage                                                              -0.00574*** -0.00512***   -0.00632***
                                                                               (0.00188)   (0.00189)     (0.00180)
    Panel C:                                                  ACS ­ Older Adult (50-64)
    Increaser*After                0.00648***     0.00552***    0.00554**
                                    (0.00231)      (0.00204)     (0.00232)
    Indexer*After                   -0.00426       -0.00410       -0.00471
                                    (0.00338)      (0.00326)     (0.00295)
    Minimum Wage                                                               0.00421**   0.00334**     0.00227
                                                                               (0.00163)   (0.00148)    (0.00174)
    Panel D:                                                 ACS ­ No High School Degree
    Increaser*After                -0.00622**     -0.00615** -0.00589**
                                    (0.00293)      (0.00287)     (0.00270)
    Indexer*After                   0.00666**      0.00631**    0.00732***
                                    (0.00299)      (0.00304)     (0.00269)
    Minimum Wage                                                                -0.00373    -0.00352     -0.00282
                                                                               (0.00248)   (0.00240)    (0.00210)
    Panel E:                                             ACS ­ High School or Some College
    Increaser*After                 0.00710*       0.00745*      0.00482*
                                    (0.00370)      (0.00375)     (0.00278)
    Indexer*After                   -0.00247       -0.00210       -0.00294
                                    (0.00338)      (0.00332)     (0.00292)
    Minimum Wage                                                                0.00464      0.00473     0.00228
                                                                               (0.00295)   (0.00292)    (0.00212)
    Observations                    1,224,134      1,224,132    1,224,132      1,224,134   1,224,132    1,224,132
    Panel F:                                          BGT ­ High School Diploma Requirement
    Increaser*After                  0.0186**       0.0200**     0.0322***
                                    (0.00733)      (0.00779)     (0.00731)
    Indexer*After                   -0.00558       -0.00604       -0.00412
                                     (0.0182)       (0.0180)      (0.0194)
    Minimum Wage                                                                 0.0104      0.0113*     0.0136*
                                                                               (0.00637)   (0.00649)    (0.00682)
    Occ-State-Date Cells             37,402          37,402        37,402        37,402      37,402      37,402
    Occ, State, and Date FE           Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
    Occ-by-Date, Occ-by-Date FE       No               Yes           Yes           No          Yes         Yes
    Macroeconomic Controls            No               No            Yes           No          No          Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. See tables
4 and 7. Panels A-E present ACS results; panel F presents BGT results. Both samples are restricted to
low-wage occupations. Increaser is an indicator equaling 1 if the state had new legislation to increase
their minimum wage during our sample period; indexer equals 1 if that state instead had minimum wage
changes through inflation indexing; Minimum wage is the linear value for the state in July of the year.
                                                         59
     Table A.2: ACS Worker Skills and Minimum Wages: Low Wage Occupations
                                                            Low Wage Occupations
                                                         (1)          (2)         (3)
                    Panel A:                                No High School Degree
                    Increaser*After                 -0.00622** -0.00615** -0.00589**
                                                     (0.00293)    (0.00287)   (0.00270)

                    Panel B:                         Ungraduated Teen (19 or younger)
                    Increaser*After                 -0.00466*** -0.00421** -0.00602***
                                                     (0.00168)   (0.00165)   (0.00142)

                    Panel C:                               Adult Dropout (age>19)
                    Increaser*After                   -0.00156     -0.00194   0.000125
                                                     (0.00311)    (0.00308)   (0.00199)

                    Observations                     1,224,134     1,224,132     1,224,132
                    Occ, State, and Year FE             Yes           Yes           Yes
                    Occ-by-Yr, Occ-by-State FE          No            Yes           Yes
                    Macroeconomic Controls              No            No            Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. See table
4. Panel A replicates Panel D of table 4. In panel B (C) the dependent variable is an indicator equalling 1
if the individual is age 19 or less (greater than 19) and lacks a high school diploma. The effect in panel A
loads almost completely onto the panel B variable, implying that the high school diploma effect operates
primarily via the age effects.




                                                       60
Table A.3: Worker Skills/Requirements and Minimum Wages: Higher-Paying Occupa-
tions

            Occupation Group                Low            Modest     Medium             High
                                                           Wage Occupations
                                             (1)              (2)        (3)               (4)
            Panel A:                                            ACS ­ Age
            Increaser*After               0.262***           0.107     0.0353           0.0571
                                          (0.0785)         (0.0715)   (0.0521)         (0.0610)

            Panel B:                             ACS ­ Young Adult (16-21)
            Increaser*After             -0.00972*** -0.00243 -0.000737 -0.000727*
                                         (0.00265)  (0.00177) (0.00134) (0.000425)

            Panel C:                              ACS ­ Older Adult (50-64)
            Increaser*After              0.00554**   0.00186   0.00327      0.00398*
                                         (0.00232)  (0.00223) (0.00200) (0.00220)

            Panel D:                             ACS ­ No High School Degree
            Increaser*After              -0.00589** -0.000217 -0.00154 -0.000605*
                                          (0.00270)  (0.00305) (0.00115) (0.000344)

            Panel E:                          ACS ­ High School or Some College
            Increaser*After               0.00482*   -0.000428 0.00256    0.000996
                                          (0.00278)  (0.00262) (0.00305) (0.00202)

            Observations                 1,224,132 2,188,897 1,832,908 2,660,420
            Panel F:                      BGT ­ High School Diploma Requirement
            Increaser*After              0.0322***  0.00694    0.00972*  -0.00380
                                         (0.00731) (0.00657) (0.00526) (0.00460)

            Occ-State-Date Cells           37,402          88,711        91,339         98,364
            Full Controls                   Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Column 1
replicates the full controls (column 3) specification from tables 4 and 7 for low-wage occupations. Column
2 restricts to workers and ads in modest-wage occupations; column 3 restricts to medium-wage occupa-
tions; column 4 to high-wage (see Table 2 for definitions). Dependent variables and data set are indicated
in the panel headings.




                                                      61
                Table A.4: ACS Worker Demographics and Minimum Wages

             Occupation Group             Low          Modest      Medium               High
                                                        Wage Occupations
                                           (1)            (2)          (3)               (4)
             Panel A:                                          Black
             Increaser*After             0.00203       -0.00235 0.00298***           0.000926
                                        (0.00173)     (0.00225)    (0.00103)         (0.00134)

             Panel B:                                        Hispanic
             Increaser*After            0.000224       0.00195    -0.000579          -0.000783
                                        (0.00249)     (0.00155)   (0.00250)          (0.00141)

             Panel C:                                         Female
             Increaser*After             4.17e-05      -0.00119   0.000308            -0.00240
                                        (0.00292)     (0.00135)  (0.00199)           (0.00160)

             Panel D:                                      Foreign Born
             Increaser*After             0.00378       0.00340     0.00208           -0.000723
                                        (0.00389)     (0.00295)   (0.00193)          (0.00180)

             Panel E:                           Migrated from Another State
             Increaser*After            -0.00188 -0.00156* -0.000853 -0.00216**
                                        (0.00117) (0.000905) (0.000757) (0.000994)

             Observations              1,224,132      2,188,897       1,832,908      2,660,420
             Full Controls                Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Column 1
restricts to workers employed in low-wage occupations; column 2 to modest-wage occupations; column 3
to medium-wage occupations; column 4 to high-wage (see table 2 for definitions). Outcomes are the share
of worker employed in the indicated occupation group who belong to the group indicated in the panel
heading. See Table 4.




                                                      62
                 Table A.5: BGT Representativeness and sample restrictions
                                                          (1)        (2)         (3)
                  Panel A:                          BGT-OES Occupation Share Deviation
                  Increaser*After                   0.00719***    -0.00127   -0.00150
                                                      (0.00164)  (0.00122)  (0.00112)
                  Increaser*After*Modest            -0.00868***   0.00130     0.00131
                                                      (0.00162) (0.000984) (0.000986)
                  Increaser*After*Medium            -0.00980***  0.000909   0.000913
                                                      (0.00176)  (0.00128)  (0.00128)
                  Increaser*After*High               -0.0109***   0.00169     0.00169
                                                      (0.00245)  (0.00161)  (0.00161)

                  Observations                         10,773        10,728        10,728
                  Panel B:                                In non-missing firm sample
                  Increaser*After                    0.0494***      0.0168        0.0271
                                                      (0.0146)     (0.0212)      (0.0171)
                  Increaser*After*Modest            -0.0469***    -0.00800      -0.00762
                                                     (0.00812)     (0.0110)      (0.0110)
                  Increaser*After*Medium            -0.0589***      -0.0148       -0.0150
                                                     (0.00935)    (0.00970)     (0.00968)
                  Increaser*After*High              -0.0550***    -0.00956      -0.00932
                                                      (0.0109)     (0.0124)      (0.0121)

                  Observations                         348,032     348,015    348,015
                  Panel C:                          In regular low-wage employer sample
                  Increaser*After                     0.0425***    0.00525     0.0108
                                                      (0.00895)    (0.0133)   (0.0112)
                  Increaser*After*Modest             -0.0489***    -0.00537   -0.00526
                                                      (0.00899)   (0.00958)  (0.00964)
                  Increaser*After*Medium             -0.0482***    -0.00410   -0.00416
                                                       (0.0103)   (0.00998)  (0.00997)
                  Increaser*After*High               -0.0550***   -0.00116    -0.00103
                                                       (0.0120)    (0.0103)   (0.0102)

                  Observations                        348,032      348,015        348,015
                  Occ, State, and Date FE               Yes          Yes            Yes
                  Occ-by-Date, Occ-by-Date FE           No           Yes            Yes
                  Macroeconomic Controls                No           No             Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. In panel
A the dependent variable is the BGT occupation ad share in the state-year minus the OES occupation
employment share. Observations are occupation-state-years. OES data are from 2013 and 2016, which each
represent three-year averages. BGT data are correspondingly averages from 2011-2013 and 2014-2016. The
"after" variable and time-varying controls are also three-year averages. In panels B and C, observations
are occupation-state-date (year-month) cells in BGT. Outcomes are the share of ads with a non-missing
employer (panel B) or the share of ads by employers that regularly post in low-wage occupations (in at
least 20 states and 20 months over our sample period) (panel C).




                                                      63
                   Table A.6: BGT High School Requirement Robustness
                 Dependent Variable                  High School Diploma Requirement
                                                           Low-wage occupations
                                                      (1)        (2)            (3)
                 Panel A:                                    Preferred sample
                 Statutory*After                   0.0186**   0.0200**      0.0322***
                                                  (0.00733) (0.00779)       (0.00731)
                 Indexer*After                    -0.00558    -0.00604      -0.00412
                                                   (0.0182)   (0.0180)       (0.0194)

                 Observations                      37,402       37,402          37,402
                 Panel B:                                        Full sample
                 Statutory*After                   0.00733     0.00740         0.0223***
                                                  (0.00881)   (0.00872)        (0.00694)
                 Indexer*After                     -0.0107     -0.0106          -0.00781
                                                   (0.0169)    (0.0168)         (0.0170)

                 Observations                       39,141     39,141         39,141
                 Panel C:                                Non-Missing firm sample
                 Statutory*After                   0.00657    0.00689       0.0207***
                                                  (0.00763) (0.00757)       (0.00626)
                 Indexer*After                    -0.00965   -0.00978        -0.00827
                                                   (0.0153)  (0.0151)        (0.0167)

                 Observations                       38,566     38,566       38,566
                 Panel D:                         Stronger low-wage employer restriction
                 Statutory*After                   0.0133*    0.0164*     0.0263***
                                                  (0.00771) (0.00843)     (0.00904)
                 Indexer*After                    -0.000196 -0.00138      -0.000362
                                                   (0.0146)   (0.0143)     (0.0151)

                 Observations                      35,505      35,505           35,505
                 Occ, State, and Date FE            Yes         Yes              Yes
                 Occ-by-Date, Occ-by-Date FE        No          Yes              Yes
                 Macroeconomic Controls             No          No               Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Table
restricts to ads posted in low-wage occupations (see table 2 for definitions) and the dependent variable
is the share of ads with a high school diploma requirement. Our preferred sample (panel A) restricts
to ads with non-missing employers and further restricts to employers that post frequently in low-wage
occupations (in at least 20 states and 20 months). Panel B imposes no restrictions. Panel C imposes only
that ads have a non-missing firm. Panel D imposes a stronger restriction that employers must post in
low-wage occupations in at least 40 states and 40 months. See table 7.




                                                     64
                 Table A.7: BGT Skill Requirements and Minimum Wages
                    Occupation Group         Low        Modest     Medium       High
                                                         Wage Occupations
                                              (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)
                    Panel A:                     College Requirement
                    Statutory*After       0.000755     0.000686      0.00209   0.0115*
                                          (0.00191) (0.00165) (0.00293) (0.00679)
                    Indexer*After         -0.000282 -0.00213        -0.00310   0.00418
                                          (0.00153) (0.00281) (0.00414) (0.00554)
                    Panel B:                      Any Experience Requirement
                    Statutory*After        0.00666      -0.00867    -0.00571   0.00562
                                          (0.00953) (0.00704) (0.00393) (0.00653)
                    Indexer*After          -0.00937     -0.00588    -0.00462  -0.00301
                                           (0.0120)    (0.00694)    (0.0124)  (0.0135)
                    Panel C:                   Customer Service Skill Requirement
                    Statutory*After        0.0193**      0.00305    0.00717*  0.00186
                                          (0.00725) (0.00453) (0.00394) (0.00539)
                    Indexer*After          -0.00108      0.00462    -0.00626  -0.00199
                                          (0.00634) (0.00562) (0.00762) (0.00510)
                    Panel D:                     Non-Cognitive Skill Requirement
                    Statutory*After        -0.00220      0.00391    -0.00134  0.0108**
                                          (0.00570) (0.00342) (0.00455) (0.00452)
                    Indexer*After          0.00525      -0.00295   0.000447 -0.000113
                                          (0.00839) (0.00470) (0.00623) (0.00873)
                    Panel E:                           English Requirement
                    Statutory*After        0.00200       0.00236   -0.00423* -0.00820
                                          (0.00664) (0.00614) (0.00249) (0.00696)
                    Indexer*After         0.000201      -0.00193   0.000622   -0.00370
                                          (0.00907) (0.00495) (0.00335) (0.00482)
                    Panel F:                         Computer Requirement
                    Statutory*After       -0.00875* 0.00904*        -0.00130   0.00565
                                          (0.00457) (0.00534) (0.00609) (0.00488)
                    Indexer*After         -0.000227      0.00182     0.0112    0.00480
                                          (0.00723) (0.00874)       (0.0118) (0.00931)
                    Panel G:                       Cognitive Skill Requirement
                    Statutory*After       -0.0155** -0.000678 0.0106**        0.00225
                                          (0.00607) (0.00363) (0.00498) (0.00357)
                    Indexer*After          0.00180       0.00240    -0.00170   0.00152
                                          (0.00681) (0.00779) (0.00698) (0.00786)
                    Observations            36,900        87,588     89,868     97,518
                    Full Controls             Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Column
1 restricts to ads posted in low-wage occupations; column 2 to modest-wage occupations; column 3 to
medium-wage occupations; column 4 to high-wage (see table 2 for definitions). Outcomes are the share
of ads for the indicated occupation group that require the skill indicated in the panel heading using
Burning Glass Technologies (BGT) data. Customer service, non-cognitive skill, computer, cognitive skill,
and English requirements are defined in the manuscript; see Deming and Kahn (2018) for additional
details.




                                                     65
                         Table A.8: BG Effects on Number of Vacancies

               Occupation Group             Low     Modest Medium        High
                                                    Wage Occupations
                                             (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
               Panel A:                          Vacancy Shares
               Statutory*After           -0.00880 -0.00301 0.00126      0.0106*
                                         (0.00626) (0.00428) (0.00286) (0.00604)
               Indexer*After             -0.00496 0.000576 -5.61e-05 0.00444
                                         (0.00640) (0.00391) (0.00331) (0.00669)

               Observations               14,688   14,688     14,688     14,688
               Panel B:                     Number of Vacancies (mean = 1732)
               Statutory*After            -225.4    -286.5     -113.3    -53.64
                                          (258.9)  (273.6)    (164.9)   (287.6)
               Indexer*After              -115.6    -133.9     -81.30    -128.7
                                          (309.8)  (272.1)    (172.0)   (222.7)

               Observations                 3,672      3,672      3,672     3,672
               Panel C:                          Log(Vacancies) (mean = 6.0)
               Statutory*After            -0.0359     -0.0143    0.0233    0.0322
                                          (0.0459)   (0.0516)   (0.0416)  (0.0478)
               Indexer*After              -0.0213    0.00247    -0.00145   0.0175
                                          (0.0376)   (0.0381)   (0.0492)  (0.0592)

               Observations                3,672          3,672        3,672         3,672
               Full Controls                Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
Note: *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels respectively. Obser-
vations are at the occupation group-state-date. Full controls include state and date fixed effects as well
as macroeconomic and ACA condrols (see Table 4). The dependent variable in panel A is an indicator
equalling 1 if the ad was for the indicated occupation group ­ column 1 is Low, column 2 modest, column
3 medium, column 4 high wage occupations (see table 2). We weight observations in this panel by the
number of ads posted so results can be interpreted as the share of ads falling in an indicated occupation
group. Panels B and C restrict observations to the indicated occupation group and use as the dependent
variable the number of ads posted and the log postings, respectively. These regressions are unweighted
but results are similar when we instead weight by state-occupation group annual employment.




                                                     66
