                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        EMPLOYER POLICIES AND THE IMMIGRANT-NATIVE EARNINGS GAP

                                       Benoit Dostie
                                         Jiang Li
                                        David Card
                                       Daniel Parent

                                     Working Paper 27096
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27096


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We are grateful to Mitchell Hoffman and participants at the October 2019 "Models of Linked
Employer-Employee Data" for many helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank
participants at the 2019 International Metropolis, the 2019 Canadian Economic Association
Meetings, and the 2018 Association for Canadian Studies conference for comments. This project
was funded by the Productivity Partnership as supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada (SSHRC). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of Statistics Canada or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Benoit Dostie, Jiang Li, David Card, and Daniel Parent. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Employer Policies and the Immigrant-Native Earnings Gap
Benoit Dostie, Jiang Li, David Card, and Daniel Parent
NBER Working Paper No. 27096
May 2020
JEL No. J15,J31,J62

                                         ABSTRACT

We use longitudinal data from the income tax system to study the impacts of firms' employment
and wage-setting policies on the level and change in immigrant-native wage differences in
Canada. We focus on immigrants who arrived in the early 2000s, distinguishing between those
with and without a college degree from two broad groups of countries ­ the U.S., the U.K. and
Northern Europe, and the rest of the world. Consistent with a growing literature based on the two-
way fixed effects model of Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999), we find that firm-specific
wage premiums explain a significant share of earnings inequality in Canada and contribute to the
average earnings gap between immigrants and natives. In the decade after receiving permanent
status, earnings of immigrants rise relative to those of natives. Compositional effects due to
selective outmigration and changing participation play no role in this gain. About one-sixth is
attributable to movements up the job ladder to employers that offer higher pay premiums for all
groups, with particularly large gains for immigrants from the "rest of the world" countries.


Benoit Dostie                                   David Card
Department of Applied Economics                 Department of Economics
HEC Montreal                                    549 Evans Hall, #3880
3000 Chemin de la Cote-Sainte-Catherine         University of California, Berkeley
Montreal, QC, Canada H3T 2A7                    Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
benoit.dostie@hec.ca                            and NBER
                                                card@econ.berkeley.edu
Jiang Li
Economic Analysis Division                      Daniel Parent
Statistics Canada                               Department of Applied Economics
100 Tunney's Pasture Driveway                   HEC Montreal
Ottawa, ON, Canada K1A 0T6                      3000 Chemin de la Cote-Sainte-Catherine
JiangBeryl.Li@canada.ca                         Montreal, QC, Canada H3T 2A7
                                                daniel.parent@hec.ca
1        Introduction
Average earnings of immigrants differ from those of natives, with gaps that depend on their country
of origin and time in the host country. In the U.S., Canada, and Australia, immigrants from many
countries earn less than natives with similar observed characteristics, though some immigrant groups
earn more (see e.g., Clarke, Ferrer and Skuterud, 2019). Much of the existing literature attributes
these gaps to differences to productivity associated with such factors as language skills (e.g., Chiswick
and Miller, 1994), literacy (Ferrer, Green and Riddell, 2006), and the quality of schooling (Bratsberg
and Terrell, 2007). A closely related literature explains the growth of immigrant earnings after
arrival as the outcome of human capital investments (Chiswick, 1978; LaLonde and Topel, 1992;
Baker and Benjamin, 1997), reinforced by the return migration of less successful immigrants (Yezer
and Thurston, 1976; Dustmann and Gorlach, 2015).
        While productivity differences between immigrants and natives are clearly important, a growing
body of research originating with Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (1999) suggests that firm's wage
setting policies tend to magnify differences between groups and widen overall inequality (see Card,
Cardoso, Heining and Kline, 2019 for a recent overview). In the presence of such firm-specific
premiums, the immigrant-native pay gap will depend on the relative fractions of immigrants hired
at high-wage firms ­ a between-firm sorting effect ­ and on the size of pay premiums offered by firms
to immigrants versus natives ­ a relative wage-setting effect. Recent research suggests that both
channels are quantitatively important for gender and race-related wage differences (Card, Cardoso
and Kline, 2016; Gerrard, Lagos, Severnini, Card, 2019).
        Several strands of existing research suggest that firm's hiring and wage setting policies may
have a differential impact on immigrants. Oreopoulos (2011) showed that employers are less likely
to call back job applicants with foreign names, particularly those with limited work experience in
the host country. Using monthly labor force data to analyze transitions between higher and lower-
paying jobs, Skuterud and Su (2012) showed that immigrants have lower upward-mobility rates than
natives. Pendakur and Woodcock (2010) and Javdani and McGee (2018) compare job mobility rates
and within-firm promotion rates in a longitudinal worker-firm data base and find immigrant-native
gaps in both dimensions.
        In this paper we use administrative earnings data for immigrants in Canada, along with parallel
data for native-born workers, to quantify the impacts of employer policies on the level and trend
in the immigrant-native pay gap.1 We classify immigrants into four broad groups based on having
    1
    An earlier study by Damas de Matos (2016) used a similar approach to study earnings assimilation of immigrants
to Portugal, and concluded that movement to higher-paying firms was an important channel for the rise in relative



                                                        1
a college degree when applying for permanent residence status or not; and on being from either
"advantaged" countries (the U.S., Northern Europe, Australia, New Zealand) ­ the source of about
10% of recent immigrant cohorts ­ or non-advantaged countries (India, China, other Asian countries,
Southern and Eastern Europe, Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean) ­ the source of the vast
majority of recent immigrants to Canada
    Our main analysis relies on the Canadian Employer-Employee Dynamic Database (CEEDD), a
longitudinal matched worker-firm database derived from tax records. CEEDD has information on
taxable earnings for 100% of the Canadian population, and is matched to information for immigrants
at the time they are granted permanent residence status, including country of origin and education.2
A key advantage of CEEDD is sample size: we have earnings information for all workers in Canada
- a fact that is particularly important for studying the outcomes of a specific immigrant arrival
cohort. Relatedly, we can track individuals over time, allowing us to address concerns over selective
emigration or changes in the share of a given immigrant cohort that works.3 A limitation of CEEDD
is the absence of detailed demographic information for natives, specifically on education. Like many
other administrative data sets (e.g., Social Security earnings records in the U.S.) CEEDD also lacks
information on weeks or hours, making it impossible to disentangle differences in labor supply from
differences in wages per unit of time.
    To set the stage for the analysis and provide some insights into the likely consequences of not
being able to measure hours of work or natives' education, we therefore begin by analyzing data from
the 2006, 2011 and 2016 Censuses. We reach two main conclusions. First, comparisons of immigrant-
native wage gaps with and without controlling for education yield broadly similar conclusions about
earnings assimilation patterns. Second, wage gaps in annual earnings are quite similar to the gaps in
weekly earnings. Thus, we believe that the limitations of the CEEDD are unlikely to lead to major
biases in our analysis.
    With this background, we then turn to our main analysis. Using data for about 10 million
wages of immigrants in the period after arrival.
   2
     Given this data source ­ known as the Longitudinal Immigration Data Base (IMDB) ­ we focus exclusively on
immigrants with permanent residence status (equivalent to holding a Green Card in the U.S.) In contrast to the U.S.,
most immigrants receive permanent status when they first arrive in Canada. For the cohort of cohort of immigrants
granted permanent residence between 2000 and 2004, only about 15% had entered Canada as temporary workers or
students prior to obtaining permanent residence status.
   3
     Recent studies of immigrant earnings growth in the U.S. that use administrative earnings records reach different
conclusions about the importance of selective emigration, with Lubotsky (2007) finding that it contributes to positive
earnings growth for stayers, and Rho and Sanders (2018) and Akee and Jones (2019) finding the opposite. Using
tax record data similar to ours, Picot and Pirano (2013) find that selective emigration by immigrants is largely offset
by selective non-participation by natives, leading to little net effect on the growth of immigrant earnings relative to
natives.



                                                          2
natives and 2.5 million immigrants over the period from 2005 to 2013, we estimate separate Abowd,
Kramarz and Margolis (1999) (AKM) models for annual earnings of natives and immigrants on
their main jobs in each year. These models decompose earnings into a time-invariant person effect,
a time-varying function of observed characteristics (including age and province of work), an earnings
premium associated with the current employer, and a residual term. Consistent with findings from
the U.S. and many other countries, we find that differences in the wage premiums paid by different
firms explain an important share of the variation in earnings for both natives and immigrants in
Canada.4 We also find a strong pattern of assortative matching between higher-skilled workers
and high-premium firms for both groups.5 These matching patterns mean that firm-specific wage
premiums tend to widen inequality between more- and less-skilled workers within both groups, as
has been documented for Germany, the U.S., and other countries, and suggests that firm hiring
patterns will widen immigrant-native gaps.
    We then implement a simple decomposition of the difference in mean earnings between immi-
grants and natives that identifies the overall contribution of firm-specific pay premiums, and the
sorting and relative pay-setting components of this total.6 We find that the average workplace pre-
miums earned by natives are higher than those earned by immigrants, accounting for about one-fifth
of the immigrant-native pay gap for this cohort. Virtually all of this differential is associated with
the between-firm sorting effect: we find that the firm-specific pay premiums for native and immi-
grant workers are on average the same, with no evidence that higher-paying firms compress their pay
premiums for immigrants relative to natives. Looking within immigrant subgroups, we find hetero-
geneity in the contribution of firm hiring policies, with the largest magnitude for immigrants from
non-advantaged countries who lack university education. Relative to natives (and better-educated
immigrants) these workers are much less likely to be hired by high-wage firms - a gap that accounts
for 7 percentage points of their 40 point earnings gap relative to natives.
    Following this analysis of average pay gaps between immigrants and natives, we turn to an
analysis of the changes in relative earnings from 2005 to 2013 for the 2000-2004 arrival cohort ­
    4
      Abowd, Creecy and Kramarz (2002) find that between-firm variation represents about 19% of the variance of
hourly wages in Washington State and 30% of the variance of annual earnings in France. Card, Heining and Kline
(2013), Card, Cardoso, and Kline (2016), and Macis and Schivardi (2016) estimate a 15%-20% share for establishment
effects in the case of German workers, Portuguese male workers, and Italian manufacturing workers, respectively.
    5
      Orefice and Peri (2020) find the immigration inflows lead to a higher degree of assortative matching between
workers and firms in different districts in France.
    6
      As explained in detail below, a key issue underlying this comparison is how to benchmark the estimated estab-
lishment effects for natives and immigrants. Following Card, Cardoso and Kline (2016) we use a normalization based
on the set of firms that pay the lowest levels of wages to immigrants and natives. A similar method is used by Macis
and Schivardi (2016), Gallen, Lesner and Vejlin (2017), Coudin (2018) and Bruns (2019).



                                                         3
i.e., the process of earnings assimilation. In our AKM-style framework, the "composition biases"
that arise from selective outmigration or changing participation rates are summarized by changes
in the mean of the person effects for those with positive earnings in a given year. Consistent with
other recent evidence for Canadian and U.S. immigrants (Picot and Pirano, 2013; Rho and Sanders,
2018, Akee and Jones, 2019) we find that the composition effect is very small, with similar trends
for immigrants and natives over time.7
      On average we find that the growth in the sorting effect accounts for just under one-fifth of the
15 percentage composition-adjusted gain in earnings for the 2000-2004 arrival cohort between 2005
and 2013. Interestingly, the gains in relative wages attributable to moves up the job ladder are
largest for university-educated immigrants from disadvantaged countries ­ a group who are often
"over-educated" for the jobs they hold (Hou, Lu, and Schimmele, 2019). Adjusting for composition
and age effects, this group's earnings rise by 22 percent relative to natives between 2005 and 2013;
of this gain, nearly 4 percentage points are due to employment reallocation toward higher-paying
employers. In contrast, university-educated immigrants from advantaged countries tend to work
at high-paying firms when they first arrive, and make little further progress over the next decade.
These patterns are consistent with a simple learning model in which higher-paying firms can readily
evaluate the degrees of immigrants from advanced countries, but tend to downgrade the education
credentials of immigrants from less advantaged countries, and only hire those who are revealed to
be more productive over time.
      Our findings make three main contributions. First, we contribute to the literature on the de-
terminants of immigrant earnings (see e.g., Borjas, 1999)\ by quantifying the role of firm hiring
and wage setting policies in observed immigrant-native pay gaps and earnings assimilation. To the
best of our knowledge, only one earlier study by Damas de Matos (2016) ­ which focused more
narrowly on assimilation ­ has studied the impact of firm-specific pay premiums on immigrant earn-
ings outcomes. Second, we contribute to the growing literature that uses AKM-style models to
study inter-group wage differences, including the gender pay gap (Card, Cardoso and Kline, 2016;
Gallen, Lesner and Vejlin, 2017; Coudin, 2018; Bruns, 2019) and racial pay gaps (Gerrard, Lagos,
Severnini, Card, 2019). We extend this literature by showing how changes in the sorting of workers
to firms contribute to the evolution of pay gaps between groups. We also show how the estimated
person effects from an AKM setup can be used to model the impacts of changing participation of
  7
     We note that our immigrant population is comprised of people who are permanent migrants at the start of
our observation period, and excludes those who enter the country as temporary migrants and never transition to
permanent residents. We therefore miss any component of earnings growth associated with the selective emigration
of lower-earning temporary immigrants.



                                                       4
one group relative to another. Finally we contribute to the large literature on immigrant earnings
in Canada, complementing recent studies that have used longitudinal earnings data (e.g., Pendakur
and Woodcock 2010; Picot and Pirano, 2013; and Javdani and McGee, 2018) to analyze the evo-
lution of immigrant-native wage differences. We extend this literature by quantifying the impacts
of differential sorting of immigrants from different source countries to higher-wage employers both
cross-sectionally and over time.


2        Immigration to Canada
As background for our empirical analysis we begin with a brief overview of the institutional frame-
work covering immigration to Canada.8 Our focus is on "permanent immigrants" - those who have
permission to work and stay indefinitely in the country. Canada also has a set of temporary immi-
gration programs that includes temporary foreign workers and students, some of whom ultimately
apply for permanent status. Since our key source for immigrants (including their source country and
education) is derived from applications for permanent residency, we ignore temporary immigrants
unless/until they become permanent residents.
        Permanent immigrants to Canada fall into two main classes: economic immigrants and sponsored
family members.9 Economic immigrants apply to move to Canada and are evaluated through a
point system that rewards factors including education, knowledge of French or English, having
an occupation in high demand, having a pre-arranged job, and having prior work experience in
Canada.10 Candidates with higher numbers of points are invited to apply for permanent residence,
with a cutoff that varies across years. Successful applicants and their family members can then
become permanent residents upon arrival to the country.
        Sponsored family members are parents, partners, children, and other relations of people who are
already citizens or permanent residents of Canada (see Citizenship and Immigration Canada, 2014).
The applicant and his or her sponsor submit a joint application under which the sponsor agrees
to be responsible for all social assistance payments received by the applicant for a period of 3-10
years. The number of sponsored family members admitted varies from year to year, with highest
priority for spouses and dependent children. In recent years the total number admitted has been
    8
     See Green and Green (1995) for an historical overview of Canada's immigration policy.
    9
     There are also two other groups: refugees, and immigrants entering under "Humanitarian/Compassionate Public
Policy Considerations." On average these groups have made up about 10% of immigrants to Canada in recent decades.
  10
     See Ferrer, Picot and Riddell (2014) for a discussion of how the points allocations have changed over time.
Bonikowska and Hou (2015) show how various characteristics included in the point system help predict subsequent
earnings in Canada.



                                                       5
about one-half as large as the number of economic immigrants admitted.
       While the Canadian government sets the evaluation criteria and maximum inflows of each type
of immigrant each year, the composition of the inflow pool is largely supply determined. Since the
1970s the main sources of immigrant supply have shifted from Western Europe to Asia. Coincident
with this shift has been a decline in the earnings of immigrants relative to natives (Baker and
Benjamin, 1994; Hou and Picot, 2016) that is widely attributed to differences in the skills brought
to Canada by immigrants from these new source countries. Building on the existing literature, in
our analysis below we form two broad groups of countries that reflect the "traditional" and "new"
source countries. The first group, which for simplicity we call the advantaged countrie s, consists
of the U.S., the U.K., Australia, New Zealand, and countries in Northern/Western Europe where
most people have English as a second language, including Germany, France, the Netherlands, and
the Nordic countries.11 The second group, which we call the non-advantaged countries, includes all
other countries, most importantly India, China, Africa, the Caribbean, and Southern and Eastern
Europe. These "new" source countries account for close to 90% of immigrants to Canada in recent
years.
       Table 1 presents some descriptive statistics by country-of-origin group and admission class for
immigrants age 20-59 observed in the 2016 Canadian census.12 We also show parallel statistics
for natives. Comparisons across the columns of the table show that immigrants from advantaged
countries have considerably higher annual earnings than those from non-advantaged countries (or
than natives), despite the fact that immigrants from disadvantaged source countries are more likely
to hold at least a B.A. degree (47% versus 43%).13 We suspect that this difference arises because
applicants from advantaged countries are more likely to gain admission through factors like having a
pre-arranged job that have an immediate payoff in the Canadian labor market, whereas those from
non-advantaged countries are more likely to rely on having a university education ­ a credential
that does not necessarily ensure labor market success given their language skills and lower quality
schooling. Comparing immigrants admitted as sponsored family members to those admitted as
economic immigrants, it is also clear that the family-based group have lower employment rates and
lower earnings, regardless of source country, though some of these differences are presumably due to
  11
      We have experimented with including Italy and Portugal in this group and found it makes little difference. Spain
is not separately identified as a source country in the public use files of recent Canadian Censuses but we assume it
is included in a category of other European countries that we add to the list.
   12
      Information on admission class is not available in previous censuses.
   13
      Both immigrant groups are substantially more likely to hold a B.A. than natives. Some of this gap reflects the
fact that natives are older than immigrants, and university education is more prevalent among recent cohorts. Even
among 30-39 year-old natives in 2016, however, only 29% have a B.A. or higher degree.



                                                          6
their lower education levels.


3         Immigrant-Native Wage Gaps Using the 2006, 2011, and 2016
          Censuses
As noted above, a limitation of the CEEDD data that we use for our main analysis is the absence of
information on hours or weeks worked and, in the case of native workers, on educational attainment.
The first goal of this section is to assess whether the annual earnings differentials that can be
computed using CEEDD are potentially misleading due to systematic differences between immigrants
and natives in hours or weeks worked. Specifically, using census data, where we can observe weeks
and a measure of hours per week, we follow other recent studies based on annual earnings records
(e.g., Song et al., 2019) and impose a minimum annual earnings threshold of roughly $14,000 for
both natives and immigrants.14 We then compare annual earnings gaps for workers who earn at
least the threshold level to weekly wage gaps. To foreshadow our results, we find that the gaps
constructed from the (above-threshold) annual earnings are broadly similar to the gaps constructed
from weekly earnings, suggesting that the absence of hours data in CEEDD is potentially ignorable,
provided we impose a threshold to eliminate very-low earning observations.
         Our second goal is to assess the importance of missing education information for natives. Again,
using census data we compare unadjusted annual earnings gaps to more conventional regression-
adjusted gaps that control for education (and age). We find that controls for education shift the
magnitudes of the immigrant-native wage gaps ­ particularly for immigrants from disadvantaged
countries, who have high levels of education but relatively low earnings ­ but do not have much
affect on the evolution of earnings gaps over time, as would be expected if individual education
levels are constant.
         Figure 1 shows immigrant-native gaps in mean log earnings for male and female immigrants from
our two source country groups who arrived in Canada between 2000 and 2004 and were interviewed
in the 2006, 2011, or 2016 Censuses. Panel a of the figure presents gaps in mean log annual earnings,
right censoring earnings at (approximately) $14,000 in each year. Panel b shows regression-adjusted
versions of the gap in the same measure of annual earnings, with controls for education and age.
Finally, panel c shows regression-adjusted gaps in log weekly earnings.
         A first conclusion that emerges from these simple comparisons is that individuals from the
    14
    More precisely $13,380 in $2012 representing 48 weeks of full-time work paid at the average of the minimum wage
across provinces, weighted by the number of employees in each province. See Galarneau and Fecteau (2014) for a
study on the evolution of the minimum wage in Canada since 1975.


                                                        7
advantaged countries have on average much higher earnings than their counterparts from other
countries. Indeed, males from the advantaged countries earn 10-20 percent more per year than
natives, though much of this difference is explained by their higher education, so the adjusted
annual and weekly earnings gaps are in the range of ±5 percent. By comparison, males from less
advantaged countries earn 20-30 percentage points less than natives per year. This gap widens by
approximately another 15 percentage points when we control for education, reflecting the high levels
of education among these immigrants (noted in Table 1).
       A second observation is that the cross-year profiles of gaps in annual, adjusted annual, and
adjusted weekly earnings are nearly parallel for all four groups. Regression adjustments for age
and education lead to lower the gaps for all four gender  origin groups, but leave the changes in
the gaps over time largely unaffected. These patterns suggest that an analysis of gaps in (right
censored) annual earnings without adjustment for education will be informative about the earnings
assimilation patterns of recent immigrant arrivals in Canada.
       A third finding is that the earnings gaps for males and females from the same origin group
are roughly parallel over time.15 This is particularly true for the (much larger) group of males and
females from less advantaged countries: both men and women from these countries experience about
a 10% rise in earnings relative to natives between 2006 and 2011, then little further change between
2011 and 2016.
       To check whether there might be something specific to the particular cohort of immigrants who
entered the country between 2000 and 2004 or specific to the overall state of the labor market at that
time, we computed a full set of analogous gaps for the cohort of immigrants that entered Canada
between 1995 and 1999. The patterns in the immigrant-native wage differentials across the 2001,
2006, 2011, and 2016 censuses for these immigrants turn out to be very similar to the ones computed
for the later cohort of entrants (though they experience only small changes in the levels of the gaps
over time).
       We also investigated how the earnings gaps of 2000-2004 immigant arrivals varied by their age
at arrival in Canada. Appendix Figures 1a and 1b show the profiles of annual and weekly earnings
gaps for men and women in 5-year age-at-arrival cohorts over the 2006, 2011 and 2016 censuses.16
  15
     In an analysis of male and female immigration profiles, Baker and Benjamin (1997) argued that wives in immigrant
families took on dead-end jobs at arrival in Canada to help finance human capital investments by their husbands,
potentially leading to a divergence in earnings profiles after arrival. However, Blau et al. (2003) pointed out that the
actual wage profiles estimated by Baker and Benjamin ­ and profiles for immigrants in the U.S. ­ show little or no
divergence in rates of pay. Our findings on earnings are consistent with the conclusions of Blau et al. (2003).
  16
     Appendix Table 1 provides a full tabulation of unadjusted and adjusted annual and weekly earnings gaps for the
four gender country of origin groups, separately by 5-year age at arrival groups.



                                                           8
Given the small sample sizes for immigrants from advantaged countries we limit our attention in
these figures to immigrants from the non-advantaged countries. Consistent with the patterns for the
pooled set of age-at-arrival groups in Figure 1, we find that: (1) the profiles of annual and weekly
wage gaps are very similar; and (2) the profiles for male and female immigrants are also similar. One
new insight that emerges from a comparison of different age-at-arrival groups is that the gains in
immigrant earnings relative to natives between 2006 and 2011 are particularly large for immigrants
who arrived at older ages.

Other Labor Market Indicators

The comparisons in Figure 1 suggest that the earnings gaps between immigrants and natives are
very similar whether we use mean log weekly earnings or mean log annual earnings for those with
earnings above a minimum threshold. What about gaps in labor market participation? In Appendix
Table 2 we report immigrant-native gaps by gender and source country group for three measures of
participation: the fraction reporting postive earnings in the previous calendar year; the fraction who
report working mainly full-time in the previous calendar year; and the fraction who worked at least
45 weeks over the previous year. As in Figure 1 these statistics pertain to immigrants who arrived
in Canada between 2000 and 2004 and were interviewed in the 2006, 2011, or 2016 Census.
    In brief, the data suggest that male immigrants from advantaged countries work about as much
or slightly more than natives, while female immigrants from these countries work slightly less
than native females. The modest gap for females is arguably consistent with standard findings on
female labor supply, given the higher earnings of their husbands (who are mainly immigrants from
advantaged countries too). By comparison, both male and female immigrants from non-advantaged
countries work less than natives, with about a 5 percentage point gap in annual participation among
men and a 10-15 point gap for women. Interestingly, for both gender groups we also see some closing
of the gap relative to natives over the 2006-2016 period, suggesting that there is assimilation in hours
of work for these immigrants, reinforcing the patterns for earnings conditional on work.


4    Impacts of Firm-Specific Hiring and Pay Policies on Immigrant
     Earnings
In this section we present a simple framework for measuring the impacts of firms' employment and
wage setting policies on the earnings gap between immigrants and natives, and on the evolution of
the gap as immigrants accumulate experience in the host economy.


                                                   9
4.1       A Job Ladder Model of Earnings
Building on AKM we assume that ygit ­ annual earnings of worker i from group g (either immigrant
or native) in period t ­ is generated by a model of the form:

                                                         g
                                   ln ygit = gi +        j (g,i,t)   + Xgit   g   + "git                       (1)

where gi is a person effect (capturing permanent differences in earnings capacity across workers),
 g
 k     is a group-specific earnings premium at workplace k , j (g, i, t) is a function that identifies the
workplace of worker (g, i) in year t, Xgit is a vector of time varying controls (e.g., year effects, province
effects, and controls for age), and      g   is a conformable vector of coefficients.17 The final component
"git captures all remaining determinants of earnings, including measurement errors, person-specific
job match effects, and transitory shocks affecting the worker or the firm (e.g., employee health shocks
or employer demand shocks). Note that the pay premiums offered by workplace j are allowed to
vary by group, but are assumed to be the same for all workers in a given group.
       There are a number of theoretical explanations for the pay premiums in equation (1), including
variants of the equilibrium wage posting model developed by Burdett and Mortensen (1998) (e.g.,
Bassier, Dube and Naidu, 2019), search and matching models with wage bargaining (e.g., Postel-
Vinay and Robin, 2006), and static models of monopsonistic wage setting (e.g., Card, Cardoso,
Heining and Kline, 2018, henceforth CCHK). As a benchmark we follow CCHK and assume that
workers have idiosyncratic valuations for jobs at different workplaces, leading to some degree of
market power and to higher wages at more productive firms. In this setting, the wage premiums set
by a given firm for workers in different groups can vary across groups, depending on the elasticity
of supply of the group to the firm.
       Specifically, CCHK show that under some simplifying assumptions, a firm's optimal policy is to
set group-specific pay premiums:
                                                     g
                                                     j   =      g Rj                                           (2)

where Rj represents a measure of productivity at firm j (scaled relative to the reservation wage of
workers) and      g   is parameter that varies across groups and is related to the group's elasticity of
supply to different workplaces.18 Notice that this model is equivalent to a simple rent sharing model
  17
     The person effects and the age profile component of Xgit are not separately identified without a normalizing
assumption. We follow Card, Heining and Kline (2013, CHK hereafter) in normalizing the age profiles to 0 at age 48,
when the age profiles in our samples are relatively flat.
  18
     Specifically, CCHK assume that the indirect utility that person i in group g places on a job at workplace j
paying wage wgj and offering non-wage amenities agj is uigj = g ln(wgj bg ) + agj + g igj where bg represents
the reservation wage of group g and g igj is a scaled extreme value variate (with variance proportional to 2 ) that


                                                           10
in which workplace j has rents Rj and group g has a rent-sharing coefficient of                  g.
     As noted by AKM, OLS estimation of (1) will only yield unbiased estimates of the workplace
pay premiums if the conditional expectation of "git is independent of a worker's job history. Under
this exogenous mobility assumption, workers who move from one firm to another will experience
average earnings gains that are equal in size but opposite in sign to the gains of workers (from the
same group) who move in the opposite direction. In contrast, simple models of mobility driven by
idiosyncratic job match effects imply that job movers will tend to experience positive gains regardless
of the pay premiums received by other workers at the origin or destination firm. Exogenous mobility
also implies that transitory earnings fluctuations prior to a job move are unrelated to the change
      g
in    j,   ruling out the kinds of dips in earnings typically seen for workers enter a training program
(Ashenfelter, 1978).
     A series of specification checks proposed by CHK and evaluated in several later studies (e.g.,
Macis and Schivardi, 2016; Card, Cardoso and Kline, 2016; Gerrard et al. 2018) suggest that
although exogeous mobility can be formally rejected, patterns of daily or hourly wage changes
for movers are broadly consistent with a simple AKM-type model of wage setting. Evidence from
Song et al. (2019) based on annual Social Security earnings data for U.S. workers points to the
same conclusion, once allowance is made for the fact that annual earnings include pay from multiple
employers in a year of job change, and are also impacted by spells of nonwork between jobs. In
Section 5.1 below we present parallel evidence based on annual earnings changes for job movers in
the CEEDD data. Consistent with the literature, we find that the patterns of earnings changes are
broadly consistent with an AKM-type model.

4.2        Impacts on Immigrant-Native Earnings Gap
We now use equation (1) to analyze the impacts of employer hiring and pay policies on the wages
of immigrants (group M ) and natives (group N ). Let Dgit represent an indicator for the event
that individual i in group g has observed earnings in year t, let X M t and X N t represent the means
of the observed covariates among employed immigrants and natives in year t, and let M jt and
N jt represent the fractions of the two groups employed at workplace j in year t. Then, assuming
that E ["git |Dgit = 1] = 0 ­ i.e., ignoring any year-to-year variation in the mean of the transitory
component of earnings ­ the mean log wages of immigrants and natives observed in any year t can
represents an idiosyncratic preference of worker i for workplace j . Starting from this specification of preferences and
some simplifying assumptions on technology, they derive equation (2) with g = g / g .




                                                          11
be decomposed as:
                                                                                    X
                                                                                                    M
                     E [ln yM it ] = E [M i |DM it = 1] + X M t           M     +                   j M jt             (3)
                                                                                        j
                                                                                X
                                                                                                N
                     E [ln yN it ] = E [N i |DN it = 1] + X N t         N   +                   j N jt .               (4)
                                                                                    j


and the mean log wage gap between natives and immigrants in year t can be written as:

                 E [ln yN it ]       E [ln yM it ] = E [N i |DN it = 1]         E [M i |DM it = 1]                     (5)
                                                     +X N t   N    XMt M
                                                       X              X
                                                              N                     M
                                                     +        j N jt                j M jt
                                                         j                  j


The first term on the right hand side of equation (5) represents the difference in the means of
the permanent component of individual skill between the two groups in year t. This difference
will vary over time if there are changes in the relative participation of higher- or lower-skilled
individuals in the two groups (for example, from selective emigration of low-skilled immigrants).
The second term represents the difference in the observed, time-varying factors. If immigrants tend
to live in higher-wage provinces than natives, for example, then this component will be nonzero and
potentially changing with t. The third term is the net contribution of firm-specific pay premiums to
the immigrant pay gap.
   Following Oxaca (1973), the third term can be decomposed in one of two ways:
           X                 X                      X                                   X
                 N                    M                  N                                           N       M
                 j N jt               j M jt    =        j (N jt       M jt ) +                 (    j       j )M jt   (6)
             j                   j                   j                                      j
                                                    X                                   X
                                                         M                                           N       M
                                                =        j (N jt       M jt ) +                 (    j       j )N jt
                                                     j                                      j


For simplicity, throughout this paper we focus on the first version, though conclusions from the
alternative version are nearly identical. This equation expresses the difference in pay premiums
as the sum of two terms: a weighted average of the differences in employment shares of the two
groups (weighting by the pay premiums for natives at each workplace) and a weighted average
of the differences in pay premiums (weighted by the share of immigrants employed at each firm).
The first term ­ which we label the " sorting effect " ­ measures the contribution of differential
sorting of natives and immigrants across employers. This will be positive ­ widening the pay gap


                                                         12
between natives and immigrants ­ if natives are more likely to work at firms that offer higher pay
premiums. The second term ­ which we label the " pay setting effect " ­ measures the contribution
of differential pay setting for natives versus immigrants, and will be positive if on average                         j .
                                                                                                              N   >   M
                                                                                                              j
     In the monopsonistic wage setting framework outlined in CCHK the pay premiums offered at
each workplace are determined by equation (2) and             N
                                                              j
                                                                  M
                                                                  j    =(   N    M ) Rj .   In this case the overall
pay setting is just:
                               X                                       X
                                         N     M
                                     (   j     j )M jt   =(   N   M)        Rj M jt
                                j                                      j
                                                                                                     P
which is proportional to the size of aggregate rents available across firms in economy,                  j   Rj M jt . If
worker preferences are such that natives receive a larger share of the rents at each workplace, then
 N   >    M   and the pay setting effect will widen the gap between natives and immigrants.

4.3       Impacts on Immigrant Earnings Growth and Assimilation
The simple framework of equation (3) can also be used to analyze the determinants of immigrant
earnings growth over time. Consider the change in mean log earnings for a cohort of immigrants
between a base year (t = 1) and some later year (t = 2) :

      M    E [ln yM i2 |DM i2 = 1]       E [ln yM i1 |DM i1 = 1] = E [M i |DM i2 = 1]           E [M i |DM i1 = 1](7)
                                                                   +(X M 2 X M 1 )          M
                                                                     X
                                                                          M
                                                                   +      j M j
                                                                       j


where         M j   M j 2   M j 1 is the change in the share of immigrants employed at workplace j.
The first term on the right hand side of equation (7) is a selection effect arising if there is some
change in the composition of the subset of immigrants observed working in different periods. As
has been noted in the previous literature, this effect can be eliminated by focusing on the subset of
workers who are present in both periods. The second term summarizes the effects of age, location,
and changing macro-economic conditions, and will be positive if the cohort is on an upward-sloping
age profile, or is moving toward higher-wage locations, or if there is overall wage growth in the
economy. Finally, the third term summarizes the net impact of movements up or down the job
ladder, and will be positive if immigrants tend to migrate toward higher-paying workplaces as they
accumulate experience in the host labor market. Apart from Damas de Matos (2016), previous
studies of immigrant earnings growth have ignored this term, subsuming the job ladder effect in the
estimated age profile.


                                                         13
      It is also possible to compare the change in earnings for a cohort of immigrants relative to a
comparison cohort of natives, leading to an expression of the form:

                           N       M   = E [N i |DN i2 = 1]        E [N i |DN i1 = 1]                                     (8)
                                               (E [M i |DM i2 = 1]             E [M i |DM i1 = 1])
                                          +(X N 2 X N 1 ) N (X M 2 X M 1 )                           M
                                            X             X
                                                 N           M
                                          +      j N j       j    M j
                                                j                  j


Such relative changes are commonly referred to as "earnings assimilation." Chiswick (1978) argued
that immigrants tend to invest in general skills when they first arrive in a host country ­ implying
that the term in       M   measuring the effect of age for immigrants is larger than the corresponding
term in     N.   Chiswick's original approach for measuring                N             M   has been criticized for ignoring
inter-cohort changes in the earnings capacity of successive cohorts of immigrants (Borjas, 1985)
and selective outmigration of immigrants in a given arrival cohort (Dustmann and Gorlach, 2015).
Picot and Piraino (2013) and Rho and Sanders (2018) also note that measures of assimilation will
be affected by changing selectivity of the natives who work (captured in the first line of equation
8) Our framework suggests a third potential channel for this assimilation effect, arising from the
changing contribution of workplace-specific pay premiums.
      Following the logic underlying equation (6),the last component of equation (8) can be decomposed
as:
                        X                 X                        X
                               N                    M                          N
                               j   N j              j   M j    =               j (       N j         M j )                (9)
                           j               j                           j
                                                                           X
                                                                                     N         M
                                                                   +           (     j         j )   M j
                                                                           j


The first term represents a change in the sorting effect, arising from differential reallocations of
natives and workers across firms with higher or lower pay premiums for natives, while the second
term represents a change in the pay setting effect arising from shifts of immigrants between firms
that have bigger or smaller gaps in the pay premiums offered to natives versus immigrants.

4.4     Normalizing the Pay Premiums
As was noted by AKM, a key feature of equation (1) is that the person effects and the pay premiums
are only identified up to a normalizing constant. One can add a constant to all the person effects

                                                          14
and subtract the same constant from all the firm effects and leave the fitted values from the model
unchanged. This observation is particularly salient for models that allow separate workplace pay
effects for different groups of workers: the magnitudes of the pay premiums for one group are only
identified relative to those of another group by making a normalization across the groups. In
essence, one has to take a stand on which firms pay a 0 premium to native workers, and which pay
a 0 premium to immigrants. As a consequence, the relative pay-setting effect in equation (6) is only
identified after normalizing the pay premiums for natives and immigrants relative to each other. In
contrast, the sorting component in this decomposition is invariant to renormalization.19 We discuss
our approach to the normalization issue in Section 6, below.


5    Longitudinal Tax Data from CEEDD
To implement the analyses outlined in the previous section we use data from the Canadian Employer-
Employee Dynamic Database (CEEDD), an administrative data set with information on workers
and firms drawn from the tax system.20 CEEDD reports the total annual earnings received by each
employee from each employer, but has no information on the start/end date of the job, or hours
per week. Characteristics of workers include age, gender, marital status and province of residence.
At the firm level it includes annual payroll and value added, the total number of employees, and
the firm's industry classification.21 Our data use agreement provides access to CEEDD data for
2005-2013.
    Critically for this project, we are able to link CEEDD with the IMDB, which is derived from
the records of individuals who successfully apply for permanent immigrant status. IMDB includes
information on education, marital status, country of origin, and admission class. We use these
data to classify immigrants by country-of-origin group (using the same groupings as in Table 1 and
Figure 1), and by whether they have a bachelor's degree (BA) or not at the time of application for
permanent residence.
    Table 2 provides a descriptive overview of the characteristics of workers age 25-59 who have
earnings in at least one year in CEEDD in the 2005-2013 period. Building on the results from our
analysis of earnings in the censuses, we only count the earnings received from a given employer in a
  19                                                                                             eN
P To see this, consider transforming the pay premiums for natives by an additive factor  : j = j + . Since
                                                                                                        N

  j (M jt     N jt ) = 0 for any , the transformed pay premiums imply the same numerical value of the sorting effect.
  20
     Specifically, the data on individual earnings are derived from personal, family and business declaration files -
known as "T1" records ­ as well as corporate and firm owner's tax returns ("T2" files) and supplementary ("T4") files.
See the Data Appendix for more details.
  21
     Value added is measured as the sum of T4 payrolls and net income before taxes and extraordinary items.



                                                         15
year if they are above our "full-time-at-minimum-wage" threshold of roughly $14,000. In cases where
an individual earned >$14,000 from two employers in the same year, we select the one that paid
more as the main employer in that year. This procedure leads to a mechanical dip in earnings in
the last year of any "main job" that ends part-way through the year, and similarly a rise in earnings
from the first to the second year of any main job that commences part-way through the year. It also
creates "gap years" for individuals who spend a substantial share of the year out of employment.
       Columns 1 and 2 show the characteristics of native-born and permanent immigrant workers in
our CEEDD sample. As noted in the bottom row, we have data on around 10 million natives and
2.5 million immigrants. Given our focus on a single cohort of immigrants entering the country, on
average we have about 5 years of earnings data for each individual (out of a possible maximum of
9 years). This limited fraction reflects the dropping of data from any year in which an individual
earns less than $14,000 from at least one employer, as well as the aging-in and aging-out of younger
and older people.
       The samples of natives and immigrants are both about 60% male, with a mean age of just over
40. Mean earnings (on the main job) for an individual who earns at least our minimum threshold
are $50,700 for natives and $41,800 for immigrants - implying a native-immigrant earnings gap of
around 20%. The geographic distributions of natives and immigrants are also different, with 71%
of immigrants in Ontario or B.C. versus only 47% of natives. Immigrants tend to be employed at
slightly larger firms, and to work at firms that have a relatively high share of immigrants in their
overall workforce (62% versus 21% for natives). Some of this gap is driven by the concentration of
Canadian immigrants in Toronto and Vancouver, where immigrants comprise over 50% of the local
population.22
   Column 3 of Table 2 shows the subset of immigrants who obtained permanent residency (i.e.,
"landed", in Canadian terminology) in the period from 2000 to 2004. This group - most of whom
arrived in Canada for the first time in the 2000-2004 period ­ is observed over their first decade as
permanent residents in our CEEDD sample, and is our main focus. Reassuringly, recently landed
immigrants look quite similar to the broader population of immigrants, with very similar gender,
age, and geographic distributions, and similar mean earnings.
       As is well known, the worker and firm fixed effects in AKM style models are only identified
within "connected sets" of workers and firms (see e.g. Abowd, Creecy, and Kramarz, 2002). Column
4 shows the characteristics of natives in the connected set of native workers, while column 5 shows the
characteristics of immigrants in the connected set of immigrant workers. For natives, the connected
  22
     About 55% of Canadian immigrants live in Toronto or Vancouver. Immigrants make up 55% of the adult popu-
lation in Toronto and 49% in Vancouver - comparable to shares in cities like Los Angeles and Miami.


                                                     16
includes 97% of all person-year observations and 96% of all persons, but only 75% of firms, reflecting
the exclusion of firms with no employees who worked at other firms in the connected set at some
point between 2005 and 2013. The connected set for immigrants is slightly more selective, containing
94% of person-year observations, 92% of all persons, and 65% of firms that ever have an immigrant
employee in the connected set. Nevertheless, the characteristics of the connected sets are quite
similar to those of the corresponding populations in columns 1 and 2. The one difference is that the
mean firm sizes are larger in the connected subsets. We also show in column 6 the characteristics of
the 2000-2004 arrival cohort who are included in the connected set of immigrants. Again, this set is
not very different from the overall sample of such immigrants in column 3.
   To be able to make comparisons between the firm effects for natives and immigrants (such as
those in equation 6) we need to further limit attention to firms in the "dual-connected set" ­ i.e., the
set of firms that are in the connected sets for both natives and immigrants ­ and to the corresponding
sets of workers at these firms. Columns 7-9 of Table 2 show the characteristics of natives, immigrants,
and 2000-2004 arrivals in this dual connected set. The dual connected set drops firms that have
no connected native employees or no connected immigrant employees. The restriction on having at
least one connected immigrant worker is particularly stringent and ends up eliminating about 70%
of firms that are in the connected set for natives. By comparison the restriction on having at least
one connected native worker is less severe, and 80% of firms in the connected set for immigrants end
up in the dual connected set.
   The ability to construct connected sets depends critically on sample size. The fact that we have
such large samples of natives and immigrants in the CEEDD gives us the unique opportunity to
study the processes by which immigrants transition between firms in the context of an AKM style
model.
   The relative selectivity of natives in the dual connected set is illustrated by their mean earnings,
which are about 8% higher than mean earnings of all natives (column 1) or those in the connected
set of natives (column 4). Even more remarkable is the effect on median firm size, which rises from
170 full time equivalents for all natives (and 196 for natives in the connected set) to 743 full time
equivalents for those in the dual connected set. The dual connectedness restriction has less impact
on immigrants and those in the dual connected set are fairly similar to those in the connected set
of immigrants.




                                                  17
5.1      Exogenous Mobility
In this section we present some evidence on the plausibility of the exogenous mobility restrictions
needed to ensure that OLS estimation of AKM style models using CEEDD data will yield unbiased
estimates of the worker and firm effects. Specifically, following CHK, we group workers into quartiles
based on the average pay of the coworkers at their firm and examine the changes in mean earnings
for workers who move up or down the coworker "pay ladder". In CHK's original analysis the earnings
measures were based on daily wages (similarly, CCK examine hourly wages). Unfortunately, in our
case, we only observe total earnings received during the year from a given employer. This means
that we confound changes in the rate of pay with variation in the number of days worked at a given
job. This is especially problematic in the year of a job change, since our "main job" definition will
assign the worker to either the beginning-of-year or end-of-year employer, with no adjustment for
the fraction of the year worked, creating a temporary dip in earnings in either the last year on the
old job or the first year in the new job. It is even worse for people who lose a job in one year, spend
some time out of work, then start a new job in the following year. For such workers, earnings in
the last year of the old job and earnings in the first year of the new job will both be temporarily
depressed.
       With this caveat in mind Figures 2a and 2b show mean earnings in the two years before and two
years after an employer switch for natives and immigrants in our CEEDD samples. The analysis is
limited to individuals who are observed in two consecutive years at both the origin and destination
firms. Workers are grouped by quartiles of coworker pay, using wages of all coworkers (i.e., both
immigrants and natives) in the year of separation (for the origin firm) and year of hiring (for the
destination firm). For clarity, only the earnings profiles of workers who move from jobs in quartile
1 and quartile 4 are shown in the figures.
       Focusing first on people who leave first-quartile firms, we see little or no change in average
earnings per year for those who move to first quartile firms, but rises for those who move up the
ranks. As expected, there is some indication of a temporary dip in earnings in the last year of the
old job. Moreover, earnings in the new job tend to rise between the first and second years on this
job, particularly if the new job has higher co-worker pay. We interpret this rise as evidence that
many movers work only part of the year in their first year at the new firm.23 What it means is
that for workers who move up the job ladder there is a negative correlation between the transitory
component of earnings in the year after a job change and the change in mean pay offered by the
  23
     Note that for people moving to higher-paying firms it is more likely that their first part-year on the new job pays
at least $14,000, and is included in our sample. For those who move to lower-paying firms, however, many of the
part-year observations will be excluded.


                                                          18
origin and destination firms ­ a violation of the exogenous mobility assumption.
         Looking next at people who leave fourth-quartile firms, we see a dip in earnings in the last year
of the old job that is particularly deep for those who end up moving to first or second quartile firms,
then a rise between the first and second years on the new job. Again, we believe the dip and rise
are both attributable to the losses of work time in the transition years between jobs. Such dips will
be larger for workers who have longer spells of non-work between jobs. Assuming that job losers
initially search for new jobs at higher-ranked firms and only take jobs further down the job ladder if
nothing else is available, we would expect a longer gap between jobs for workers from quartile 4 who
move further down the job ladder, leading to larger average losses in work time in the last year on
the old job for those workers and larger "anticipatory dips" in measured annual earnings just prior
to job change. This pattern appears to be true for both natives and immigrants in the CEEDD.
Thus, for job losers from higher-paying firms, there is a positive correlation between the transitory
component of earnings in the year prior to changing jobs and the direction of change in the "quality"
of jobs - another violation of the exogenous mobility assumption.
         A second specification test suggested by CHK is to compare the earnings gains for people who
move up the job ladder to the losses for those who move down. Under the exogenous mobility
assumption these should be symmetric (i.e., movers from quartile 2 to quartile 1 should experience
average wage losses that are the same size but opposite sign to the gains who move from quartile 1 to
quartile 2). Figure 3 presents some evidence that is broadly supportive this prediction: we show the
percentage changes in mean earnings (from 2 years before a job change to 1 year after) by origin and
destination quartile for natives (panel a) and immigrants (panel b).24 While not perfectly symmetric,
the gains for up-movers and down-movers are very strongly negatively correlated ( =                 0.96 for
natives,  =         0.99 for immigrants).
         Overall, we interpret the evidence in Figures 2 and 3 as suggesting that the patterns of wage
changes in the CEEDD for between-firm movers are relatively consistent with exogenous mobility,
apart from the "dips" induced in the period of job transition by our inability to control for the
duration of time worked on jobs that start or end part-way through the year.


6         Estimation Results
In this section, we present the results from estimating the two-way fixed effects model in equation
(1) for natives and immigrants using the connected sets described in columns 4 and 5 in Table 2.
    24
    Movers' wage changes are adjusted for trends by deviating the changes from the mean change for people who
switch firms but remain in the same quartile of coworker pay.


                                                      19
We then discuss our procedure for normalizing the worker and firm effects for the two groups and
provide a measure of the degree of assortative matching between workers and firms.

Estimation Results and Model Fit

Table 3 summarizes the estimation results. We show the standard deviations of the estimated
person effects, estimated firm effects, and estimated covariate index X 0 bg , as well as the root
                                                                            git
mean squared error (RMSE) and adjusted R-squared of the models. For reference, we also show
comparable fit statistics for a more general "job match" model that includes a separate fixed effect
for each worker-firm match.
   The two-way fixed effects models fit relatively well, with adjusted R-squared statistics of around
80% and RMSE's of around 0.25. By comparison the adjusted R-squared statistics for the match
effects model are around 0.85, and the RMSE's are around 0.23. The difference in the two RMSE's
indicates the magnitude of the variance of the "match component" in the residuals of the AKM
model ­ i.e., the component of "git that is shared by all observations of a given worker at a given
firm. This component has a standard deviation of about 0.12 for natives and 0.11 for immigrants ­
large enough to account for about 4% of the overall variance of wages for the two groups. This small
magnitude may help to alleviate concerns over the potential role of match effects in accounting for
patterns of mobility.
   The bottom panel of Table 3 shows simple "plug-in" estimates of the variance shares of the model
components. Person effects account for around 65% of the variance of log earnings (conditional on
having earnings above our minimum threshold) while firm effects account for 11-14% of the variance.
The covariance between these two components accounts for another 3-4% of overall variance, while
the covariates (and their covariances with the person and firm effects) account for about 5% of the
variance of earnings of natives but less than 1% of the variance of earnings of immigrants.
   It is well known that estimation error in the worker and firm effects leads to at least two problems
in interpreting the variances and covariance of the estimated worker and firm effects reported in
Table 3. The first is that the sampling errors in the estimated worker and firm effects are negatively
correlated (Andrews et al., 2008) leading to a downward bias in the estimated correlation between
these effects. The second is that the variance shares of the estimated worker and firm effects will
tend to overstate the importance of these components (Kline, Saggio and Solvsten, 2019). Our
reading of recent research is that these biases are likely to be larger in settings with smaller numbers
of observations per worker and relatively "thin" networks of workers (i.e., settings where many firm
effects are identified by only a single worker that connects a particular firm to the broader connected


                                                  20
set). This suggests some degree of caution in interpreting the higher variance share of firm effects
for immigrants than natives, and the lower correlation between the worker and firm effects for
immigrants.
   Appendix Table 3 shows the estimated coefficients associated with two of the most interesting
components included in the covariate index X : marital status of the individual, and province. (The
other components of X are year effects and a quartic in age). We include 6 categories of marital
status relative to an omitted category of married. None of the estimated coefficients are large in
magnitude: among the largest is widow/widower status, which is associated with about 3-4 percent
lower earnings. The province variables are larger in magnitude, especially for native workers. Our
estimates suggest that working in the Atlantic provinces reduces earnings for natives by about 15%
relative to Ontario, while working in Alberta raises earnings by 4%. We note that these estimated
provincial earnings premiums differ from others in the literature in two ways. First, we control for
person effects, so our estimates are based on earnings differentials for people who move between
provinces. Second, we also control for firm effects: thus we are measuring earnings differences
between jobs at the same firm but in different provinces.
   Appendix Figure 2 shows the estimated age profiles of earnings for natives and immigrants. As
noted earlier, we normalize these profiles at age 48. The estimates suggest that earnings of natives
rise by about 27 percent from age 25 to 48, then fall off slightly. The age profile for immigrants is
much steeper, rising by about 46 percent from age 25 to 48. The difference is an estimate of average
earnings assimilation across the various cohorts in our immigrant sample (controlling for worker and
firm characteristics), which leads to approximately a 20 percentage point gain in mean log earnings
between ages 25 and 48 for immigrants relative to natives. We return to the issue of how to measure
earnings assimilation for a specific cohort in our analysis below of earnings growth for immigrants
who landed in the 2000-2004 period.

Normalizing the Worker and Firm Effects

The next step in our analysis is to normalize the estimated worker and firm effects in the two AKM
models summarized in Table 3. Our approach builds on the interpretation developed by CCHK of
firm-specific pay premiums as "rent shares", as specified by equation (2). Specifically, CCHK show
that marginally viable firms with no rents to share will pay workers their outside option (i.e., the
wage they could earn in the non-market sector), whereas more productive firms will pay premiums
that vary with their productivity Rj . We use the log of measured value added per worker over the
2005-2013 period at a given firm (S j ) as a proxy for Rj (so Rj /  S j ) and assume that the true pay


                                                 21
premiums paid to natives and immigrants can be written as:

                                           N         0
                                           j   =     N   max 0, S j    
                                           M         0
                                           j   =     M   max 0, S j    

where      0
           g   =   g   and  is some minimum threshold level of value added per worker beyond which firms
are productive enough to offer pay premiums. These equations imply that the arbitrarily normalized
estimated pay premiums coming from our AKM estimation procedure should be related to S j by a
pair of non-linear threshold regression functions of the form:

                                    ^N   = cN +     0
                                                         max 0, S j    + eN                                    (10)
                                     j              N                     j
                                    ^M   = cM +     0
                                                         max 0, S j     + eM
                                     j              M                      j .


In principle the threshold  should be the same in the two equations. However, we estimate the
models separately and verify that in fact the estimated thresholds are (approximately) the same.
      Estimation results for equations (10) are presented in Table 4.25 We note first that among firms
with higher levels of value added per worker there is a strong positive relationship between S j                  
and the estimated firm effects for both natives and immigrants, with a slightly smaller estimate
for    0
       M   than    N.
                   0      Second, the estimated breakpoints for natives and immigrants are quite close,
consistent with the model leading to equations (10). Based on this similarity, we set b = 9.432
which is equivalent to a threshold of around $12,500 in value added per worker.
      Overall about 6% of all native and immigrant person-year observations are accounted for by
jobs at firms with S j < b. We then determine the values of the normalizing constants such that
the re-normalized effects for both natives and immigrants have a weighted average of zero across all
firms with S j < ^, where the weight for firm j is the total number of person-year observations for
natives and immigrants in the dual connected set with j as the employer.26

Assortative Matching

As reported in Table 3, the correlations across person-year observations between the estimated
person effects and the estimated firm effects are positive for both natives ( = 0.07) and immigrants
( = 0.04). These correlations have to be interpreted carefully because the sampling errors in the
   25
      The standard errors in this table are approximations that attempt to adjust for correlations between estimated
firm effects.
   26
      These constants are approximately the same as the estimated constants cN and cM in the threshold regression
models. Since we estimate those models without weighting, however, they are not exactly the same.


                                                          22
estimated worker and establishment effects are negatively correlated, leading to a downward bias
(Mare and Hyslop, 2006; Andrews et al., 2008). Previous studies have shown that the magnitude of
the bias is larger for weakly connected networks ­ a problem that is likely more severe for immigrants
than natives in our samples. For example, there are 14.5 natives per firm in the connected set of
natives, but only 8.7 immigrants per firm in the connected set of immigrants.
   While procedures are available to derive bias-corrected correlations (Kline, Saggio and Solvsten,
2019), we follow the simpler approach to measuring assortative matching discussed by Gerrard et
al. (2018). Specifically, consider a regression of the estimated person effect for a member of group
g on the estimated firm effects for the workplaces she or he works at:

                                       bgi =   0g   +     bg
                                                        1g J (g,i,t)   + git .                                  (11)

The coefficient   1g   is closely related to the correlation of the worker and firm effects, and provides a
metric for assessing assortative matching. Since the sampling errors in the person and establishment
effects are negatively correlated, we expect OLS estimates of               1g   to be negatively biased. However,
we can use the estimated firm effects for the other origin groups as an instrumental variable, yielding
corrected estimates of     1g .
   Table 5 presents estimates based on equation (11) for natives and immigrants in the dual-
connected set, and for subset of immigrants in the dual-connected set who were landed (i.e., re-
ceived permanent residency) in the 2000-2004 period. We present both OLS and IV results for all
three groups. Inspection of the table points to three interesting conclusions. First, as expected, a
comparison of OLS and IV estimates suggests that the attenuation bias in the OLS estimate of                     1M
(for immigrants) is substantially larger than the corresponding bias in the OLS estimate of                1N   (for
natives). Second, after accounting for this bias it appears that the degree of positive assortative
matching between high-skill workers and high-wage employers is if anything larger for immigrants.
Third, the degree of assortative matching for both groups is high: a firm that pays a 10% higher
earnings premium has employees whose average earnings capacity is 8-9 percentage points higher.
The implication of this sorting is that firm policies will tend to magnify pay differences between
groups with higher and lower "skills" as measured by their mean person effects.

6.1   Decomposing the Average Immigrant-Native Pay Gap
Next, we use the framework of equation (6) to evaluate the contribution of firm-specific pay premiums
to the average earnings gap between natives and immigrants, and decompose this total effect into a
between-firm sorting effect and a within-firm relative wage-setting effect. Table 6 presents the results

                                                        23
for the overall population of natives and immigrants in the dual-connected set, and for subgroups
classified by gender and age. We present the overall wage gap for the subgroup in column 1, the mean
estimated firm effects for natives and immigrants in columns 2 and 3, respectively, the difference
in the firm effects in column 4, and the sorting and relative pay-setting effects in columns 5 and 6,
respectively.
   Beginning with the results in the first row, our AKM models and normalization procedure implies
that native workers earn an average firm-specific pay premium of 20.2 percent, whereas immigrant
workers earn and an average pay premium of 16.4 percent. The difference (3.8 percentage points)
accounts for about one fifth of the overall native-immigrant wage gap. The entries in columns 5
and 6 imply that the under-representation of immigrants at high-premium firms drives the entire
contribution of firm pay policies; the relative pay setting effect is essentially zero. As noted earlier,
the value of the pay-setting effects depends on the normalization of the firm effects. Our baseline
normalization assumes that firms with low value added per worker (i.e., S j < b) pay zero premiums
to both natives and immigrants. If we were to assume instead that these low-productivity firms
actually pay a p% wage premium for natives relative to natives, then the pay setting effect would
increase by p percentage points and the total contribution of firm premiums to the wage gap would
rise from 3.8 percentage points to 3.8 + p percentage points.
   The next two rows of Table 6 show how the effects of firm pay policies vary by gender. The
immigrant-native pay gap is larger for men than women, and the sorting effect explains a somewhat
larger share of the male gap (22% versus 15% for women). Interesting, among both natives and
immigrants in Canada, men earn higher average pay premiums than women, implying that firm
hiring policies also contribute to the gender pay gap. Indeed, the 5.5 percentage point gap in mean
pay premiums for native men versus women represents about 17% of the 32 log point gender gap in
earnings for natives, while the 3.3 percentage point gap in mean pay premiums for immigrant men
versus women represents about 12% of the 27 log point gender gap for immigrants. We emphasize
that these estimates are not strictly comparable to others in the literature (e.g. Card, Cardoso and
Kline, 2016; Gallen, Lesner and Vejlin, 2017; Coudin, 2018; and Bruns, 2019) for two important
reasons. First, our earnings measures do not adjust for gender differences in hours per week (or
weeks per year). This presumably leads is to overstate the gross pay gaps between men and women
and understate the relative contribution of firm policies. Second, we do not fit separate AKM models
for males and females - thus, we are ignoring the possibility that firms set different wage premiums
for men and women, which other studies have found also contribute to the gender gap.
   The bottom three rows of Table 6 show the heterogeneous impacts of firm pay policies by age.
Looking across the overall workforce, the native-immigrant pay gap widens with age, despite the

                                                   24
evidence in Figure 1 that the gap narrows as immigrants remain in the country longer. This seeming
paradox is explained by the fact - noted in the discussion of Appendix Figures 1a and 1b ­ that the
pay gap is wider for people who arrive in the country at later ages. The mean pay premiums earned
by natives rise somewhat with age but actually follow an inverse-U shape for immigrants, implying
that the total contribution of firms' pay policies is largest for older workers, explaining about 5.5
percentage points of the 24.4 percentage point earnings gap.

Earnings Gaps for the 2000-2004 Cohort

As a final step before turning to our analysis of changes in earnings gaps, we present a decomposition
similar to the one in Table 6 for the subset of immigrants who landed in the 2000-2004 period.
Table 7 shows results for all workers in the 2000-2004 cohort, for males and females, and for the
four immigrant groups defined by country-of-origin group and education above or below a bachelor's
degree (BA).
   The results for all workers in the 2000-2004 cohort, and for males and females, closely parallel
the results in Table 6, though the contribution of firm pay policies is slightly smaller for the recently
arrived group.
   The results for the four origin and education subgroups, shown in the last four rows of Table
7, show some interesting patterns. Most notably, the overall contribution of firm pay policies is
close to zero for immigrants with a BA from either the advantaged countries or the non-advantage
countries. In fact, mean pay premiums earned by BA holders from the advantaged countries are
actually slightly higher than those earned by natives, explaining about 1.3 percentage points of the
29.1 percentage point earnings advantage of these immigrants relative to natives. Similarly, the mean
pay premiums earned by BA holders from non-advantaged countries are nearly the same as those
earned by natives. A potential concern with comparisons between highly educated immigrants and
all natives (as we are making in Table 7) is that the assumed counterfactual ignores the evidence of
assortative matching in Table 5. Arguably, it would be more appropriate to compare highly educated
immigrants to highly educated natives, who might be expected to work at firms with higher than
average pay premiums. Given the absence of data on education for natives in the CEEDD, however,
we are unable to make such comparisons.
   In contrast to the situation for highly educated immigrants, for less-educated immigrants the
mean pay premiums are smaller than for natives, potentially explaining about one-quarter of the
mean earnings gap between natives and less-educated immigrants from advantaged countries, and
17% of the pay gap between natives and less-educated immigrants from non-advantaged countries.


                                                   25
The latter group appears to face the most difficulty in gaining jobs at high-premium firms, pushing
down their earnings relative to natives. As benchmark, the 6.6 percentage point sorting effect in the
bottom row of Table 7 is comparable to the earnings effect of having a vocational college degree for
immigrants in Canada (see e.g., Ferrer and Riddell, 2008, Tables 3a and 3b).
       Before proceeding, it is worth pointing out one further limitation of the decompositions in Table
7. These comparisons are based on averages over the 2005-2013 period for immigrants that only
recently obtained permanent residency status. To the extent that newly-arrived immigrants move
up the job ladder relatively quickly, comparisons of their average pay premiums to those of natives
may miss an important dynamic role of sorting between firms. We turn to this next.

6.2      Earnings Assimilation
Our final set of analyses address the sources of earnings assimilation for recently-landed immigrants
in Canada, using data on the cohort who obtained permanent-residency status in the 2000-2004
period.27 To set the stage for this analysis, Figure 4 shows the changes in mean log earnings for four
subgroups of the 2000-2004 cohort, classified by country-of-origin group and education level, as well
as the changes for natives. In this figure and all the analysis in this subsection we focus on members
of the 2000-2004 cohort in the dual-connected set as well as natives in this set (i.e., the subgroups
of about 7.7 million natives and 328,000 immigrants whose characteristics are presented in columns
7 and 9 of Table 2).
       Mean log earnings of all four immigrant groups rise faster than those of natives, with around a
34% gain for highly educated immigrants from disadvantaged countries, 20-25% gains for the other
three immigrant groups, and only a 7% rise for natives. We note that our estimates of relative
earnings gains for this cohort are substantially larger than the (negligible) gains reported by Baker
and Benjamin (1994) for cohorts of immigrants who arrived in Canada in the 1970s but are more
similar to estimates reported by Grant (1999) for immigrants who arrived in Canada between 1981
and 1985. They are are also quite similar in magnitude to estimates reported by Abbott and Beach
(2011), who use IMDB data linked to tax records to examine earnings growth in the first 10 years
in Canada for those who were landed in 1982, 1988 and 1994. Appendix Figure 3 shows earnings
profiles based on their tabulations. For comparability with our analysis, we scale median earnings
of each group by their median earnings in the third year after landing. Abbott and Beach's (2011)
data show earnings gains of between 30 and 40 percent for males and females in the period from 3
  27
   As noted early about 15% of this group entered Canada prior to 2000 as students or temporary workers; the
remainder presumably arrived in the 2000-2004 period.



                                                    26
to 10 years after landing. Interestingly, as we have found, their data also show earnings profiles that
are quite similar for males and females in a given arrival cohort, providing further support for our
choice to pool the genders.
   Equation (8) suggests three main sources of this growth: relative changes in the composition
of workers (summarized by the change in the mean of the person effects for the subset who are
observed working); relative changes in the observable skill components (mainly age); and relative
changes in the mean firm premiums earned by immigrants versus natives. Figure 5 presents some
evidence on the composition effect, based on the means of the estimated person effects for individuals
in a given subgroup that have earnings above the $14,000 threshold on at least one job in a given
year. Notice first that the mean of the person effects for natives is falling slightly over time (-
2.3 percentage points) while the mean of the person effects across all immigrants in the cohort
falls a little more quickly (-3.5%). The faster fall for immigrants means that the changing relative
composition of the immigrant workforce actually contributes to a decline in earnings for immigrants
in the cohort relative to natives. This is the opposite of the prediction arising from models of selective
return migration (Yezer and Thurston, 1976; Dustmann and Gorlach, 2015) which hypothesize that
immigrants who enter a host country and experience relatively low earnings in their first few years
will return home, leading to a rise in mean earnings for the subset of immigrants who stay, and the
(false) impression of assimilation.
   Comparing across the four immigrant subgroups, we see that for three groups the mean of
the person effects trend downward over time, with a particularly large fall for immigrants from
advantaged countries with a BA or higher education. We conjecture that this fall is driven by a
relative rise in participation by females within the group, coupled with selective emigration by the
most successful earners in the group, particularly to the U.S. (see Damas de Matos and Parent,
2019). In contrast, for less-educated immigrants from non-advantaged countries we see a rise over
time in the mean of the person effects for those with earnings. The gain is small (3.5 percentage
points) and concentrated in the 2008-2010 period, potentially reflecting the effects of the recession,
which caused the unemployment rate to rise from 6.0 percent in late 2008 to 8.5% in mid-2009, and
may have led to selective job losses for the least skilled on this subgroup of immigrants.
   To account for changes in the permanent skill characteristics of the subset of immigrants working
in each year, and to adjust for expected differences arising from normal wage growth with age and
changes in macro conditions, we constructed a simple "composition-adjusted" estimate of mean




                                                   27
earnings for immigrant subgroup S in year t:
                                        X                                      
                                ASt =             ln yM it    bmi
                                                                    XM it bN                       (12)
                                        i2S


Notice that this adjustment applies the estimated coefficients for natives, bN to the observed char-
acteristics of the particular immigrant (XM it ). We then calculated the change ASt    AS 2005 to derive
a composition-adjusted change in mean log earnings for group S from 2005 to year t. By using the
native age effects we are incorporating the portion of earnings growth that would be expected for
group S if their age profile was the same as natives. We are also subtracting off the estimated year
effects for natives, thus deriving an estimate of earnings assimilation that incorporates age and year
effects as well as any composition bias arising from selective participation.
   Figure 6 shows the composition adjusted earnings profiles for each of our four immigrant sub-
groups. We note two key features of these adjusted profiles. First, for all groups except highly-
educated immigrants from non-advantaged countries the growth in adjusted earnings from 2005 to
2013 is around 8-10 percent. For immigrants from non-advantaged countries with a BA adjusted
growth is about twice as large (21.6 percent). Second, the pace of assimilation appears to have
slowed in the 2009-2010 period ­ again, potentially reflecting the impact of the recession - but
resumed again by 2012.
   What role did movements up the job ladder play in this assimilation process? We provide a
graphical illustration in Figure 7, which plots
                                         X
                                                   bN (Sjt     N jt )
                                                    j
                                              j


for each subgroup S and year t. This is an estimate of the (negative) sorting effect for group S in year
t, based on the estimated firm-specific wage premiums for natives and the difference in employment
shares between group S and natives in year t. (We show the negative sorting effect to make it easier
to compare to the upward-sloping assimilation profiles in Figures 4 and 6). All four immigrant
groups show some gain in wages relative to natives from movements to higher-paying firms. The
gain is largest for immigrants from non-advantaged countries with a BA (3.6 percentage points)
and smallest for immigrants with a BA from the U.S., U.K. and Northern Europe (1.3 percentage
points), who are already working at relatively high-paying firms in 2005 and make little subsequent
progress.
   Our findings from Figures 4-7 are summarized in Table 8. The first column of this table shows


                                                         28
the change in mean log earnings for each group from 2005 to 2013 relative to natives. The second
column shows our estimate of earnings assimilation ­ the growth in ASt from equation (12) ­ for each
group. Column 3 shows the growth in earnings arising from the changing distribution of immigrants
across firms - i.e., the first term in equation (9). Finally, the fourth column shows the percentage
of estimated assimilation that is attributable to movements up the job ladder. This ranges from 13
to 32 percent, with an overall average of 18%. The magnitude of the job ladder effect is largest for
immigrants from non-advantaged countries that have a BA, but as a share of total assimilation the
job ladder component is largest for those without a BA from these same countries.


7    Discussion
We have used rich administrative data from tax records, along with the simple "job ladder" model
specified by AKM, to provide a series of new insights about the level and growth of immigrant
earnings in Canada. Consistent with a growing literature that applies the AKM framework to
understand inter-group pay differences, we find that firm-specific pay and hiring policies contribute
to the gap in earnings between immigrants and natives. Immigrants as a group are less likely to
be hired at firms that offer higher pay premiums, explaining about one-fifth of the average pay gap
between immigrants and natives in our sample period. Looking within subgroups of immigrants, we
find that this sorting effect is particularly large for immigrants from non-traditional source countries
who lack a university-level education ­ a subgroup that earns about 40% less than natives, on
average, and is widely seen as "less successful" in the Canadian labor market.
    We also use our longitudinal data and AKM-based framework to help understand the sources
of the relatively rapid earnings growth that recently arrived cohorts of immigrants experience in
their first years in the host country. The AKM framework provides a natural metric for measuring
changes in earnings due to selective emigration or non-participation within a cohort. In the context
of the model, these changes are represented by changes in the average of the person effects for those
with earnings in a particular year. For the cohort we study, who became permanent residents in
the 2000-2004 period, we find that selectivity biases associated with movements in or out of the
workforce actually contribute to a slight decline in earning of immigrants relative to natives ­ a
finding that has been echoed in a few other recent studies for Canada and the U.S. (Picot and
Pirano, 2013; Rho and Sanders, 2019).
    Using the estimated AKM models for immigrants and natives to derive the "true" earnings as-
similation rate of the cohort, adjusting for selective composition effects, age-related earnings growth,
and macro shocks, we conclude that immigrants in the 2000-2004 cohort experienced about a 15

                                                  29
percentage point growth in mean log earnings between 2005 and 2013. Comparing assimilation rates
across country-of-origin and education subgroups, the one group that stands out are immigrants from
the "new" source countries (i.e., Asia, Eastern Europe, Africa and Latin America) with a university
education. This group experiences earnings growth of about 20% relative to natives. Interestingly,
they are also the group with the largest movements up the job ladder between 2005 and 2013 - shifts
between employers that can explain about one-sixth of their rapid earnings gains.
   Overall, our findings complement and extend existing results in the literature by showing the time
profile in the progress of the immigrants' average earnings relative to natives and by identifying part
of the source of the average gain from having a B.A. or more, namely the movement from employer to
employer. In addition, the results for those from the new source countries with a university education
are consistent with some learning in the labor market by employers. Although the credentials of those
immigrants are discounted upon arrival, their productivity is eventually revealed and recognized by
employers, and part of this paper's contribution is to characterize this process by which foreign
credentials are valued in the labor market.




                                                  30
References
Abbott, Michael G. and Charles M. Beach. 2011. "Immigrant Earnings Differences Across Admission
Categories and Landing Cohorts." CLSRN Working Paper No. 81.
   Abowd, John M., Robert H. Creecy, and Francis Kramarz. 2002. "Computing Person and
Firm Effects Using Linked Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data." U.S. Census Bureau Technical
Working Paper TP-2002-06.
   Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis. 1999. "High Wage Workers and
High Wage Firms." Econometrica 67(2): 251-333.
   Akee, Randall and Maggie R. Jones. 2019. "Immigrants Earnings Growth and Return Migration
from the U.S.: Examining Their Determinants Using Linked Survey and Administrative Data."
NBER Working Paper No. 25639.
   Andrews, Martyn J., Leonard Gill, Thorsten Schank, and Richard Upward. 2008. "High Wage
Workers and Low Wage Firms: Negative Assortative Matching or Limited Mobility Bias?" Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society : Series A 171 (3): 673-697.
   Ashenfelter, Orley, 1978. "Estimating the Effect of Training Programs on Earnings." Review of
Economics and Statistics 60(1): 47-57.
   Baker, Michael, and Dwayne Benjamin. 1994. `The Performance of Immigrants in the Canadian
Labor Market." Journal of Labor Economics 12(2): 369­405.
   Baker, Michael, and Dwayne Benjamin. 1997. "The Role of the Family in Immigrants' Labor-
Market Activity: An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations." American Economic Review 87(4):
705-727.
   Bassier, Ihsaan, Arindrajit Dube and Suresh Naidu. 2019. "Monopsony in Movers: The Elasticity
of Labor Supply to Firm Wage Policies." Unpublished Working Paper, University of Massachusetts
Department of Economics.
   Blau, Francine D., Lawrence M. Kahn, Joan Y. Moriarty and Andre Portela Souza. 2003. "The
Role of the Family in Immigrants' Labor-Market Activity: An Evaluation of Alternative Explana-
tions: Comment." American Economic Review 93(1): 429-447.
   Bonikowska Aneta, Feng Hou and Garnett Picot. 2015. "Which Human Capital Characteristics
Best Predict the Earnings of Economic Immigrants?" Statistics Canada Analytical Studies Branch
Research Paper Series No. 368.
   Borjas, George J. 1985. "Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of Immi-
grants." Journal of Labor Economics 3(4): 463-489.
   Borjas, George J. 1999. "The Economic Analysis of Immigration." In Orley Ashenfelter and


                                                  31
David Card, editors. Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
   Bratsberg, Bernt and Dek Terell. 2007. "School Quality and the Returns to Education of U.S.
Immigrants." Economic Inquiry 40(2):
   Bruns, Benjamin. 2019. "Changes in Workplace Hetergeneity and How They Widen the Gender
Wage Gap." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11(2): 74-113.
   Burdett, Kenneth and Dale T. Mortensen. 1998. "Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and Un-
employment." International Economic Review 39(2): 257-273.
   Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Jorg Heining, and Patrick M. Kline. 2018. "Firms and Labor
Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory." Journal of Labor Economics 36 (Supplement):
S13-S70.
   Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, and Patrick M. Kline. 2016. "Bargaining, Sorting, and the
Gender Wage Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 131(2): 633-686.
   Card, David, Jorg Heining, and Patrick M. Kline. 2013. "Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise
of West German Wage Inequality." Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3): 967-1015.
   Chiswick, Barry R. 1978. "The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign Born Men."
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86, No. 5, pp. 897­921.
   Chiswick Barry R. and Paul W. Miller. 1994. "The Determinants of Post-Immigration Invest-
ments in Education." Economics of Education Review 13(2): 163-177.
   Citizenship and Immigration Canada. 2014. Evaluation of the Family Reunification Program.
Research and Evaluation Division Report No. E4-2103.
   Clarke, Andrew, Ana Ferrer and Mikal Skuterud. 2019. "A Comparative Analysis of the Labour
Market Performance of University- Educated Immigrants in Australia, Canada, and the United
States: Does Policy Matter?" Journal of Labor Economics 37(S2): S443-S490.
   Coudin, Elise, Sophie Maillard, and Maxime To. 2018. "Family, Firms and the Gender Wage
Gap in France." CREST Serie des Doccuments de Travail, No. 2018-09.
   Damas de Matos, Ana. 2016. "Firm Heterogeneity and Immigrant Wage Assimilation." Applied
Economics Letter s 24(9): 653-657.
   Damos de Matos, Ana and Daniel Parent. 2019. "Canada and High-Skill Emigration to the
United States: Way Station or Farm System?" Journal of Labor Economics 37(S2): S491-S532.
   Dustmann, Christian and J.-S. Gorlich. 2015. "Selective Out-migration and the Estimation of
Immigrants' Earnings Profiles. In Handbook of the Economics of International Migration, Vol. 1.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.



                                               32
   Eeckhout, Jan and Philipp Kircher. 2011. "Identifying Sorting - In Theory." Review of Economic
Studies 78(3): 872-906.
   Ferrer, Ana, David A. Green and W. Craig Riddell. 2006. "The Effect of Literacy on Immigrant
Earnings." Journal of Human Resources 41 (2): 380-410.
   Ferrer, Ana, Garnett Picot and W. Craig Riddell. 2014. "New Directions in Immigration Policy:
Canada's Evolving Approach to the Selection of Economic Immigrants." International Migration
Review 48(3): 846-867.
   Ferrer, Ana and W. Craig Riddell. 2008. "Education, Credentials, and Immigrant Earnings."
Canadian Journal of Economics 41(1): 186-216.
   Galarneau, Diane and Eric Fecteau. 2014. "The Ups and Downs of Minimum Wage." Insights
on Canadian Society, Statistics Canada, Catalogue no. 75-006-X.
   Gallen, Yana; Rune V. Lesner, Rune Majlund Vejlin. 2017 "The Labor Market Gender Gap in
Denmark: Sorting Out the Past 30 Years." IZA Discussion Paper, No. 10789.
   Gerard, Fracois, Lorenzo Lagos, Edson Severnini and David Card. 2018. "Assortative Matching
or Exclusionary Hiring: The Impact of Firm Policies on Racial Wage Differences in Brazil." NBER
Working Paper No. 25176.
   Grant, L. Mary. 1999. "Evidence of New Immigrant Assimilation in Canada." Canadian Journal
of Economics 32(3): 930-955.
   Green, Alan and David A. Green. 1995. "The Economic Goals of Canada's Immigration Policy:
Past and Present." Canadian Public Policy 25: 425-451.
   Hou, Feng, Yao Lu and Christoph Schimmele. 2019. "Recent Trends in Over-education by
Immigration Status." Statistics Canada Analytical Studies Branch Research Paper Series No. 436.
   Javdani, Mohsen and Andrew McGee. 2018. "Labor Market Mobility and the Early-Career
Outcomes of Immigrant Men." IZA Journal of Development and Migration 8:20.
   Lalonde, Robert J. and Robert H.Topel. 1992. "The Assimilation of Immigrants in the U.S. Labor
Market." In George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman, editors, Immigration and the Workforce:
Economic Consequences for the United States and Source Areas. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
   Lubotsky, Darren . 2007. "Chutes or Ladders: A Longitudinal Analysis of Immigrant Earnings."
Journal of Political Economy 115(5): 820-867.
   Kline, Patrick M., Raaele Saggio, and Mikkel Solvsten. 2019. "Leave-Out Estimation of Variance
Components." Econometrica forthcoming.
   Macis, Mario and Fabiano Schivardi. 2016. "Exports and Wages: Rent Sharing, Workforce
Composition, or Returns to Skills?" Journal of Labor Economics 34(4): 945-978.

                                                33
   Mare, David C. and Dean R. Hyslop. 2006. "Worker-Firm Heterogeneity and Matching: An
Analysis Using Worker and Firm Fixed Effects Estimated from LEED." Statistics New Zealand
LEED Research Paper.
   Oaxaca, Ronald L. 1973. "Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets." Interna-
tional Economic Review 14(3): 693-709.
   Orefice, Gianluca and Giovanni Peri. 2020. "Immigration and Worker-Firm Matching." NBER
Working Paper No. 26860.
   Oreopoulos, Philip. 2011. "Why Do Skilled Immigrants Struggle in the Labor Market? A Field
Experiment With Thirteen Thousand Resumes." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
3(4): 148-171.
   Pendakur, Krishna and Simon Woodcock. 2010. "Glass Ceilings or Glass Doors? Wage Disparity
Within and Between Firms." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 28(1): 181-189.
   Picot, Garnett and Patrizio Piraino. 2013. "Immigrant earnings growth: selection bias or real
progress?" Canadian Journal of Economics 46(4): 1510-1536.
   Postel-Vinay, Fabien and Jean-Marc Robin. 2006. "Microeconometric Search-Matching Models
and Matched Employer-Employee Data." CREST Working Paper.
   Rho, Deborah and Seth Sanders. 2018. "Immigrant Earnings Assimilation in the United States:
A Panel Analysis." Unpublished Working Paper, Duke University Department of Economics.
   Skuterud, Mikal, and Mingcui Su. 2012. "The influence of Measurement Error and Unobserved
Heterogeneity in Estimating Immigrant Returns to Foreign and Host-Country Sources of Human
Capital." Empirical Economics 43: 1109-1141.
   Song, Jae, David J. Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and Till Von Wachter. 2019. "Firming
Up Wage Inequality." Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(1): 1-50.
   Yezer Anthony M. J. and Lawrence Thurston. 1976. "Migration Patterns and Income Change:
Implications for the Human Capital Approach to Migration." Southern Economic Journal 42 (4):
693-702.




                                               34
Table 1: Characteristics of Adult Natives and Immigrants, 2016 Census

                                                    Immigrants from US/UK/Northern
                                                                Europea                      Immigrants from Rest of World
                                                                           Family                                    Family
                                                              Economic Reunification                 Economic Reunification
                                     Natives          All        Class      Class             All       Class         Class

Share Female                           0.51          0.50        0.52         0.46           0.46        0.49         0.41
Share with B.A. or More                0.23          0.42        0.46         0.36           0.47        0.60         0.27
Share with Postive Earnings            0.81          0.78        0.81         0.74           0.75        0.77         0.71
Share Working Mainly Full Time         0.74          0.77        0.82         0.69           0.70        0.73         0.66
Mean Annual Earnings                  46,797        54,969      60,354       46,889         35,641      40,280       28,352
Number Observations                  320,349        7,334        4,401        2,933         72,488      44,299       28,189
Notes: Entries are tabulations from 2016 Census for individuals age 20 59.

a
    Includes U.S., U.K., Australia, New Zealand, Germany, Netherlands, France, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland, Spain.
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for Subsamples of Individuals in CEEDD 2005-2013

                                                                                                       Connected Sets of Workers/Firms
                                          Overall Analysis Sample                              All                                    Dual-Connected

                                                             Landed 2000-                                Landed 2000-                                 Landed 2000-
                                  Natives      Immigrants        2004         Natives     Immigrants         2004          Natives       Immigrants      2004
                                    (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)          (5)              (6)            (7)            (8)           (9)

Percent Male                       59.7            57.5             58.7       60.0           57.8            59.0          59.8            57.9         59.4

Mean age                           42.1            41.2             39.9       42.0           41.1            40.0          42.2            41.3         39.9
Percent <= 30 years old            16.2            14.5             12.6       16.4           14.7            11.9          15.6            13.9         11.9
Percent >= 50 years old            27.6            20.7             12.6       27.2           20.3            12.6          27.4            20.6         12.2

Mean earnings (if  threshold)     50 732          41 774        40 976        51 011         42 239          41 633        55 671          43 790       42 992

Percent in Québec                  26.3            13.3             14.2       26.5           13.1            14.1          23.9            13.4         14.5
Percent in Ontario                 36.1            54.8             55.9       36.1           55.3            56.1          39.5            55.8         56.5
Percent in British Columbia        11.3            15.7             14.6       11.2           15.5            14.6          11.4            14.7         13.6

Median firm size (estimated         170            201              218         196           258             229            738            297           326
 labor units)
Fraction of immigrants at firm     21.2            62.4             65.6       21.4           62.1            64.9          26.9            55.9         58.2
  (estimated labor units)
Mean log sales/estimated           10.7            10.6             10.6       10.7           10.6            10.7          10.8            10.7         10.7
 labor unit
Number of person-year obs        52 004 007     11 430 335    1 840 022     50 511 526     10 744 641      1 770 032     35 502 198      9 555 501     1 542 143
Number of persons                10 097 344     2 466 523      376 131       9 717 699     2 269 452        315 382       7 035 252      1 898 212      294 621
Number of firms                   888 781        401 223       140 732        668 892       259 353         118 782        220 948        220 948        90 129
Notes: Based on authors' tabulations of CEEDD. Estimated labor units are computed using the average number of employees at the firm, representing the mean
of all non-zero monthly employment submissions from the Payroll Deductions and Remittances. Annual earnings are set to missing if less than $14,000 threshold
(in real dollars) -- see text.
Table 3: Summary of Estimated AKM Models for Natives and Immigrants


                                                             Natives            All Immigrants
                                                               (1)                    (2)

Standard deviation of log earnings                            0.637                 0.591
Number of person year observations                         50,457,400            10,935,636
Summary of parameter estimates:
Number of person effects                                    8,631,009             2,127,628
Number firm effects                                          605,155               221,540
Std. dev. of person effects (across person yr obs.)           0.489                 0.460
Std. dev. of firm effects (across person yr obs.)             0.202                 0.211
Std. dev. of Xb (across person yr obs.)                       0.130                 0.133
Correlation of person/firm effects                            0.071                 0.042
RMSE of model                                                 0.259                 0.250
Adjusted R squared of model                                   0.818                 0.802
                                                   a/
Corr. of estimated native/immigrant firm effects                        0.601
Comparison with job match effects model:
Number of job match effects                                10,097,344             4,144,024
RMSE of match effects model                                  0.228                  0.226
Adjusted R squared of match effect model                     0.856                  0.836
Standard deviation of job match effect                       0.123                  0.107
Share of variance of log wages due to:
Person effects                                               0.649            0.672
Firm effects                                                 0.111            0.141
Covariance of person and firm effects                        0.038            0.026
XB and associated covariances                                0.054            0.003
Residual                                                     0.149            0.158
Note: table presents summary of estimated two way fixed effects model. Model is estimated
separately for natives (column 1) and immigrants (column 2).
a/
   Correlation of estimated firm effects for native workers and immigrant workers across all
firms In dual connected set.
Table 4: Regressions of Estimated Firm Effects on Mean Log
         Value Added per worker

                                          Natives                   Immigrants
                                            (1)                        (2)

Constant                                  -0.206                      -0.155
                                          (0.010)                     (0.020)

Slope coefficient                          0.141                       0.125
                                          (0.010)                     (0.010)

Break Point ()                             9.432                       9.465
                                          (0.130)                     (0.170)
Note: Table displays coefficient estimates for nonlinear regression of unnormalized
estimated firm effects for firms in dual connected set on
max{ mean log value added per worker - m, 0 } , where m is an estimated breakpoint.
Approximate standard errors in parentheses.
Table 5: Relationship Between Estimated Person Effects and Estimated Firm Effects


                                                                                    Immigrants
                                      Natives              Immigrants          (Landed 2000 2004)
                                  OLS         IV          OLS       IV            OLS        IV
                                  (1)         (2)         (3)      (4)            (5)        (6)

Regression Coefficient           0.434      0.779        0.188      0.902        0.257       0.869
(Pers. Eff. = a +b Firm Eff)    (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.003)

Note: table entries are coefficients from regression of estimated person effect on estimated firm
effect for the firm of person's main job in the year. In column 2 instrumental variable for estimated
firm effect for native workers is estimated firm effect for immigrant workers. In columns 4 and 6
instrumental variable for estimated firm effect for immigrant workers is estimated firm effect for
native workers. Sample for columns 1 2 is person year observations for natives working at firms in
dual connected set of natives and immigrants. Sample for columns 3 4 is person year observations
for immigrants working at firms in dual connected set of immigrants and natives. Sample for
columns 5 6 is person year observations for immigrants who landed in the period 2000 2004
working at firms in dual connected set of immigrants and natives.
Table 6: Contribution of Firm specific Pay Premiums to the Immigrant Wage Gap at Dual Connected Firms


                  Immigrant          Mean Firm         Mean Firm      Total Contribution        Sorting Effect  Pay Setting Effect
                Native Earnings     Premium for       Premium for     of Firm Premiums          (Weighted by      (Weighted by
                     Gap              Natives         Immigrants       to Earnings Gap        Native Premiums) Immigrant Shares)
                       (1)               (2)               (3)                 (4)                     (5)                   (6)

All                  0.199             0.202              0.164              0.038                   0.040                  0.002
                                                                             (0.19)                  (0.20)                ( 0.01)
By gender:
Male                 0.217             0.224              0.178              0.045                   0.048                  0.003
                                                                             (0.21)                  (0.22)                ( 0.01)

Female               0.158             0.169              0.145              0.024                   0.026                  0.002
                                                                             (0.15)                  (0.16)                ( 0.01)
By age group:

Up to age 30         0.112             0.186              0.164              0.022                   0.028                  0.005
                                                                             (0.20)                  (0.25)                ( 0.03)

Ages 31 50           0.207             0.204              0.169              0.035                   0.038                  0.003
                                                                             (0.17)                  (0.18)                ( 0.01)

50 or over           0.244             0.206              0.151              0.055                   0.054                 0.001
                                                                             (0.22)                  (0.22)                (0.00)
Note: Column (1) shows the mean log earnings gap between immigrants and natives in the dual connected set. Columns (2) and (3)
show the mean (normalized) pay premiums received by natives and immigrants. Column (4) is the difference between columns (2) and
(3) and measures the total contribution of firm specific hiring and wage setting policies to the immigrant native gap. Columns (5) and
(6) decompose the total in column (4) into a between firm sorting effect (column (5)) and a differential pay setting effect (column (6)).
See text. Entries in parentheses are shares of overall gap explained by component in columm.
Table 7: Contribution of Firm specific Pay Premiums to the Wage Gap for Immigrants Landed 2000 2004


                         Immigrant         Mean Firm        Mean Firm     Contribution of        Sorting Effect  Pay Setting Effect
                       Native Earnings    Premium for      Premium for    Firm Premiums          (Weighted by      (Weighted by
                             Gap            Natives        Immigrants         to Gap           Native Premiums) Immigrant Shares)
                             (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)                   (5)              (6)
All                         0.203            0.202            0.172            0.029                 0.034             0.004
                                                                               (0.14)                (0.17)           ( 0.02)
By gender:
Male                        0.215            0.224            0.189            0.035                 0.039               0.005
                                                                               (0.16)                (0.18)             ( 0.02)

Female                      0.183            0.169            0.148            0.021                 0.025               0.004
                                                                               (0.11)                (0.14)             ( 0.03)

By source country group and BA or not:
US/UK/Northern               0.291           0.202            0.214             0.013                0.001               0.014
 Europe with BA+                                                               (0.04)                (0.00)             ( 0.04)

US/UK/Northern              0.121            0.202            0.168            0.033                 0.055               0.021
 Europe without BA                                                             (0.27)                (0.45)             ( 0.18)
Other Countries             0.077            0.202            0.201            0.000                 0.008               0.007
 with BA+                                                                      (0.01)                (0.10)             ( 0.09)

Other Countries                0.410             0.202             0.133            0.068                 0.066                 0.002
 without BA                                                                         (0.17)                (0.16)               (0.00)
Note: Column (1) shows the mean log earnings gap between immigrants who landed 2000 2004 and natives in the dual connected set
for natives and immigrants. Columns (2) and (3) show the mean (normalized) pay premiums received by natives and immigrants.
Column (4) is the difference between columns (2) and (3) and measures the total contribution of firm specific hiring and wage setting
policies to the immigrant native gap. Columns (5) and (6) decompose the total in column (4) into a between firm sorting effect (column
(5)) and a differential pay setting effect (column (6)). See text. Entries in parentheses are shares of overall gap explained by
component in columm.
Table 8: Contribution of Changes in Firm Premiums to Adjusted Earnings Growth for Immigrants Landed 2000 2004
                                                                                  Change in Mean Firm Contribution of Sorting
                                Growth in Mean Log        Adjusted Growth in      Premiums Relative to  Effect to Adjusted
                                Earnings Relative to      Mean Log Earnings          Natives (Sorting    Earnings Growth
                                                                                                a
                                      Natives             Relative to Natives            Effect)             (percent)
                                        (1)                       (2)                      (3)                  (4)
All                                     0.199                    0.149                    0.027                     18.1
By source coutry group:
US/US/Northern                          0.120                    0.091                    0.014                     15.4
 Europe
Other Countries                         0.212                    0.154                    0.028                     18.2
By source coutry group and BA or not:
US/US/Northern                        0.158                      0.100                    0.013                     13.0
 Europe with BA+
US/US/Northern                          0.135                    0.090                    0.020                     22.2
 Europe without BA
Other Countries                         0.274                    0.216                    0.036                     16.7
with BA
Other Countries                          0.184                    0.084                  0.027                   32.1
without BA
Note: Column (1) shows growth in mean log earnings for immigrants that landed 2000 2004 relative to natives over the 2005
2013 period. Column (2) shows an estimate of composition adjusted earnings growth for immigrants (adjusting for changes in
permanent component of earnings and age differences). Column (3) shows the change in the estimated between firm sorting
effect (i.e., the change in the difference in average native firm premiums at firms employing immigrants versus natives).
Column (4) shows the percentage of adjusted total earnings growth explained by the change in the sorting effect.

a
 Sorting effect is defined as difference in shares of immigrants and natives working at different firms, weighting by the
estimated firm specific pay premium for natives. This is the negative of the sorting effect defined in earlier tables and figures.
Figure 1: Immigrant Native Gaps in Earnings

                a. Annual Earnings Gap

                0.30                                                    US/UK/Euro
                                                                        Male
                0.20
                0.10                                                    US/UK/Euro
 Earnings Gap

                                                                        Female
                0.00
                0.10                                                    Other
                0.20                                                    Countries
                                                                        Female
                0.30
                                                                        Other
                0.40                                                    Countries Male
                0.50
                             2006                  2011          2016
                                                   Census Year


                 b. Adjusted Annual Earnings Gap

                0.30                                                    US/UK/Euro
                                                                        Male
                0.20
                0.10                                                    US/UK/Euro
 Earnings Gap




                0.00                                                    Female

                0.10
                                                                        Other
                0.20                                                    Countries
                                                                        Female
                0.30
                                                                        Other
                0.40                                                    Countries Male
                0.50
                             2006                  2011          2016
                                                   Census Year


                c. Adjusted Weekly Earnings Gaps

                0.30                                                    US/UK/Euro
                                                                        Male
                0.20
                0.10                                                    US/UK/Euro
 Earnings Gap




                                                                        Female
                0.00
                0.10
                                                                        Other
                0.20                                                    Countries
                                                                        Female
                0.30
                                                                        Other
                0.40                                                    Countries Male
                0.50
                             2006                  2011          2016
                                                   Census Year
                          Figure 2a: Earnings Trends for Natives Around Job Changes
                            Classified by Co worker Earnings Quartiles Pre and Post
                100,000

                 90,000                                                               Q4 to Q4
                                                                                      Q4 to Q3
                 80,000
                                                                                      Q4 to Q2
                 70,000
Mean Earnings




                                                                                      Q4 to Q1
                 60,000                                                               Q1 to Q1
                 50,000                                                               Q1 to Q2
                                                                                      Q1 to Q3
                 40,000
                                                                                      Q1 to Q4
                 30,000

                 20,000
                            1              2                 3          4
                                         Years Relative to Change
                          Figure 2b: Earnings Trends for Immigrants Around Job Changes
                              Classified by Co worker Earnings Quartiles Pre and Post
                100,000

                 90,000                                                                  Q4 to Q4
                                                                                         Q4 to Q3
                 80,000
                                                                                         Q4 to Q2
                 70,000
Mean Earnings




                                                                                         Q4 to Q1
                 60,000                                                                  Q1 to Q1
                 50,000                                                                  Q1 to Q2
                                                                                         Q1 to Q3
                 40,000
                                                                                         Q1 to Q4
                 30,000

                 20,000
                              1             2                 3          4
                                          Years Relative to Change
Figure 3: Earnings Changes of Firm Movers by Co worker Earnings
                    Quartile of Origin and Destination Firm

 a. Natives


                             0.6

                                0.4

                                0.2

      Mean Earnings Change        0

                                 0.2

                                 0.4
                                                                                        3
                                 0.6
                                                                                       Destination
                                            1                                  1
                                                     2                                 Co worker
                                                               3       4                Quartile
                                            Origin Co worker
                                                Quartile



   b. Immigrants


                          0.6

                          0.4

                          0.2
          Mean Earnings
            Change           0

                          0.2

                          0.4
                                                                                   3
                           0.6                                                     Destination
                                        1                                  1       Co worker
                                                 2        3        4                Quartile
                                       Origin Co worker
                                           Quartile


Note: earnings changes are deviated from mean earnings changes of movers who
      remain in same co worker quartile.
                                               Figure 4: Mean Earnings Growth of Natives and Subgroups of Immigrants
                                                                    in 2000 2004 Landed Cohort
                                         0.4
                                                                                                                   Other
                                                                                                                   Countries BA
Change in Mean Log Earnings Since 2005




                                                                                                                   (+34.3%)

                                         0.3
                                                                                                                   Other
                                                                                                                   Countries No
                                                                                                                   BA (+25.3%)

                                         0.2
                                                                                                                   US/UK/NW
                                                                                                                   Eur. With BA
                                                                                                                   (+22.8%)
                                         0.1
                                                                                                                   US/UK/NW
                                                                                                                   Eur. No BA
                                                                                                                   (+20.4%)
                                         0.0
                                                                                                                   Natives
                                                                                                                   (+6.9%)

                                         0.1
                                           2005      2006    2007   2008    2009    2010   2011    2012   2013
                                                        Figure 5: Changes in the Mean Person Effects of Workers Employed Over
                                                                         Time Estimates of Composition Bias
                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                            Other
                                                                                                                            Countries No
                                                                                                                            BA (+3.5%)
Change in Mean Person Effects Relative to 2005




                                                                                                                            Natives
                                                                                                                            ( 2.3%)

                                                 0.00
                                                                                                                            All Imm.
                                                                                                                            ( 3.5%)



                                                                                                                            US/UK/NW
                                                                                                                            Eur. No BA
                                                                                                                            ( 4.4%)
                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                            Other
                                                                                                                            Countries BA
                                                                                                                            ( 4.7%)

                                                                                                                            US/UK/NW
                                                                                                                            Eur. With BA
                                                                                                                            ( 7.2%)
                                                 0.10
                                                    2005      2006    2007   2008    2009    2010   2011    2012    2013
                                                  Figure 6: Composition Adjusted Earnings Growth of Subgroups of
                                                              Immigrants in 2000 2004 Landed Cohort
                                         0.3
                                                                                                                   Other
                                                                                                                   Countries BA
Change in Mean Log Earnings Since 2005




                                                                                                                   (+21.6%)


                                         0.2                                                                       All Immigrants
                                                                                                                   (+14.9%)




                                                                                                                   Other
                                         0.1                                                                       Countries No
                                                                                                                   BA (+8.4%)


                                                                                                                   US/UK/NW
                                                                                                                   Eur. With BA
                                         0.0                                                                       (+10.0%)


                                                                                                                   US/UK/NW
                                                                                                                   Eur. No BA
                                                                                                                   (+9.0%)
                                         0.1
                                           2005     2006    2007    2008   2009    2010    2011   2012    2013
                                                   Figure 7: Evolution of Sorting Effect for Subgroups of Immigrants in 2000
                                                                              2004 Landed Cohort
                                                0.02
                                                                                                                          US/UK/NW
                                                                                                                          Eur. With BA
Estimated Sorting Effect (Immigrants Natives)




                                                                                                                          (1.3%)
                                                0.00
                                                                                                                          Other
                                                                                                                          Countries
                                                                                                                          With BA
                                                0.02                                                                      (3.6%)

                                                                                                                          All
                                                                                                                          Immigrants
                                                0.04                                                                      (2.7%)


                                                                                                                          US/UK/NW
                                                0.06                                                                      Eur. No BA
                                                                                                                          (2.0%)


                                                0.08                                                                      Other
                                                                                                                          Countries
                                                                                                                          No BA
                                                                                                                          (2.7%)
                                                0.10
                                                   2005    2006    2007   2008    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013
                                                                                            Jiang Beryl Li, EAD/DEA
                                                                                                          April 2020

Data Appendix


Our study makes use of the Canadian Employer-Employee Dynamics Database (CEEDD) ­ a matched
employer-employee database built from large-scale administrative data in a linkable file environment.
The CEEDD covers the universe of individual tax filers and their families, employees receiving Statements
of Remuneration Paid (T4) slips, unincorporated businesses and corporations, unincorporated business
owners reporting self-employment income, and owners of Canadian-controlled Private Corporations.1,2
Our dataset focuses on employees in the business sector whose primary income sourcing from
employment. Several steps are taken before arriving at the full set as reported in columns 1-3 in Table 2.
First and foremost, our sample keeps individuals with their primary source of income being employment
only. To determine the main source of income for a given individual, we define income sources into four
categories: 1) employment income; 2) self-employment income; 3) indifferent between employment and
self-employment income; and 4) no income. Employment income is aggregated from all T4 slips. Self-
employment income sources from business, farming, fishing, rental, commissions, and professional
income. Our full set includes scenarios 1) and 3) only.
Second, our sample limits Canadian businesses to ones with a valid business number (BN) only, removing
unincorporated (T1) businesses without BN as a result.3 BN is a number the Canadian Revenue Agency
assigns to a business when it files any or all of T4, Payroll Deductions and Remittances (PD7), GST/HST,
and exports/imports.4 As such, BNs establishes employer-employee relationship. Limiting our sample to
businesses with a valid BN is a particularly important and necessary step for T1 businesses to retain a
longitudinal structure in this relationship between employees and their employers. While all incorporated
(T2) businesses have a valid BN, only a fraction of T1 businesses does so. Moreover, other T1 business
identifiers, while exist, are not meaningful in creating our sample for the following reasons. The unique
business identifier (BI) used in collecting T1 Business Declaration (T1BD) is cross-sectional in nature.
Moreover, other longitudinal business identifiers (e.g., partnership business number and parent operating
entity) cannot be used to match employees with their employers.
Finally, our sample covers Canadian businesses in the business sector only and with two or more
employees. We limit our focus to the business sector for two reasons. First, the average firm size in the
public services (NAICS 91) is found significantly larger than the rest of industries. Second, most public-
sector employees are unionized which in turn may contaminate the wage-setting effect in the business


1
  The data are accessed at the Canadian Centre for Data Development and Economic Research (CDER), Statistics
Canada in Ottawa. The current production cycle of the core CEEDD file covers reference years 2001-2017.
2
  The CEEDD provides comprehensive information on employees and their employers. For employees, this includes
1) demographics (e.g., age, gender, marital status, immigrant status, province of residence); 2) family (e.g., spouse
and children); and 3) employment (e.g., earnings, job separation, workplace). For businesses, this includes 1) detailed
financial information (e.g., revenue, expense, assets, liabilities); 2) employment, payroll, workforce characteristics;
and 3) performance related to productivity, research and development expenditures, industry, province of operation,
and trade.
3
  The unit of analysis for firms is different between T1 and T2 businesses. A T1 business is identified by BN whereas
a T2 business is identified by enterprise ­ a statistical identifier that could correspond to multiple BNs for a more
complex business entity. T1 businesses are in general smaller than T2 business in size, defined by employment. Using
BN as the unit of analysis in T1 reinforces this result as each T2 business could have one or more BNs.
4
  PD7 is filled out by the employer to indicate the amount of the employee's and employer's benefits sent to CRA.
This information is generally reported monthly.
                                                                                           Jiang Beryl Li, EAD/DEA
                                                                                                         April 2020

sector. Moreover, we include businesses with two employees or more in our final sample. Consequently,
we exclude over half of all Canadian businesses with limited labour market implications.5
The resulting dataset include all workers in the business sectors employed at firms with a valid BN and
with at least two employees. For a given year, each worker has one job gives rise to his/her highest
employment income. Effectively, this dataset also excludes self-employment or individuals with zero
employment income.
Key variables considered for employees are annual earnings, gender, and province of residence. For a
given employee, annual earning is derived from T4 income by BN. Province of residence and gender
information are sourced from T1 personal tax filings. Gender information from the Longitudinal
Immigration Database is used to supplement any missing values from T1.
Key variables on firm characteristics include value added per worker, employment and immigrant
participation rate (or shares).6 For each firm, value added is a sum of T4 payrolls and net income before
taxes and extraordinary items. Employment is the average number of employees. For T2 businesses it is
the mean of all non-zero monthly employment submissions from PD7 whereas for T1 businesses it is the
total headcount of employees who receive T4 slips. 7 Immigrant share is calculated according to these
employment measures for a given firm.


Reference
Li, J., Grekou, D. and H. Liu. 2018. "The Measurement of Business Ownership by Gender in the Canadian
          Employer-Employee Dynamics Database." Analytical Studies: Methods and References, Catalogue
          no. 11-633-X -- No. 017, Statistics Canada.




5
  On average, there are 2.3 million firms annually between 2005 and 2013; about 1.2 million of them ­ incorporated
and unincorporated ­ have no employment (see columns 1-3 in Table 1-1 in Grekou, Li and Liu 2018).
6
  In T1BD, payroll information is not reported. Instead, T1 payroll is created by aggregating all T4 employment income
for a given BN. This is identical to the concept of T2 payroll.
7
  While conceptually similar, PD7-based employment is a preferred measure. As an average of non-zero monthly
employment, PD7 employment captures annual full-time employment figure instead of T4 headcount which does
not adjust for part-time employment and seasonal operations.
Appendix Table 1: Mean Earnings Gaps Relative to Natives by Birth Cohort, Age and Year
                                                               Earnings Gaps Relative to Natives:
                                             Sample                  Adjusted                  Adjusted
   Birth Cohort       Age         Year        Size        Weekly      Weekly       Yearly        Yearly
        (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
a) Males from Other Countries
      81 85        20 24          2006          56         0.114         0.055         0.055           0.12
      81 85        25 29          2011          91         0.122         0.134         0.172          0.182
      81 85        30 34          2016         117         0.144         0.161         0.165          0.185
      76 80        25 29          2006         320         0.151         0.202         0.152          0.207
      76 80        30 34          2011         441         0.068         0.131         0.129          0.195
      76 80        35 39          2016         472         0.181         0.216         0.195          0.234
      71 75        30 34          2006         691         0.173         0.313         0.217          0.369
      71 75        35 39          2011         936         0.105         0.232         0.139          0.279
      71 75        40 44          2016         988         0.129         0.277         0.138          0.299
      66 70        35 39          2006         817         0.232         0.406         0.268          0.457
      66 70        40 44          2011         996         0.168          0.33         0.159          0.335
      66 70        45 49          2016        1083         0.135         0.314         0.138          0.332
      61 65        40 44          2006         634         0.304         0.499         0.354          0.565
      61 65        45 49          2011         774         0.164         0.346         0.167          0.364
      61 65        50 54          2016         760         0.166         0.361         0.163          0.376
      56 60        45 49          2006         367         0.331         0.489         0.416          0.584
      56 60        50 54          2011        482           0.22         0.384         0.232          0.412
      56 60        55 59          2016        426          0.248         0.422         0.217          0.406
      51 55        50 54          2006        217          0.448         0.582         0.478          0.621
      51 55        55 59          2011        275          0.339         0.452          0.33          0.453
      51 55        60 64          2016        188          0.303         0.436         0.272           0.41
      46 50        55 59          2006        109          0.621         0.635         0.605          0.613
      46 50        60 64          2011        106          0.404         0.452         0.359          0.408
      46 50        65 69          2016         52          0.398          0.46         0.271          0.338
b) Males from US/UK/Northern Europe
      81 85       20 24       2006               4         0.128         0.041         0.055         0.037
      81 85       25 29       2011               2         0.301         0.242         0.404         0.338
      81 85       30 34       2016               6         0.271         0.216         0.147         0.207
      76 80       25 29       2006              49         0.019         0.109         0.049         0.188
      76 80       30 34       2011              36         0.026         0.133         0.026         0.091
      76 80       35 39       2016              47         0.016         0.125         0.005         0.124
      71 75       30 34       2006              89         0.048         0.162         0.041         0.165
      71 75       35 39       2011              72         0.294         0.132         0.306         0.129
      71 75       40 44       2016              89         0.206         0.049         0.246         0.077
      66 70       35 39       2006              91         0.143         0.011         0.147         0.007
      66 70       40 44       2011              69         0.025         0.083         0.072         0.047
      66 70       45 49       2016              87         0.179         0.093         0.177         0.083
      61 65       40 44       2006              60         0.063         0.003          0.1           0.03
      61 65       45 49       2011              52         0.223         0.119         0.201         0.088
      61 65       50 54       2016              58         0.176         0.039         0.198         0.048
      56 60       45 49       2006              46         0.079         0.053         0.045         0.098
      56 60       50 54       2011              31         0.261         0.159         0.302          0.19
      56 60       55 59       2016              30         0.127         0.005         0.185         0.033
      51 55       50 54       2006              24         0.405         0.149         0.444         0.166
      51 55       55 59       2011              12         0.341         0.249         0.333         0.213
      51 55       60 64       2016              14         0.508         0.319         0.603         0.399
      46 50       55 59       2006              14          0.56         0.494         0.675         0.603
      46 50       60 64       2011               6         0.278         0.232         0.369         0.319
      46 50       65 69       2016               7          0.39          0.34         0.155         0.102
Note: Based on 2006, 2011, and 2016 Canadian Census files. Adjusted wage gaps control for education and
experience.
Appendix Table 1, continued
                                                                 Earnings Gaps Relative to Natives:
                                             Sample                    Adjusted                  Adjusted
   Birth Cohort       Age         Year         Size       Weekly        Weekly         Yearly        Yearly
        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)
c) Females from Other Countries
      81 85        20 24        2006            45         0.048         0.076         0.108          0.136
      81 85        25 29        2011            91         0.146         0.112         0.199          0.167
      81 85        30 34        2016           118         0.184         0.125         0.238          0.179
      76 80        25 29        2006           300         0.149         0.187         0.175          0.207
      76 80        30 34        2011           516         0.085         0.101         0.153          0.167
      76 80        35 39        2016           610         0.184         0.197         0.216          0.226
      71 75        30 34        2006           525         0.141         0.256          0.19            0.3
      71 75        35 39        2011           795         0.096         0.193         0.126          0.218
      71 75        40 44        2016           929          0.07         0.174          0.11          0.209
      66 70        35 39        2006           503           0.2         0.342         0.232          0.366
      66 70        40 44        2011           746         0.087         0.216         0.106          0.226
      66 70        45 49        2016           882         0.118         0.248         0.132          0.255
      61 65        40 44        2006           382         0.224         0.384         0.286          0.436
      61 65        45 49        2011           628         0.164          0.3          0.176          0.305
      61 65        50 54        2016           608         0.138         0.299          0.15          0.301
      56 60        45 49        2006           216         0.326         0.448         0.364          0.478
      56 60        50 54        2011           347         0.189         0.321          0.2           0.324
      56 60        55 59        2016           319         0.181         0.329         0.179           0.32
      51 55        50 54        2006           117         0.357         0.435         0.373          0.439
      51 55        55 59        2011           144         0.166         0.242         0.194          0.266
      51 55        60 64        2016           129         0.218         0.339         0.207          0.309
      46 50        55 59        2006            47         0.423         0.449         0.446          0.461
      46 50        60 64        2011            59         0.202         0.184         0.167          0.161
      46 50        65 69        2016           23          0.204         0.298         0.14           0.227
d) Females from US/UK/Northern Europe
      81 85        20 24     2006                4         0.603          0.43         0.231         0.065
      81 85        25 29     2011                1          0.01         0.272         0.003         0.253
      81 85        30 34     2016                8         0.244         0.094         0.134         0.007
      76 80        25 29     2006               36         0.008         0.095         0.048         0.051
      76 80        30 34     2011               41         0.183         0.129         0.152           0.1
      76 80        35 39     2016               55         0.021         0.002         0.008         0.015
      71 75        30 34     2006               67          0.05          0.08         0.024         0.149
      71 75        35 39     2011               53         0.003         0.121         0.055         0.166
      71 75        40 44     2016               74         0.102          0.02          0.15         0.036
      66 70        35 39     2006               54         0.133         0.051         0.088         0.009
      66 70        40 44     2011               43         0.039         0.026         0.078         0.011
      66 70        45 49     2016               58         0.104          0.02         0.061          0.02
      61 65        40 44     2006               30         0.143         0.034         0.158         0.055
      61 65        45 49     2011               33         0.069         0.116         0.063         0.108
      61 65        50 54     2016               39         0.098         0.175         0.069         0.134
      56 60        45 49     2006               18         0.253         0.341          0.23         0.314
      56 60        50 54     2011               18         0.204         0.274          0.19         0.257
      56 60        55 59     2016               20         0.156         0.094          0.09          0.03
      51 55        50 54     2006               14         0.297           0.4         0.253          0.35
      51 55        55 59     2011                9         0.001         0.048         0.069         0.024
      51 55        60 64     2016               18         0.051         0.027         0.127         0.036
      46 50        55 59     2006               10         0.557         0.612         0.534         0.587
      46 50        60 64     2011               4          0.092         0.085         0.044         0.214
      46 50        65 69     2016               6          0.162         0.545         0.057         0.335
Note: Based on 2006, 2011, and 2016 Canadian Census files. Adjusted wage gaps control for education and
experience.
Appendix Table 2: Immigrant Native Gaps in Work Activity, 2000 4 Arrivals

                                         Immigrant Native Gap in:
                        Share Working       Share Full Time     Share 45+ Weeks
                               (1)                  (2)                 (3)

a. Males from US/UK/Northern Europe:
            2006           0.006                   0.001               0.008
            2011           0.001                   0.025               0.032
            2016           0.006                   0.063               0.045

b. Males from Other Countries:
            2006             0.056                 0.063               0.098
            2011             0.033                 0.019               0.012
            2016             0.039                 0.014               0.003

c. Females from US/UK/Northern Europe:
            2006           0.033                   0.019               0.012
            2011           0.039                   0.014               0.003
            2016           0.096                   0.063               0.021

 d. Females from Other Countries:
              2006              0.151                0.163               0.076
              2011              0.118                0.104               0.017
              2016              0.083                0.068               0.021
Note: table entries represent gaps relative to natives in share working last year
(column 1), working full time last year (column 2) and working 45 or more weeks
last year (column 3).
Appendix Table : Estimated Coefficients from AKM Models
                                                   Natives      Immigrants
                                                     (1)           (2)
Marital Status (Relative to Married):
Common Law                                           0.008         0.004
Widowed                                              0.036         0.028
Divorced                                             0.002         0.008
Separated                                            0.007         0.001
Single                                               0.01          0.002
Unstated                                             0.016          0.04

Province (Relative to Ontario):
Newfoundland and Labrador                            0.181         0.043
Prince Eward Island                                  0.196         0.065
Nova Scotia                                          0.148         0.066
New Brunswick                                        0.129         0.037
Quebec                                               0.038         0.023
Manitoba                                             0.015         0.041
Saskatchewan                                         0.027         0.005
Alberta                                             0.036          0.028
British Columbia                                    0.009           0.02
NorthWest Territories                               0.136          0.147
Yukon                                               0.018          0.045
Nunavut                                             0.142          0.021

Year Effects                                         yes            yes
                                          a/
Quartic in Age, Person and Year Effects              yes            yes
Note: table shows estimated coefficients of marital status and province from
estimated AKM models for natives and immigrants.
a/
 See Table 3 for summary of estimated person and firm effects in these
models, and Appendix Figure 2 for graph of estimated age profiles
                           Appendix Figure 1a: Annual vs. Weekly Earnings Gaps Relative to Natives:
                              Males from Outside US/UK/Northern Europe, Arrived 2000 2004


                   0                                                                                  Year of Birth
                                                                                                            46 50

                  0.2                                                                                      51 55
                                                                                                           56 60
Gap (log scale)




                  0.4                                                                                      61 65
                                                                                                           66 70
                  0.6                                                                                      71 75
                                                                                                           76 80
                  0.8      Note: annual earnings gaps in color; weekly                                     81 85
                           earnings gaps shown by dashed lines
                                                                                                           Series
                   1
                    22.5     27.5    32.5     37.5     42.5    47.5      52.5   57.5   62.5    67.5
                                                     Age when observed
                           Appendix Figure 1b: Annual vs. Weekly Earnings Gaps Relative to Natives:
                             Females from Outside US/UK/Northern Europe, Arrived 2000 2004


                   0                                                                                  Year of Birth
                                                                                                            46 50

                  0.2                                                                                      51 55
                                                                                                           56 60
Gap (log scale)




                  0.4                                                                                      61 65
                                                                                                           66 70
                  0.6                                                                                      71 75
                                                                                                           76 80
                  0.8      Note: annual earnings gaps in color; weekly                                     81 85
                           earnings gaps shown by dashed lines
                                                                                                           Series
                   1
                    22.5     27.5    32.5     37.5     42.5    47.5      52.5   57.5   62.5    67.5
                                                     Age when observed
                                        Appendix Figure 2: Estimated Age Profiles from AKM Models

                                         0.10
Deviation from Log Earnings at Age 48




                                         0.00

                                         0.10

                                         0.20

                                         0.30
                                                                           Natives    Immigrants
                                         0.40

                                         0.50

                                         0.60
                                                25       30          35         40          45      50   55   60
                                                                                      Age
                                                   Appendix Figure 3: Earnings Growth of Immigrant Arrival Cohorts
                                                                   from Beach and Abbott (2011)                           Gender and
                                         0.5
                                                                                                                          Year of Landing
                                         0.4                                                                                 Males
                                                                                                                             1982
Change in Mean Earnings Since 3rd Year




                                         0.3
                                                                                                                             Males
                                         0.2                                                                                 1988
                                                                                                                             Males
                                         0.1                                                                                 1994
                                          0                                                                                  Females
                                                                                                                             1982
                                         0.1
                                                                                                                             Females
                                         0.2                                                                                 1988
                                                                                                                             Females
                                         0.3                                                                                 1994
                                         0.4
                                               1        2       3       4       5         6       7   8       9      10
                                                                            Years Since Landing
