                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         EDUCATION AND INNOVATION:
                THE LONG SHADOW OF THE CULTURAL REVOLUTION

                                       Zhangkai Huang
                                      Gordon M. Phillips
                                         Jialun Yang
                                          Yi Zhang

                                     Working Paper 27107
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27107


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We appreciate the helpful suggestions from seminar participants at Southern University of
Science and Technology, Development Economics Workshop at Peking University, The Ronald
Coase Institute Workshop on Institutional Analysis in University of Warsaw (2019), 12th
International Accounting & Finance Doctoral Symposium in Milan (2019), Asian Meeting of the
Econometric Society (2019), China Financial Research Conference (2019), Ph.D. Poster Session
at the AFA Annual Meeting (2020). The authors are responsible for all the remaining errors. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Zhangkai Huang, Gordon M. Phillips, Jialun Yang, and Yi Zhang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Education and Innovation: The Long Shadow of the Cultural Revolution
Zhangkai Huang, Gordon M. Phillips, Jialun Yang, and Yi Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 27107
May 2020
JEL No. G3,I23,J24,O31,O32

                                         ABSTRACT

The Cultural Revolution deprived Chinese students of the opportunity to receive higher education
for 10 years when colleges and universities were closed from 1966-1976. We examine the human
capital cost of this loss of education on subsequent innovation by firms, and ask if it impacted
firms more than 30 years later. We examine the innovation of firms with CEOs who turned 18
during the Cultural Revolution, which sharply reduced their chances of attending college. Using
multiple approaches to control for selection and endogeneity, including an instrument based on
whether the CEO turned 18 during the Cultural Revolution and a regression discontinuity
approach, we show that Chinese firms led by CEOs without a college degree spend less on R&D,
generate fewer patents, and receive fewer citations to these patents.


Zhangkai Huang                                 Jialun Yang
School of Economics and Management             Tsinghua University
huangzhk@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn                   Beijing
                                               China
Gordon M. Phillips                             yangjl.16@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College                              Yi Zhang
100 Tuck Hall                                  Nottingham University
Hanover, NH 03755                              Beijing
and NBER                                       China
gordon.m.phillips@gmail.com                    cherry-yi.zhang@nottingham.edu.cn
1. Introduction
     A key insight from Romer (1990) is that human capital is critically important to economic

growth through research and the production of ideas. As Romer discusses, each person

accumulates human capital through both education and training. The generation of new ideas

through human capital can also lead to positive knowledge spillovers that raise the productivity

of other researchers, giving rise to endogenous economic growth. This growth can be sustained

through the accumulation of inputs that generate these positive externalities, such as access to

education and on job training.

     Many firms seek to capitalize on the human capital of their employees by organizing in

such a way that maximizes positive spillover effects. Firms can encourage innovation and

human capital sharing in multiple ways, e.g., through hiring practices, incentive systems, and a

company culture that tolerates failure in the pursuit of new ideas. Often, a firm's CEO is

responsible for setting a culture that can either encourage or discourage innovation. We

examine the importance of education to new ideas and innovation by examining the impact of

education on innovation by firms through the leadership their CEOs. In this paper, we examine

if the CEO's education influences innovation that arises from the firm.

     We use a particular historical episode of China-- the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976) to

examine the lingering impact of closing universities and colleges on firms over 30 years after

the Cultural Revolution. The Cultural Revolution was one of the largest adverse events in the

20th century. It not only affected millions of Chinese--political elites and ordinary people

alike--but also prevented individuals from accessing higher education during peak college

learning years due to the government shut down of all colleges and universities. Chinese

students were unable to obtain higher education for a ten-year period, until the colleges and

universities were reopened in 1977. During this time, an entire cohort of students missed their

opportunity to attain formal higher education during their peak learning years. We explore how

access to education in key college attendance years can impact firm spending on R&D and

innovation and use the Cultural Revolution as a negative shock that impacted individuals for a

generation. 1


1 See Li and Meng (2017) document evidence on the scarring impact of the Cultural Revolution. Affected

individuals experienced sizeable reductions in earnings and wealth that persisted for over 30 years.
                                                         2
     When the Cultural Revolution finally ended in 1976, individuals who missed the chance

to attend college could take the college admission test in the winter of 1977 and enter college

in the summer of 1978. However, even if they decided to retake the test and give up the job

they may currently held, they would have had to compete with new high school graduates who

were perhaps better prepared for the entry test. Thus, few who graduated high school during the

Cultural Revolution ended up attending college, and it took almost a decade for China's higher

education system to recover as the number of college students only gradually increased during

the 1980s.

     We assess the long-run human capital cost of the Cultural Revolution by examining the

education background of CEOs of listed companies in China ­ focusing on those CEOs who

would have entered college during the Cultural Revolution. We examine the relation between

a company's innovation expenditures, innovation output, and the education of its CEO.

Specifically, we look at firm R&D expenditures, patents, and a measure of firm innovation

efficiency to test whether these innovation inputs and outputs are related to whether the CEO

has a college degree. We use data from China Stock Market & Accounting Research Database

and Wind Economic Database ranging from the year of 2008 to 2016 and construct a panel

dataset for all listed companies in China. We control for year and firm fixed effects and also

examine firms surrounding exogenous CEO turnovers, which occur when the CEO is close to

their mandatory retirement age as in Dittmar and Duchin (2006).

     We identify CEOs who were unlucky to have been born during 1948-1958, thus turning

18 during the Cultural Revolution and sharply reducing their chance of going to college. We

create a binary variable, denoted as Unlucky, to indicate if the CEO was born during this period.

We use this variable to instrument whether a CEO has a college degree.        This instrumental

variable is highly correlated with our core explanatory variable, CEO College Degree, and

should have little impact on firm's innovation policies except through the channel of CEO

education. We use the Unlucky instrument both in the full sample and in the exogenous turnover

sample.

     In all of our tests, we find that firms led by a CEO without a college degree have lower

firm R&D expenditures, fewer patent applications, fewer granted patents and fewer patent

citations. These results hold within firms, thus removing firm-specific permanent
                                               3
characteristics. The results also hold when the college degree of the CEO is instrumented by

our Unlucky instrument that identifies when a CEO turned 18 during the Cultural Revolution

thus impacting whether or not they were able to attend college after high school. This instrument

is completely exogenous to CEO characteristics other than age, as the Cultural Revolution

impacted all college age individuals during this period. Our results support the idea that

decreased access to education and less available human capital have long lasting negative

effects for firms, as the Cultural Revolution sharply reduced the stock of experienced CEOs

that have a college education.

       We extend our analysis and apply a regression discontinuity design methodology using

the 1977 policy shock when Deng Xiaoping ended the college prohibition. We take advantage

of the fact that CEOs who reached the age of 18 before 1977 had a much lower probability of

attending college, as they either had to prepare for the entrance exam while still working full

time or had to opt for part-time college studies. Our regression discontinuity results show that

firms with CEOs turned 18 prior to 1977 during the Cultural Revolution have lower R&D

expenditures and fewer patent applications, and also fewer patent citations compared to those

firms with CEOs turning 18 in 1977 or afterwards. Both the instrumental variable results and

the regression discontinuity results show a large economic effect on innovation associated with

having a college educated CEO. The results add to evidence that education not only serves as a

signal for CEOs' capabilities, but also increases human capital inside the firm.

       The question naturally arises: if there is a large benefit to having a college educated CEO,

why don't firms with a non-college educated CEO replace him? Several factors could explain

this question. First, CEO accession in China frequently involves internal promotion of existing

management based on seniority and political connections. 2 Because the Cultural Revolution

deprived a full cohort of college access, promoting someone with a college education to CEO

is often not possible without promoting someone of a younger age over those with more

seniority, which is uncommon in China.

       Second, the supply of educated CEOs is rather limited in China, partially due to the

Cultural Revolution. The median CEO age of our sample is 55 years old. In 2012, the middle



2   See Cao, Pan and Qian (2011), Fan, Wong and Zhang (2007), You and Du (2012).
                                                       4
year of our sample, the college graduate proportion of the population aged between 50 to 60 is

approximately 0.75%, calculated using data from the China Statistical Yearbook. Currently,

49.21% of CEOs in China do not have a college degree, which is a large fraction relative to

CEOs in the West. In contrast, in the U.S. only 8.3% of Forbes 800 CEOs in the years 1987-

1996 do not have college degrees, as documented by Jalbert, Rao and Jalbert, (2002) and Jalbert,

Jalbert and Perrina (2004).

     Third, the importance of the CEO's education for managing or appointing other innovative

employees may not be recognized in China as important to overall corporate innovation. All of

these cultural and historical factors may explain why a much smaller fraction of Chinese companies

have college-educated CEOS relative to the West, despite evidence of their benefits.

     Our paper adds to the literature studying the importance of human capital. Romer (1990)

includes human capital in the macroeconomic production function and shows how human

capital stock can impact an economy's growth rate. Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992) develop

an augmented Solow model that includes the accumulation of human capital and show that it

provides an excellent description of cross-country differences in growth rates. Barro (2001)

emphasizes the role of education as a determinant for long term growth. Stroombergen et al.

(2002) conclude that human capital is an important source of innovation, driver of sustainable

development, and tool for reducing poverty and inequality. More recently, Gennaioli, La Porta,

Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2012) point to the paramount importance of human capital in

accounting for regional differences in development. Looking at China specifically, Fleisher and

Chen (1997) find human capital has played a significant role in the Chinese economic

development. Fleisher, Li and Zhao (2009) find human capital also has an important effect on

reducing regional inequality in China. Our paper adds to this literature by examining the

importance of human capital through education in China on individual firms by emphasizing

how human capital influences corporate innovation activity.

     Our paper also adds to the literature begun by Bertrand and Schoar (2003) on whether

CEO personal traits and experiences influence corporate outcomes. We focus on experiences

early in a manager's life. We thus add to the evidence of Malmendier, Tate and Yan (2001),

who show that CEOs who grew up during the Great Depression are averse to debt, and Schoar

and Zhou (2017) who show that economic conditions at the beginning of a manager's career
                                                5
have lasting effects on their career path as a CEO. We also add to the literature on CEOs and

innovation. Islam and Zein (2018) find that firms led by "Inventor CEOs" are associated with

higher quality innovation. We contribute to this evidence by showing how a CEO's college

education influences corporate innovation. 3

      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the interruption of

higher education during the Cultural Revolution. Section 3 presents the data and summary

statistics. We present our empirical strategy, and discuss the empirical relation between CEO's

college education and firm innovation in Section 4. We address endogeneity concerns in

Section and deal with causality issues in Section 5. We conclude in Section 6.



2. The Cultural Revolution (1966-1976) and the Interruption of Higher Education

2.1. Background

     In 1966, Mao Zedong launched the Cultural Revolution, which was a massive socio-

political movement in China. Mao asserted that some members of the Chinese Communist Party

(CCP) had forgotten their original revolutionary ideology, and no longer acted on behalf of the

people, and called on the public to act against those alleged bourgeois members. Under such

encouragement, millions of young people joined the "Red Guards," a mass student-led

movement mobilized and guided by Chairman Mao Zedong. People took action around the

nation with the intention of removing all bourgeois practices, and countless individuals died

during this movement as a result of violence.



2.2. Interruption of Higher Education

      Higher education was suspended during the Cultural Revolution, because it was blamed

for fostering the spread bourgeois values. The government shut down colleges and universities

and cancelled the college entrance examination in 1966. Faculty members and core university

staff were sent to special reform "schools" to work on farms and in factories. The Red Guard

persecuted white collar professionals: searching their houses, confiscating their property, and

3 Our paper also contributes to the literature about how political distortion of education and destruction of human
capital have long-run effects through changes in personal preferences and human capital loss. See Alesina et al.
(2007) for evidence on East Germany. See Akbulut-Yuksel M. and Yuksel M. (2015) and Francesco et al. (2019) for
the long-term direct and spillover effects of large-scale human capital loss caused by the persecution of Jewish
professionals in Nazi Germany.
                                                         6
humiliating and assaulting them in front of crowds of people. Some of them were sent to the

May 7 Cadre School (named after Mao Zedong's May 7 Directive of 1966). Mao also asked

schools to shorten their educational term, to revolutionize education, and not to allow the

bourgeoisie to rule schools. After high school, many students went to factories and farms as

workers. An entire generation was deprived of the right to receive higher education.

     Several previous authors have documented the scarring effect of the Cultural Revolution.

Li and Meng (2017) systematically investigate the effects of the deprivation of college

education during the Cultural Revolution. They estimate a marked downward shift in college

completion rate for the affected cohorts, i.e., those born in or after 1947, relative to older cohorts.

Affected individuals experienced a sizable reduction in their earnings and wealth. Meng and

Gregory (2002) show that all socioeconomic groups were adversely affected by the Cultural

Revolution, but that children with parents of lower educational achievement and lower

occupational status experienced the largest negative impact. Widespread and across-the-board

school interruption had a substantial impact on later educational attainment, especially when

the interruption occurred at the high school level. The probability that an individual who missed

both junior and senior high school would go on to obtain a formal 4-year university degree

decreased by about 55%.

2.3. The Restart of the College Entrance Exam

     The Cultural Revolution came to an end after Mao Zedong died on September 9, 1976. In

August of 1977, Deng Xiaoping hosted a meeting on science and education in Beijing. During

this meeting, Deng Xiaoping decided to restart the college entrance exam. In December, 1977,

the first college entrance examination after the Cultural Revolution was held: 5.7 million

candidates took the examination, and 273,000 freshmen were admitted to colleges and

universities nationwide. The college entrance examination was held again in the summer of

1978, with 6.1 million applicants and 420,000 enrolled following this exam.

     Even after the resumption of college entrance exams, the higher education system still took

time to recover. In 1976, the number of faculty and researchers engaged in scientific research

in colleges was less than 10% of the previous high before the Cultural Revolution, and




                                                  7
laboratories and equipment were seriously damaged. 4 Though countless people desired to enter

universities, the universities lacked the faculty and equipment to take all these students.

Consequently, in the 1980s there were few college graduates, and it was only in 1990s that

universities began to expand enrollment significantly.

     The individuals born between 1948 and 1959 thus suffered from the unexpected shock of

the Cultural Revolution. While they were permitted to take the college entrance exam after

1977, in many cases they were supporting a family and they had to compete with recent high

school graduates when taking the exam. Thus, the opportunity cost of attending college was

likely very high for impacted individuals. While the college entrance exam never set limits on

the age of exam takers, an entire unlucky cohort missed their peak opportunity to receive a

higher education.



3. Data and Summary Statistics

3.1. Sample Construction

     Our sample consists of companies that are listed on China's two major exchanges: the

Shanghai A-share stock market and the Shenzhen A-share stock market. We construct a firm-

year panel data set to examine whether a CEO's college education has any influence on firm

innovation. The data we use are from the China Stock Market Trading Database and Wind

Economic Database. We include years 2008 to 2016. In 2006, the CSRC released the

Accounting Rules of China's Enterprises (2006 version) requiring all listed firms to report their

annual R&D expenditures. Companies began to disclose their R&D expenses in annual reports

beginning in 2007. We begin the sample in 2008 to allow the reporting requirements to be fully

in place and companies in compliance. We exclude financial industries and also 2-digit CSRC

industries in which the average patent count per firm-year is less than one. We thus include

firms with no patents if other firms in the same industry have patents, while excluding firms in

industries which innovation activity is not crucial.




4 In Tsinghua University, from June 1966 to April 1977, the loss of instruments and equipment was approximately
18 million RMB (nearly half of the total value of original instruments and equipment). More than 10,000 pieces of
laboratory furniture were lost, and the number of laboratory staff was reduced from 1100 to 500, among which the
number of laboratory technicians was reduced from 480 to 180.
                                                         8
3.2. Variable Measurement

3.2.1. Measuring Educational Background

     In our dataset, each CEO's degree is measured by a dummy variable, Degree. The variable

Degree equals 1 when the CEO's highest degree is secondary school, equals 2 when their

highest degree is from a junior college, and equals 3 when their highest degree is an

undergraduate degree, equals 4 when their highest degree is a master degree, and equals 5 when

their highest degree is a doctoral degree.

     In all of our main tests we focus on the impact of having an undergraduate degree or higher.

We thus generate a binary variable: College Degree. The variable College Degree equals 1 when

Degree is at least 3, otherwise it equals 0.



3.2.2. Measuring Corporate Innovation

     We construct our main innovation variables from China Stock Market & Accounting

Research Database and Wind Economic Database. We consider multiple measures of firm

innovation: innovation inputs, which we capture through firm R&D spending scaled by total

assets, and also innovation outputs, which we capture through patenting activity. We use two

metrics to proxy for the firm's innovation output. Previous literature has shown that the patent

application is closer to the actual timing of innovation (Griliches, Pakes, and Hall, 1987). Thus,

the first and main metric is the number of patent applications that are filed by each firm in a

given year (by the listing firm and all of its subsidiaries). While patent applications better

capture the timing of innovation, some patents may not be granted. Therefore, we also examine

the number of patents that are eventually granted.

     The granted patents count suffers from a truncation problem because there is, on average,

a two-year lag between a patent's application date and grant date. Following prior work (Hall,

Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 2005; Fang, Lerner and Wu, 2017), to reflect the long-term nature of

patent assets, we construct the patent stock measure as follows:



                                    ,  = (1-) , -1+,                                          (1)

Where:

     · ,  is the patent stock of firm i in year t
                                                    9
     ·  is the rate of depreciation of the patent stock, which is set to 15% in accordance with

     prior work

     · ,  is the ultimately granted patents applied for by firm i in year t.



     Additionally, to assess a patent's impact we examine patent citations. We hand-collect

patent citation information for every listing firm from the Chinese State Intellectual Property

Office (CSIPO). Unfortunately, we are not able to collect citations for patents applied by the

listing firm's subsidiaries.

     Citations have two limitations. First, citations also have a natural delay, as they are

received after the patent is applied for and granted. Second, citation intensities vary across

industries. To adjust for these problems, we follow Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg (2001), and

divide the number of citations-per-patent for each firm by the mean of the number of citations-

per-patent received by all patents in that year in the same industry as the patent. The adjusted

variable is constructed to capture relative citation strength. If it is higher than one, then it implies

that a particular patent is cited more than the average patent successfully filed for in the same

year, in the same industry.

     Due to the right-skewed distributions of patent counts and citations, we take natural

logarithm of patent applications, granted patent applications, patent stock, citation counts,

citations-per-patent and relative citation strength. To avoid losing firm-year observations with

zero patents or citations, we add one to the actual values when calculating the natural logarithm.

     Our innovation variables thus capture different stages of firm innovation: R&D expense

reveals the commitment of firm's resources to innovation, patent metrics show the innovation

output in generating new knowledge that can in principle be appropriated by the firm, and

citations indicate the extent to which those innovations turn out to be "important" and hence

presumably more valuable to the firm.



3.2.3. Control Variables

     We control for additional time-varying firm variables that may also impact firm innovation.

Control variables include a measure of capital intensity per employee, firm investment

opportunities, firm profitability, and firm size. Capital intensity, CapIntensity, is measured as
                                                  10
the natural logarithm of the ratio of net property, plant, and equipment divided by the number

of employees.     We use Tobin's q, the market value of assets divided by the book value of assets,

as a measure of investment opportunities.      Firm profitability, Cashflow, is measured as cash

flow from operations divided by lagged firm size.         Firm size is measured as the natural

logarithm of total assets. We include an indicator variable to mark if a firm is a state-owned

enterprise: SOE equals 1 if the company is a state owned enterprise and 0 otherwise. We also

include CEO characteristics, including CEO Age, and Chairman, which is indicator variable

that equals 1 when the CEO is also the chairman of the board and zero otherwise.



3.3. Summary Statistics

     Table 1 presents the summary statistics for our main variables by whether or not the CEO

has a college degree (College Degree). We find important differences in the characteristics of

firms when comparing the sample means for those run by CEOs with college degrees and those

run by CEOs without college degrees. CEOs with college degrees are less likely to work in

state-owned firms. The firms at which they work invest more in R&D (2.64% of assets vs. 2.06%

of assets) than firms where CEOs without college degrees are hired. Firms led by college CEOs

also produce higher innovation outcomes. Firms with college CEOs, on average, generate more

patent applications (2.119 vs.1.713), have more patents that are successfully granted (1.870 vs

1.538), and hold a higher stock of patents (2.648 vs. 2.241) than firms without college CEOs.

The firms that are run by CEOs with college degrees also receive more citations on average

(0.368 vs. 0.326) and their patents have higher relative citation strength (0.406 vs. 0.343) than

firms run by CEOs without college degrees. The differences between the two groups are

statistically significant.




                                                11
4. CEO College Education and Corporate Innovation

4.1 Univariate Evidence

     We begin by examining the relation between firm innovation and CEO education for a

sample of firms that replace their CEOs. Examining changes at the firm level allows us to

control for time invariant firm characteristics. We split the sample into (1) firms that replaced a

non-college educated CEO with one with a college degree, (2) firms that replaced a college-

educated CEO with a CEO without a college degree, and (3) firms with no change in the

education of their CEO. We implement a difference-in-difference test to show the results for

firms in all of these scenarios (College Degree changes from 0 to 1; College Degree changes

from 1 to 0; no change in College Degree).

     We examine innovation around CEO turnovers in a [-3, +3] window, where the turnover

years are excluded. We first take the mean of each firm's innovation before and after turnover,

and therefore calculate firm differences. We winsorize these differences at the 1% and 99%

levels. For each treatment firm (where CEO turnover does happen), we generate firm

differences for all other firms with no turnover in the same industry around the same turnover

year, and take the median of these differences as the control sample. Table 2 presents these

results, which show that innovation increases when a CEO without a college education is

replaced by a CEO with a college education. Panel A shows that the increase in Patent

Applications when a non-college CEO was replaced by a college CEO, on average, is about

0.812, and significant at 1% level, relative to control firms. As for Successful Patent

Applications, the mean of the difference between post-turnover period and pre-turnover period

is 0.685 and the change is also significant at 1% level relative to control firms. Whereas for

treatment firms that replaced a college-educated CEO with a CEO without a college degree,

their Patent Applications experience a decline after CEO turnovers, significant at 1% level

compared to control firms, as shown in Panel C. Panel B reveals that for firms with no change

in the education of their CEOs, little change in innovation is found around CEO turnover.

    However, the differences we have documented from Table 1 and Table 2 still may be driven

 by time-varying firm, economy, or industry changes. Therefore, we next examine the relation

 between college education and innovation in a multivariate regression setup where we include
                                                12
 year and firm fixed-effects to address the concern that unobserved systematic variation may

 also be driving the results.



4.2 CEOs and College Education

4.2.1 Stock Market Returns

  We first examine whether investors react more favorably to patents applied for by firms with

college educated CEOs. These results indicate whether the stock market participants believe

the patents applied for by CEOs with college education have higher value. To ensure that all

patents were generated under the leadership of a particular CEO, we require that the same CEO

is in place both on the grant date and at least one year before the application date for all the

patents approved on a given date t for the firm i. We regress cumulated abnormal returns around

patent-grant dates against the college degree indicator variable for the CEO, and control for the

number of patents granted to the firm on the same day, year fixed effects, industry fixed effects,

and other control variables. The control variables include the CEO Tenure, CEO Age, CEO

Salary, CEO Ownership Share, an indicator for whether the CEO is also the Chairman of the

Board, and indicators for whether the CEO has a background in the government or in the finance

industry. All of these variables are defined in Appendix A. We include average CEO tenure and

average CEO age over all the patents granted at that date, as there are cases where there are

multiple patents granted in a particular year but were applied for under different CEOs. Other

controls are defined as in Appendix A.

     CAR_CAPM is the stock market cumulative abnormal return, during three-day window [0,

+ 2] around the patent-grant date, and excess return is based on the Capital Asset Pricing Model

(CAPM). Specifically, we fit the market model over [-275,-25] period to get the expected

returns on the firm's stock, using the Shanghai Exchange market return and then estimate

cumulative abnormal returns over a three-day period [0, + 2] around the patent-grant date.

CAR_Market is cumulative market adjusted abnormal return, during the three-day window [0,

+ 2] around the patent-grant date. The excess return is calculated by subtracting the Shanghai

                                               13
Exchange market return from the raw stock return.

     Table 3 shows the results for the market reactions to the patents. The coefficients on

College Degree are all positive and statistically significant, which implies that the patents

created by firms with college CEOs are viewed as generating higher value for shareholders.




4.2.2 Innovation and CEO Education

     In this section, we examine whether firm innovation varies with a CEO's higher education

background using a panel setting and including firm and CEO time varying characteristics. We

also include year and firm fixed effects to rule out the possibility that the results are driven by

yearly variation or by unobserved characteristics of firms.

     We begin our analysis by running panel OLS regressions that relate a CEO's college

experience to a variety of corporate innovation measures. We focus on three main types of

innovation measures: R&D spending decisions, counts of patent number, and counts of patent

citations. The independent variable of interest is College Degree, which is a binary variable

equal to 1 if the CEO has obtained an undergraduate degree or higher, and equal to 0 otherwise.

The coefficient of interest in our regressions is , which examines how college education relates

to corporate innovation. Specifically, we estimate the following model as our baseline

regression:


              yit =* it +*Xit +Vi +Vt (+Vj ) +Vp +it                                            (2)


     yit represents the dependent variables, which include firm's R&D expenses, number of

patent applications, number of granted patents, the number of citations and citations-per-patent,

respectively. i indexes the firm, Vi, Vt are the firm and year fixed effects, Vp are the province

fixed effects and Vj are the industry fixed effects. We include province and industry fixed effects,

which we include in selected regressions instead of firm fixed effects. We also

include year*industry fixed effects in regressions with industry fixed effects to control for time

trends and variations across industries and provinces.

     The baseline results of our paper are presented in Table 4, Panel A and Panel B. For brevity,
                                                14
we don't report the coefficients of the control variables in our tables.

        We first present firm fixed effects regressions in Panel A. With firm fixed effects, the

regressions will only take those observations into consideration where there are changes in the

variable College Degree for the identification of the coefficient on College Degree.   However,

the dependent variables patents and citations have time lags that are different from R&D/Assets.

Thus for these patent related dependent variables, we use the average of the these variables

before and after the CEO turnover as the dependent variable and also exclude the CEO turnover

year.

     The results in Panel A show that R&D expenditures scaled by total assets is significantly

higher when firms switch to a college educated CEO. The estimated coefficient on College

Degree is positive with a value of 0.341, significant at 5% level. This estimate evaluated at the

previous averages in Table 1 implies that having a college CEO increases R&D/Assets by

16.59%, a substantial effect. The increased R&D could be because these CEOs value research

and innovation more, given they themselves have received a college education and may have

more specific technical knowledge or know more about the importance of R&D.

        We also examine innovation outcomes, measured by different metrics of patenting activity

and measure patent significance through citations received. As noted before in Section 3, it has

been shown that application of patents occur more closely after the real innovation take place,

compared to the occurrence of granting of patents, which generally lag two or more years after

the application of a patent. Thus, we use the number of patent applications as our main measure

of innovation output. We find the estimated coefficient on College Degree is 0.288, significant

at 5% level. From Table 1, the mean of Patent Applications for firms without college CEOs is

1.713, also implying the average number of patent applications for those firms is exp(1.713) ­

1 =4.55. So having a college CEO increases Patent Applications by 0.288, to

0.288+1.713=2.001. This implies the number of patent applications increases to exp(2.001) ­ 1

= 6.40a significant increase compared to the average value of 4.55 for firms without college

CEOs implied from Table 1. These findings confirm that patent applications increase after the

firm switches to a college educated CEO.     We also examine patents granted and find that when

CEOs have college degrees, the number of patents applications that are granted is also

significantly higher, with the estimated coefficient on College Degree is 0.31. Lastly, companies
                                                15
with college CEOs have higher patent stocks, with the estimated coefficient on College Degree

is 0.37.

      Taken together, the implication of our baseline result is that companies with college

educated CEOs perform significantly better on measures of innovation than companies with

non-college educated CEOs. However, while there is evidence these two types of companies

differ when it comes to innovation policy and results, there are still concerns that firms with

better growth prospects may appoint CEOs with a college education for reasons other than

innovation.



4.2.3 Selection of New CEOs

     In the previous section, we show that companies that have a CEO with a college degree

innovate more than firms led by a CEO without a college degree.                  However, there are still

concerns about non-random selection and endogeneity. For example, the board may choose to

appoint a new CEO at the same time it changes its innovation policies. In addition, CEOs may

be replaced for poor performance. Under such circumstances, his successor may also implement

new innovation and investment policies. In this section, we control for selection by examining

firms who replace CEOs either at the time of their retirement or when they die from a sudden

death. These replacement decisions are likely to be exogenous and not related to current firm

performance or firm policies.

     For our sample, strict natural retirement is defined as CEO who leaves his/her position at

the legal retirement age which is 60 for men and 55 for women in China. 5                In this retirement

sample, we include the firm-year observations of the naturally departing CEO and his or her

successor. Then we examine the change in innovation activity surrounding the retirement years.

These turnovers, as they are generally exogenous, have very little possibility of being related

to a change of firm characteristics or the retiring CEO's job performance.

     Panel A of Table 5 presents summary statistics for the CEO retirement sample. There are

231 instances of CEO retirement with 82 instances where the retiring CEO is replaced by a new

CEO with a college degree. Among these 82 replacements, there are 59 cases in which the


5See Interim Measures of the State Council on the Placement of Elderly, Weak and Disabled Cadres" and "Interim
Measures of the State Council on Retirement and Retirement of Workers" (Guofa [1978] 104).
                                                      16
departing CEO had no college degree.

     We examine firm R&D and innovation surrounding the replacement years. Given that

innovation changes and outcomes may take some time to be realized, and to avoid abrupt

changes of firm policies in the transition years surrounding the CEO replacement, we follow

Ditmar and Duchin (2014) and exclude the observations that fall into the range of -1 year, +1

year of the turnover event.

     Panel B of Table 5 provides regression results around these natural CEO retirement events.

The dependent variables are R&D/Assets, Patent Applications, Successful Patent Applications,

and Patent Stock. Inspection of the results shows that the coefficients on College Degree are

positive and significant. The relation between College Degree and Patent Applications is

significantly positive at the 10% level, with an estimated coefficient of 0.264. The relation

between College Degree on Successful Patent Applications is also significantly positive at the

5% level, with an estimated coefficient of 0.298. Given more limited observations for R&D in

this sample, the R&D coefficient is insignificant.

     Overall, the results are consistent with CEO education having an impact on innovation in

this sample of exogenous CEO replacements.



5 The Cultural Revolution and its Impact on Education

     In this section, we examine the long-run impact of the Cultural Revolution.    We use an

instrumental variable approach to deal with endogeneity concerns in this section. In the next

section we use a regression discontinuity approach and compare firms with CEOs who reach

college age right before the end of the Cultural Revolution to those firms with CEOs who reach

college age right after the end of the Cultural Revolution. Both of these approaches examine

firm R&D over 30 years after the end of the Cultural Revolution to measure the long-run impact

of the lack of college education.

5.1 The Unlucky Instrument

     In our instrumental approach, we instrument for whether a CEO has college education

using an instrument that we call Unlucky, which equals 1 if the CEO was born during the cohort

of 1948-1958, meaning he or she reached 18 during the Cultural Revolution (1966--1977), and

0 otherwise. We present the results of the first stage where we regress the variable College
                                               17
Degree on the Unlucky variable. The unlucky generation, as defined above, had a very limited

possibility to attend college, not to mention the chance to finish college and get a bachelor's

degree., given they spent this period in factories and in the countryside as laborers, not in

college. We confirm in Panel A of Table 6 that the variable Unlucky is highly negatively and

significantly correlated with our independent variable of interest, College Degree.

       We present the results of the IV regression in Table 6, Panel B and report the F-statistic for

the statistical relevance of the instrument. We also consider other statistical measures of the

relevance of the Cultural Revolution instrument, including the Kleibergen-Paap rk LM statistic,

Kleibergen-Paap Wald rk F statistic, Anderson-Rubin Wald statistic and Shea's Partial R-

Squared. They also are consistent with the validity of the instrument variable approach. The

regression results show that instrumented College Degree is significantly positively related to

all of our measures of innovation except for successful patent applications. 6                 For example, in

column (2), the coefficient on College Degree is 0.679, corresponding to an average increase

in Patent Applications of 0.679. In column (7), the coefficient on College Degree is 0.349 (t

=2.4), corresponding to an average increase in Relative Citation Strength of 0.349. Overall, the

results are consistent with CEO human capital through education influencing firm innovation

expenditures and outcomes.

       We do note that the coefficients for IV regression are larger than the uninstrumented OLS

coefficients of our baseline regression. There are two explanations for this result. First, for

Unlucky, the individuals include both those individuals who would not have attended college

even if they were not unlucky, as well as those who were unlucky and would have definitely

gone to college if they were not born during 1948-1959. In other words, the subgroups whose

decisions are affected by the "Unlucky" shock were constrained by the marginal cost of

schooling, rather than by the lack of either desire or ability to benefit from college education,

meaning the return to education for these individuals may be higher than other subgroups.

Therefore, the local treatment effect at the margin for the excluded individuals could exceed

that of the population average treatment effect.



6   The Successful Patent Applications variable has truncation problems. Many patent applications filed during the
latter years in the sample were still under review and had not been granted.
                                                         18
     Second, looking back at section 5.1, we can see the regressions coefficients for the

retirement sample, where we have less concerns about selection, are of the same magnitude as

that of our whole sample IV regression, which is evidence that when endogeneity concerns are

ruled out, the coefficients become larger compared to the baseline regression.

     In Table 7, we run the same set of regressions for exogenous turnover sample as in Table

5, Panel B, this time using Unlucky as instrumental variable. The instrumented variable, College

Degree, is significantly related to all the innovation variables. The results improve relative to

the results in Table 5, Panel B, in terms of magnitude and significance. The coefficients on

College Degree take the values of are all positive and significant at the 10% level or stronger.

     To conclude, after removing many endogeneity concerns using both the retirement sample

and instrumenting College Degree with the Cultural Revolution experience instrument, our

baseline results still hold and we find an positive relation between CEO college education and

firm-level innovation.



5.2 Did the Cutltural Revolution Change Beliefs About Innovation?

      It may still be the case that our instrument, Unlucky, not only represents the rare

possibility of this unlucky cohort to attend college, but also caused these who were unlucky to

change their beliefs about the value of innovation and perhaps impact their willingness to

undertake risky activities such as innovation. The mass political movement of the Cultural

Revolution triggered conflict among different groups of people.         Economic activity was

sharply curtailed and families of intellectuals were persecuted. They may have suffered

mentally and physically in the Cultural Revolution and potentially it was their experience

during this period, and not the lack of a college education, that impacted their attitude toward

R&D investment.

   To deal with this concern, we perform two additional robustness tests. First, we check

whether or not Unlucky may have changed beliefs toward innovation even for a sample of

individuals that did not attend college. We regress firm innovation, on Unlucky, in the sample

where every CEO does not have a college degree. Thus, the variable Unlucky can take on the

values of zero and one, but either through choice or through experiencing the Cultural

Revolution, all CEOs do not have a college education. In Table 8, Panel A, we show that for
                                               19
those firms led by CEOs without college degrees, whether the CEOs have experienced the

Cultural Revolution has little to do with firm innovation. All coefficients on Unlucky are

statistically insignificant. In Table 8, Panel B, we repeat the regressions at the CEO-individual

level and find similar results.

      We also examine the effect of our two key independent variables, College Degree and

Unlucky, in the same regression to examine if experiencing the Cultural Revolution has an

incremental, independent effect when also considering the impact of having a College Degree.

Results are shown in Table 9. All coefficients of Unlucky are insignificant, while the coefficients

on College Degree are significantly positive and have similar magnitude and significance as

the coefficients in Table 4, Panel B. This last test adds to the evidence that variable Unlucky

does not have an independent effect on corporate innovation except through the channel of

having a college degree.



5.3. Cultural Revolution Regression Discontinuity

       Our last set of tests examines the relation between CEO education and innovation using a

regression discontinuity approach. We apply a regression discontinuity design (RDD), using

the year of 1977 (individuals with a birth year of 1959) as the cut-off point. As we have

discussed earlier, CEOs who reached the age of 18 before 1977 faced more difficulties in

entering college. Thus, if they do not have a college degree, it is less likely a result of their

ability and more likely a result of factors outside of their control. We focus on CEOs who

reached the age of 18 in years surrounding 1977. We assume that CEOs born in years

surrounding 1977 have no other observed or unobserved systematic differences, and the result

of having a college degree is simply a random sampling outcome.

       We adopt both a reduced form RDD and a fuzzy form RDD. The specific polynomial

model is shown below:


                  yi = POSTi +  POSTi *EventTimei + X i + Vj + Vp + i
(3)


       Where yi represents the dependent variables. The treatment variable, , is a dummy

variable, equal to 1 if the year is larger than 1977 and zero otherwise. EventTime is equal to the
                                                20
year minus 1977.  contains control variables, including industry fixed effects and province

fixed effects. All variables are averaged and all regressions are run at the CEO individual level.

     We conduct the standard checks for RDD validity. Given people do not choose their birth

year, the randomness of sample assignments around the cut-off year is guaranteed. Next, we

check whether control variables included in the RDD regressions are continuous around the

cut-off-point. Appendix B presents the regression for covariates. Panel I shows the results using

a (-3 year, +3 year) window. Panel II shows the results using a (-5 year, +5 year) window. The

coefficients of POST are insignificant. In this way, we assure there's no significant jump of

covariates at the cut-off-point. We also do a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) test for these

regressions to test the null hypothesis that there is no statistical difference among the

coefficients for these regressions. When using the (-3 year, +3 year) window, the p-value for

SUR test is 0.1303, indicating that we can't reject the null hypothesis.

     Table 10 examines the effect of the resumption of the college entrance exam on education

outcomes. As shown in Table 10, College Degree is regressed against POST in a probit model.

The marginal effects are significantly positive and significant in both columns, consistent with

a treatment effect of the Cultural Revolution on obtaining a college degree.

     We run both reduced form RDD and a fuzzy form RDD. In the reduced form RDD, we

regress innovation against POST as in model (3). Results are shown in Table 11. For the fuzzy

RDD model, we use treatment dummy POST directly as the actual instrumental variable for

College Degree, and run instrumental variable regressions. Table 12 shows the results for the

fuzzy RDD. For each table, Panel A shows the results using a (-3 year, +3 year) window. Panel

B shows the results using a (-5 year, +5 year) window. In Panel A, Table 11, the reduced-form

RDD estimate in column (2) indicates that the resumption of the college entrance exam had a

positive effect of 0.233 on Patent Applications in a (-3 year, +3 year) window. The economic

magnitude corresponds to a 0.233/1.713=13.6% increase in patent applications for CEOs with

college degrees relative to the mean of Patent Applications for firms led by CEOs without

college degrees. In Panel A, Table 12, the fuzzy RDD estimate in column (2) is also precisely

estimated and confirms this effect. We find a similar and even stronger effect of the resumption

on Patent Applications in Panel B, Table 11 and Panel B, Table 12. In a (-5 year, +5 year)

window, the coefficients on POST are of greater magnitude and significance. Patenting
                                               21
activities show significant increases after the cut-off-year both in Table 11 and Table 12, and

R&D also shows some increases in the reduced form RDD in a (-3 year, +3 year) window.

     Overall, the regression discontinuity results are consistent with the conclusion that college

education does change CEOs' human capital stock and therefore influences companies'

innovation. Our results show that firms that are led by CEOs who had a sharply decreased

chance of receiving formal college education due to the Cultural Revolution,\ invest less in

R&D and patent less.



6. Conclusions

     We use the period of the Cultural Revolution to examine the importance of human capital

through CEO education on corporate innovation over 30 years later. Our tests show that firms

led by CEOs without college degrees have lower R&D expenditures, fewer patent applications,

and fewer patent citations. To mitigate selection issues, we identify if CEOs were unlucky to

have been born during 1948-1958, giving them a sharply reduced chance of going to college as

they would have turned 18 during the Cultural Revolution. We use an instrument, "Unlucky"

that identifies whether or not the CEO turned 18 during the Cultural Revolution to instrument

our college education variable. This instrument is completely exogenous to CEO characteristics

other than age, as the Cultural Revolution impacted all college age individuals during this

period. We show that reaching college age during the Cultural Revolution sharply decreases

the probability that a CEO has a college degree, while it should have little impact on firm's

innovation except through the channel of CEO education. Firms with CEOs with college

education, instrumented with this "unlucky" instrument, have higher R&D, more patent

applications, and higher indicators of innovation success.

     We also apply a regression discontinuity design and use the year of 1977, when the college

entrance exam was resumed, as the cut-off-year. Firms led by CEOs born right before 1977

who had a sharply lower chance of receiving a college education due to the Cultural Revolution,

invest less in R&D and generate less patents than CEOs born right after 1977.

     Our results, using the Cultural Revolution instrument and an exogenous replacement

sample as well as using a regression discontinuity approach, all show that firms with a CEO

                                               22
without a college education have lower R&D, fewer patent applications, and lower indicators

of innovation success. Our results are consistent with decreased access to education and thus

less human capital having long lasting negative effects for firms. Our results also show that

socio-political events that interrupt a generation's access to education, such as the Cultural

Revolution, have long lasting negative effects for firms and economies that wish to encourage

innovation.




                                             23
                                          References
Akbulut-Yuksel M , Yuksel M., 2015. The Long-Term Direct and External Effects of Jewish
Expulsions in Nazi Germany. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(3), 58-85.

Alesina, Alberto, and Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln, 2007. Good-bye Lenin (or not?): the Effect of
Communism on People's Preferences. American Economic Review 97(4), 1507-1528.

Barro R. J., 2001. Human capital and growth. American Economic Review 91(2), 12-17.

Bertrand, M., Schoar, A., 2003. Managing with style: the effect of managers on firm policies.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169-1208.

Cao J., Pan X. and Qian M., 2011. Political Connection and Managerial Entrenchment:
Evidence from CEO Turnovers in China. SSRN Electronic Journal.

Chen, Fleisher B., 1997. The coast-noncoast income gap, productivity, and regional economic
policy in China. Journal of Comparative Economics 25, 220-236.

Dittmar A., Duchin R., 2016. Looking in the rearview mirror: the effect of managers'
professional experience on corporate financial policy. The Review of Financial Studies 29(3),
565-602.

Fan J. P. H., T. J. Wong, and T. Y. Zhang, 2007a. Politically-Connected CEOs, Corporate
Governance and Post-IPO Performance of China's Partially Privatized Firms. Journal of
Financial Economics 84(2), 330-357.

Fang LH., Lerner J., Wu., 2017. Intellectual Property Rights Protection, Ownership, and
Innovation: Evidence from China. Review of Financial Studies 30(7), 2446-2477.

Fleisher, Belton, Li Haizheng and Zhao Minqiang ,2010. Human Capital, Economic Growth,
and Regional Inequality in China. Journal of Development Economics 92(2), 215-231.

Francesco D., Marcel P. and Michael W., 2019. Historical Antisemitism, Ethnic Specialization,
and Financial Development. The Review of Economic Studies 86(3), 1170-1206.

Gennaioli N., La Porta, Lopez De Silanes and Shleifer, 2014. Growth in regions. Journal of
Economic Growth 19(3), 259-309.

Griliches Z., Pakes A., Hall B., 1987. The value of patents as indicators of inventive activity.
Policy and Technological Performance. Cambridge University Press, 97­124.

Hall, B., Jaffe, A., Trajtenberg, M., 2001. The NBER patent citations data file: lessons, insights
and methodological tools. NBER Working Paper No. 8498.

Hall, B. , Jaffe, A. , Trajtenberg, M. , 2005. Market value and patent citations. RAND Journal

                                               24
of Economics 36 (1), 16­38 .

Islam E., Zein J., 2018. Inventor CEOs. Journal of Financial Economics. Forthcoming.

Jalbert T., Jalbert M., Perrina G., 2004. Does Degree Earned Matter? An Empirical Analysis of
CEOs from Large Firms. Journal of College Teaching and Learning 5(1), 65-73.

Jalbert T., Rao R., Jalbert M., 2002. Does School Matter? An Empirical Analysis of CEO
Education, Compensation and Firm Performance. International Business and Economics
Research Journal 1(1), 83-98.

Li H. and Li Meng, 2017. Scarring Effects of Deprived College Education during China's
Cultural Revolution, working paper.

Malmendier U.Tate G., Yan J., 2011. Overconfidence and EarlyLife ExperiencesThe
Effect of Managerial Traits on Corporate Financial Policies. Journal of Finance 66(5), 1687-
1733.

Mankiw N.D., Romer D. and Weil D.N., 1992. A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic
Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 407-437.

Meng, X., Gregory, R.G., 2002. The Impact of Interrupted Education on Subsequent
Educational Attainment: a Cost of the Chinese Cultural Revolution. Economic Development
and Cultural Change 50 (4), 935­959.

Romer M., 1990. Endogenous technological change. Journal of Political Economy 98, 71-102.

Schoar A., Zro, L., 2017. Shaped by Booms and Busts: How the Economy Impacts CEO
Careers and Management Styles. The Review of Financial Studies 30(5), 1425-1456.

Stroombergen, A., D. Rose and Nana, G., 2002. Review of the Statistical Measurement of
Human Capital. Statistics New Zealand working paper.

You J., Du G., 2012. Are Political Connections a Blessing or a Curse? Evidence from CEO
Turnover in China. Corporate Governance: An International Review 20(2), 179-194.




                                             25
                                                                          Table 1
                                                                    Summary Statistics
This table provides summary statistics of main variables for both firms led by CEOs with no college degrees and firms led by CEOs with college degrees.
Observations are at the firm-year level.
                                                With College Degree                         Without College Degree                    Difference
                                       Mean      Std. dev.     Observations            Mean     Std. dev.    Observations             t-Test
 Dependent variables
 R&D/Assets (multiplied by 100)        2.639       2.897          8475                 2.055       2.418          5858                10.947
 Patent Applications                   2.119       1.773          11133                1.713       1.715          9611                16.678
 Successful Patent Applications        1.870       1.687          11133                1.538       1.629          9611                14.343
 Patent Stock                          2.648       1.986          9174                 2.241       1.967          7784                13.350
 Citations                             0.368       0.907          8753                 0.326       0.831          7367                3.036
 Citations per Patent                  0.076       0.232          8753                 0.073       0.232          7367                0.717
 Relative Citation Strength            0.406       1.200          8403                 0.343       1.077          7083                3.447
 Independent variable
 College Degree                        1.000       0.000          11133                0.000       0.000          9611
 Control variables
 ROA                                   0.043       0.060          11132                0.034       0.067          9610                9.393
 Cash flow                             0.086       5.596          10082                -0.019      8.740          9067                0.998
 FirmSize                              21.600      1.321          10092                21.599      1.265          9078                -0.078
 CEO's Age                             48.314      6.269          11123                49.067      6.600          9594                -8.415
 Chairman CEO                          0.291       0.454          11133                0.205       0.404          9611                14.268
 Tobin's q                             3.001       2.744          10871                2.608       2.689          9409                10.277
 CapIntensity                          11.737      1.766          11037                11.731      2.025          9485                0.211
 SOE                                   0.356       0.479          11133                0.500       0.500          9611                -21.123


                                                                          26
                                                                              Table 2
                                                                 Innovation around CEO turnovers

This table provides Diff-in-Diff t-test results of main dependent variables around CEO turnover in a [-3, +3] window, where the turnover years are excluded.
We first take the mean of each firm's innovation before and after turnover, and therefore calculate firm diffs. For each treatment firm (where turnover does
happens), we generate firm diffs for all firms in the same industry around using the same turnover year, and take the median of these diffs as control industry
diff. R&D/Assets is multiplied by 100 in all tables. Panel A to Panel C each represent the results for different types of treatment firms' CEO turnover, with
each table reports the mean of firm diffs, the mean of industry diffs, and the t-statistics for diff-in-diff, and the last 2 columns of each table reports the results
when treated firms' diffs are winsorized at 1% and 99% levels. Panel A is based on the sample where the replacement CEO has a college degree and replaces a
CEO without a college degree. Panel B based on the sample where both the replacement and old CEO do not have college degrees. Panel C is based on the
sample where the replacement CEO does not have a college degree and replaces a CEO with a college degree. .

Panel A: Turnover where a new college CEO replaces a CEO without a college degree

                                                                        Control Firms( Industry             Diff-in-       Winsorized Treated           Diff-in-
                                                 Treated Firms
                                                                        Median)                             Diff           Firms                        Diff
                                         Mean of firm
                                                              #Firms    Mean of industry diff               T-statistic    Mean of firm diff            T-statistic
                                         diff
  R&D/Assets (multiplied by
                                         1.052                55        0.81                                1.411          1.047                        1.402
  100)
  Patent Applications                    0.812                55        0.43                                3.105          0.812                        3.105
  Successful Patent Applications         0.685                55        0.269                               3.572          0.685                        3.572




                                                                                 27
Panel B: Turnover where the new and replacement CEO both do not have a college degree

                                        Treated Firms        Control Firms( Industry Median)   Diff-in-Diff   Winsorized Treated Firms   Diff-in-Diff
                                  Mean of firm diff #Firms   Mean of industry diff             T-statistic    Mean of firm diff          T-statistic
 R&D/Assets                       0.993             127      0.758                             1.384          1.027                      1.715
 Patent Applications              0.374             127      0.382                             -0.135         0.374                      -0.139
 Successful Patent Applications   0.262             127      0.269                             -0.137         0.264                      -0.102

Panel C: Turnover where a CEO with a college degree is replaced by a CEO without a college degree

                                         Treated Firms       Control Firms( Industry Median)   Diff-in-Diff   Winsorized Treated Firms   Diff-in-Diff
                                  Mean of firm diff #Firms   Mean of industry diff             T-statistic    Mean of firm diff          T-statistic
 R&D/Assets                       0.55               22      0.638                             -0.314         0.569                      -0.257
 Patent Applications              -0.077             22      0.381                             -2.034         -0.035                     -2.026
 Successful Patent Applications   -0.067             22      0.26                              -1.586         -0.029                     -1.535




                                                                       28
                                                                            Table 3
                                                       Stock market returns around patent-grant dates
This table presents the results from OLS regression of cumulative stock market abnormal returns (CARs) around patent-grant dates on our core independent
variable, College Degree. CAR_CAPM is cumulative abnormal return, during three-day window [0, + 2] around the patent-grant date, and excess return is based
on the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) using the Shanghai Stock Market Return. CAR_Market is the stock market cumulative abnormal return, during the
three-day window [0, + 2] around the patent-grant date, and excess return is generated by deducting the Shanghai market return from the raw stock return.
Number of patents refers to the number of patents granted to the firm on the same day. Average tenure (CEO age) is computed as the mean of the values of
tenure (CEO age) corresponding to the patents granted to the firm on the same day. We require that the CEO be the same one when the independent variables
and the dependent variable are estimated. Year fixed effects and industry fixed effects are included in each regression. All variables are defined as in the
Appendix A. T-statistics are in parentheses.* Indicates significance at 10% level; ** significance at 5% level; *** significance at1% level.
                                                 CAR_CAPM                    CAR_Market                   CAR_CAPM                   CAR_Market
                                                 (1)                         (2)                          (3)                        (4)
 College Degree                                  0.00508***                  0.00468***                   0.00507***                 0.00482***
                                                 (9.99)                      (8.73)                       (10.08)                    (9.03)
 NumPatent                                       0.000533***                 0.000772***                  0.000529***                0.000765***
                                                 (5.09)                      (7.18)                       (5.06)                     (7.11)
 Tenure                                          -0.000348***                -0.000242***                 -0.000344***               -0.000244***
                                                 (-6.98)                     (-4.69)                      (-6.87)                    (-4.71)
 Age                                             0.0000755*                  0.0000925**                  0.0000698                  0.0000800*
                                                 (1.76)                      (2.04)                       (1.61)                     (1.73)

 Other Controls                                No                         No                          Yes                        Yes
 Year F.E                                      Yes                        Yes                         Yes                        Yes
 Industry F.E.                                 Yes                        Yes                         Yes                        Yes
 Observations                                  217425                     217425                      216932                     216932
 Adjusted-R2                                   0.0076                     0.0105                      0.0078                     0.0098


                                                                            29
                                                                         Table 4
                                                          CEO College Degree and Firm Innovation

This table provides OLS regression results of the main dependent variables on our core independent variable, College Degree. This sample is based on China's
listed companies from 2008 to 2016 with non-missing values, consisting of companies operating in the 2-digit industrial classification of the China Securities
Regulatory Commission (CSRC) industries where the average patent number per company in the industry is at least one. Financial firms are excluded. Panel A
reports the firm fixed effects regression results. Panel B represents the industry fixed effects regression results for seven different dependent variables,
R&D/Assets (multiplied by 100), Patent Applications, Successful Patent Applications, Patent Stock, Citation, Citation per Patent and Relative Citation
Strength. All variables are defined as in the Appendix A. Control variables are included in each regression. In Panel B, year fixed effects, industry fixed effects,
province fixed effects, year*industry fixed effects are included in each regression. The standard errors are clustered at province*year level. T-statistics are in
parentheses.* Indicates significance at 10% level; ** significance at 5% level; *** significance at1% level.

Panel A: Within firm changes: Firm fixed effects

  Dependent variable R&D/Assets Patent                Successful Patent PatentStock Citation Citation per Patent Relative Citation Strength
                                         Applications Applications
                         (1)             (2)              (3)                    (4)             (5)       (6)                   (7)
  College Degree         0.341**         0.288**          0.312**                0.370***        0.0475    0.0398                0.046
                         (2.05)          (2.25)           (2.48)                 (2.96)          (0.36)    (0.97)                (0.78)
  Controls               Yes             Yes              Yes                    Yes             Yes       Yes                   Yes
  Firm fixed effects     Yes             Yes              Yes                    Yes             Yes       Yes                   Yes
  Year fixed effects     Yes             Yes              Yes                    Yes             Yes       Yes                   Yes
  Cluster at firm        Yes             Yes              Yes                    Yes             Yes       Yes                   Yes
  Observations           1884            1929             1929                   2006            1732      1454                  1848
  R-squared              0.147           0.274            0.144                  0.453           0.214     0.316                 0.176



                                                                                30
Table 4
Continued

Panel B: Within industry differences: Industry fixed effects

                                                               Successful                              Citation per   Relative Citation
 Dependent variable          R&D/Assets Patent                                  PatentStock Citation
                                                               Patent                                  Patent         Strength
                                            Applications       Applications
                             (1)            (2)                (3)              (4)         (5)        (6)            (7)
 College Degree              0.236***       0.0905***          0.0698***        0.0392*     0.0315**   0.00682**      0.0158**
                             (3.92)         (4.04)             (3.16)           (1.81)      (2.04)     (2.00)         (2.13)
 Controls                    Yes            Yes                Yes              Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes
 Year fixed effects          Yes            Yes                Yes              Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes
 Industry fixed effects      Yes            Yes                Yes              Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes
 Province fixed effects      Yes            Yes                Yes              Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes
 Year*Industry fixed
                             Yes            Yes                Yes              Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes
 effects
 Cluster at Province*Year    Yes            Yes                Yes              Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes
 Observations                12392          18240              18240            16764       14109      14109          14336
 R-squared                   0.5154         0.4937             0.4796           0.4893      0.3879     0.2857         0.2398




                                                                           31
                                                                   Table 5: CEO Retirements
This table shows what happens around natural CEO retirement events. Panel B provides regression results around exogenous CEO retirement events. All
variables are defined as in the Appendix A. The same of control variables, as in Table 4, are included in every regression in Panel B. In Panel B, to avoid the
abrupt change of firm policies due to the change of CEO, we exclude the observations that fall into the range of (-1 year, +1 year) of the turnover event before
we run regressions. Year fixed effects, industry fixed effects, province fixed effects, year*industry fixed effects are included in each regression. The standard
errors are clustered at province*year level.* Indicates significance at 10% level; **significance at 5% level; *** significance at1% level.

Panel A: Details of exogenous CEO changes
                                    Exogenous changes                        College Degree Change                     Begin to have college degree
 number                             231                                      82                                        59


Panel B: Effect of CEO's college degree on innovation
 Dependent variable                                             R&D/Assets                   Patent                   Successful Patent       Patent Stock
                                                                                             Applications             Applications
                                                                (1)                          (2)                      (3)                     (4)
 College Degree                                                 0.277                        0.264*                   0.298**                 0.114
                                                                (0.78)                       (1.82)                   (2.08)                  (0.64)
 Controls                                                       Yes                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes
 Year fixed effects                                             Yes                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes
 Industry fixed effects                                         Yes                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes
 Province fixed effects                                         Yes                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes
 Cluster at Province*Year                                       Yes                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes
 Observations                                                   380                          734                      734                     588
 R-squared                                                      0.703                        0.666                    0.658                   0.6887




                                                                               32
                                                Table 6: Innovation with the Cultural Revolution Instrument

This table provides empirical regression results of instrumental variable regressions with the cultural revolution instrument: Unlucky. Panel A presents the first
stage regression of IV. Panel B shows the results of the second stage of the instrumental variable regressions. Year fixed effects, industry fixed effects, province
fixed effects are included in each regression. College degree is run against independent variable Unlucky. R&D / Assets is multiplied by 100 in all tables. The
standard errors are clustered at province*year levels. T-statistics are in parentheses.* Indicates significance at 10% level; **significance at 5% level; ***
significance at 1% level.

Panel A: IV first stage

 Dependent variable                                                                                 College Degree
 Unlucky                                                                                            -0.097***
                                                                                                    (-7.59)
 Controls                                                                                           Yes
 Year fixed effects                                                                                 Yes
 Industry fixed effects                                                                             Yes
 Province fixed effects                                                                             Yes
 Cluster at Province*Year                                                                           Yes
 Observations                                                                                       12385




Table 6


                                                                                33
Continued

Panel B: IV second stage

 Dependent variables        R&D/Assets   Patent          Successful Patent Patent   Citation   Citation   Relative
                                         Applications    Applications      Stock               per Patent Citation Strength
                            (1)          (2)             (3)               (4)      (5)        (6)        (7)
 College Degree             1.607**      0.679*          0.389             0.647*   0.864**    0.170**    0.349**
                            (2.21)       (1.94)          (1.19)            (1.81)   (2.52)     (1.99)     (2.4)
 Controls                   Yes          Yes             Yes               Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes
 Year fixed effects         Yes          Yes             Yes               Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes
 Industry fixed effects     Yes          Yes             Yes               Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes
 Province fixed effects     Yes          Yes             Yes               Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes
 Cluster at Province*Year   Yes          Yes             Yes               Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes
 F-statistic                56.22        59.53           59.53             58.26    35.3       35.3       38.4
 Observations               12392        18242           18242             16764    14111      14111      14336
 R-squared                  0.2393       0.4758          0.4753            0.5335   0.091      0.074      0.059




                                                        34
                                                                      Table 7
                                            CEO Retirement Sample using the Cultural Revolution Instrument

This table shows an IV regression result around exogenous CEO retirement events with College Degree instrumented by Unlucky. All variables are defined as
in the Appendix A. R&D / Assets is multiplied by 100 in all tables. The same control variables, as in Table 4, are included in every regression. Same as in Table
5, Panel B, we exclude the observations that fall into the range of (-1 year, +1 year) of the turnover event before we run regressions. Year fixed effects, industry
fixed effects, province fixed effects, year*industry fixed effects are included in each regression. The standard errors are clustered at province*year level.*
Indicates significance at 10% level; **significance at 5% level; *** significance at 1% level.

 Dependent variable                                           R&D/Assets                   Patent                     Successful Patent        Patent Stock
                                                                                           Applications               Applications
                                                              (1)                          (2)                        (3)                      (4)
 College Degree                                               3.138***                     1.761***                   1.747***                 2.521***
                                                              (2.77)                       (4.56)                     (4.84)                   (4.42)
 Controls                                                     Yes                          Yes                        Yes                      Yes
 Year fixed effects                                           Yes                          Yes                        Yes                      Yes
 Industry fixed effects                                       Yes                          Yes                        Yes                      Yes
 Province fixed effects                                       Yes                          Yes                        Yes                      Yes
 Cluster at Province*Year                                     Yes                          Yes                        Yes                      Yes
 F-statistic                                                  26.83                        46.58                      46.58                    41.66
 Observations                                                 379                          733                        733                      587
 R-squared                                                    0.387                        0.628                      0.614                    0.631




                                                                                35
                                                                         Table 8
                                                                CEOs with no College Degree

This table provides empirical regression results to support the validity of the instrumental variables. We run regressions where the dependent variables capture
innovation, the independent variable of interest is our instrumental variable in the sample where every CEO has no college degree. All variables are defined as
in the Appendix A. R&D / Assets is multiplied by 100 in all tables. Control variable CEO's age is excluded from these regressions. Year fixed effects, industry
fixed effects, province fixed effects, year*industry fixed effects are included in each regression. The standard errors are clustered at province*year level. T-
statistics are in parentheses.* Indicates significance at 10% level; **significance at 5% level; *** significance at 1% level.

Panel A: Effect of the Cultural Revolution on innovation, using the sample where CEOs have no college degree, firm-year level

 Dependent variable                       R&D/Assets        Patent            Successful Patent     Patent      Citation     Citation      Relative
                                                            Applications      Applications          Stock                    per Patent    Citation Strength
                                          (1)               (2)               (3)                   (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)
 Unlucky                                  -0.114            0.043             0.039                 0.039       0.029        0.008         0.0136
                                          (-1.49)           (1.18)            (1.10)                (1.09)      (1.05)       (1.00)        (1.04)
 Controls                                 Yes               Yes               Yes                   Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 Year fixed effects                       Yes               Yes               Yes                   Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 Industry fixed effects                   Yes               Yes               Yes                   Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 Province fixed effects                   Yes               Yes               Yes                   Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 Year*Industry fixed effects              Yes               Yes               Yes                   Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 Cluster at Province*Year                 Yes               Yes               Yes                   Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
 Observations                             5182              8631              8631                  7692        6570         6570          6684
 R-squared                                0.5055            0.4903            0.472                 0.4769      0.3756       0.3013        0.2765




                                                                              36
Table 8
Continued

Panel B: CEO individual level: Effect of the Cultural Revolution on innovation, using the sample where CEOs have no college degree

 Dependent variable                   R&D/Assets       Patent          Successful Patent   Patent     Citation    Citation     Relative
                                                       Applications    Applications        Stock                  per Patent   Citation Strength
                                      (1)              (2)             (3)                 (4)        (5)         (6)          (7)
 Unlucky                              -0.0676          -0.0821         -0.0865             -0.111     0.0320      0.0162       0.0208
                                      (-0.61)          (-1.39)         (-1.53)             (-1.56)    (0.80)      (1.16)       (0.95)
 Controls                             Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
 Year fixed effects                   Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
 Industry fixed effects               Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
 Province fixed effects               Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
 Year*Industry fixed effects          Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
 Cluster at Province*Year             Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
 Observations                         1787             2623            2623                2470       2286        2286         2286
 R-squared                            0.4540           0.5828          0.5683              0.5672     0.4297      0.3773       0.3851




                                                                       37
                                                                         Table 9
                                           The Cultural Revolution Experience and Firm innovation, OLS results

This table provides OLS regression results of the main dependent variables against our core independent variable, College Degree and instrument variable,
Unlucky. Regressions results are presented for seven different dependent variables, R&D/Assets, Patent Application, Successful Patent Applications, Patent
Stock, Citation, Citation per Patent and Relative Citation Strength. R&D / Assets is multiplied by 100 in all tables. All variables are defined as in the Appendix
A. The same control variables, as in Table 4, except variable Age, are included in each regression. Year fixed effects, industry fixed effects, province fixed
effects, year*industry fixed effects are included in each regression. The standard errors are clustered at province*year level. T-statistics are in parentheses.*
Indicates significance at 10% level; ** significance at 5% level; *** significance at 1% level.

 Dependent variable             R&D/Assets      Patent       Successful Patent PatentStock Citation            Citation per Patent    Relative Citation Strength
                                                Applications Applications
                                (1)             (2)             (3)                 (4)            (5)         (6)                    (7)
 College Degree                 0.229***        0.0937***       0.0738***           0.0400*        0.0311**    0.00651**              0.0146**
                                (3.81)          (4.20)          (3.33)              (1.86)         (2.05)      (1.97)                 (1.97)
 Unlucky                        -0.0589         -0.00129        -0.00864            0.0108         -0.00609    -0.00441               -0.00496
                                (-1.19)         (-0.05)         (-0.37)             (0.44)         (-0.31)     (-0.97)                (-0.61)
 Controls                       Yes             Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes         Yes                    Yes
 Year fixed effects             Yes             Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes         Yes                    Yes
 Industry fixed effects         Yes             Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes         Yes                    Yes
 Province fixed effects         Yes             Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes         Yes                    Yes
 Year*Industry fixed effects    Yes             Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes         Yes                    Yes
 Cluster at Province*Year       Yes             Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes         Yes                    Yes
 Observations                   12402           18262           18262               16785          14349       14349                  14349
 R-squared                      0.2885          0.4933          0.4793              0.4891         0.3841      0.2797                 0.24



                                                                               38
                                                                     Table 10
                                                        RDD Treatment effect of College Degree

This table shows result using a regression discontinuity design (RDD) treatment effect for CEOs who reached the age of 18 in years surrounding 1977. College
Degree. College Degree is regressed against treatment dummy POST in a probit model to examine the RDD treatment effect of College Degree. K represents
the polynomial order of RDD model. Window represents the bandwidth. Industry fixed effects, province fixed effects are included in each regression. The
standard errors are clustered at province level. T-statistics are in parentheses.* Indicates significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; *** significant at1%.

 Dependent variable                                                                                           College Degree
 POST                                                                             0.067**                           0.038***
                                                                                  (2.34)                            (4.98)
 Industry fixed effects                                                           Yes                               Yes
 Province fixed effects                                                           Yes                               Yes
 Cluster at Province                                                              Yes                               Yes
 K                                                                                1                                 1
 Window                                                                           (-3,+3)                           (-5,+5)
 Observations                                                                     1232                              2431
 Pseudo R2                                                                        0.1016                            0.0804




                                                                            39
                                                                        Table 11
                                                College Degree and Innovation using a Reduced Form RDD

This table shows results of innovation for college degree CEOs for CEOs who turned 18 during or right after the Cultural Revolution using a reduced form
RDD. Innovation measures are regressed against treatment dummy POST. K represents the polynomial order of RDD model. Window represents the bandwidth.
Panel A shows the results using a (-3 year, +3 year) window. Panel B shows the results using a (-5 year, +5 year) window. R&D / Assets is multiplied by 100
in all tables. All variables are defined as in the Appendix A. The same set of control variables, as in Table 4, is included in every regression. Industry fixed
effects, province fixed effects are included in each regression. The standard errors are clustered at province level. T-statistics are in parentheses.* Indicates
significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; *** significant at1%.

Panel A: (-3 year, +3 year) Window, using reduced form RDD

 Dependent variable                                    R&D/Assets                           Patent                             Successful Patent
                                                                                            Applications                       Applications
                                                       (1)                                  (2)                                (3)
 POST                                                  0.317*                               0.233***                           0.163**
                                                       (1.80)                               (3.08)                             (2.37)
 Industry fixed effects                                Yes                                  Yes                                Yes
 Province fixed effects                                Yes                                  Yes                                Yes
 Cluster at Province                                   Yes                                  Yes                                Yes
 K                                                     1                                    1                                  1
 Window                                                (-3,+3)                              (-3,+3)                            (-3,+3)
 Observations                                          837                                  1201                               1201
 Adjusted-R2                                           0.2963                               0.5866                             0.5653




                                                                               40
Table 11
Continued

Panel B: (-5 year, +5 year) Window, using reduced form RDD

 Dependent variable                             R&D/Assets        Patent         Successful Patent
                                                                  Applications   Applications
                                                (1)               (2)            (3)
 POST                                           0.258             0.302***       0.221***
                                                (1.21)            (5.80)         (4.24)
 Industry fixed effects                         Yes               Yes            Yes
 Province fixed effects                         Yes               Yes            Yes
 Cluster at Province                            Yes               Yes            Yes
 K                                              1                 1              1
 Window                                         (-5,+5)           (-5,+5)        (-5,+5)
 Observations                                   1701              2322           2322
 Adjusted-R2                                    0.3048            0.5576         0.5424




                                                             41
                                                                         Table 12
                                                   College Degree and Innovation using Fuzzy Form RDD

This table shows results of the degree effect on innovation, using a fuzzy form RDD. For the fuzzy RDD model, we use treatment dummy POST as the actual
instrumental variable for College Degree, and run instrumental variable regressions for College Degree. K represents the polynomial order of RDD model.
Window represents the bandwidth. Panel A shows the results using a (-3 year, +3 year) window. Panel B shows the results using a (-5 year, +5 year) window.
All variables are defined as in the Appendix A. The same set of control variables, as in Table 4, is included in every regression. Industry fixed effects, province
fixed effects are included in each regression. The standard errors are clustered at province level. T-statistics are in parentheses.* Indicates significant at 10%;
**significant at 5%; *** significant at1%.

Panel A: (-3 year, +3 year) Window, using fuzzy form RDD

 Dependent variable                                     R&D/Assets                            Patent                             Successful Patent
                                                                                              Applications                       Applications
                                                        (1)                                   (2)                                (3)
 College Degree (Instrumented by Post)                  2.749                                 3.811*                             2.747*
                                                        (0.56)                                (1.78)                             (1.68)
 Industry fixed effects                                 Yes                                   Yes                                Yes
 Province fixed effects                                 Yes                                   Yes                                Yes
 Cluster at Province                                    Yes                                   Yes                                Yes
 K                                                      1                                     1                                  1
 Window                                                 (-3,+3)                               (-3,+3)                            (-3,+3)
 Observations                                           873                                   1201                               1201
 Adjusted-R2                                            0.476                                 0.3834                             0.5226



                                                                                42
Table 12
Continued

Panel B: (-5 year, +5 year) Window, using fuzzy form RDD

 Dependent variable                             R&D/Assets        Patent         Successful Patent
                                                                  Applications   Applications
                                                (1)               (2)            (3)
 College Degree (Instrumented by Post)          1.256             2.326***       1.66***
                                                (0.56)            (4.22)         (3.77)
 Industry fixed effects                         Yes               Yes            Yes
 Province fixed effects                         Yes               Yes            Yes
 Cluster at Province                            Yes               Yes            Yes
 K                                              1                 1              1
 Window                                         (-5,+5)           (-5,+5)        (-5,+5)
 Observations                                   1701              2322           2322
 Adjusted-R2                                    0.5743            0.6477         0.6921




                                                             43
                                                                       Appendix A

Variables             Description
Dependent variables
R&D/Assets            Research and development expenditures, scaled by total assets. R&D / Assets is multiplied by 100.
Patent                The natural logarithm of one plus the number of patents applied for during the year by the listed company itself, and its branches.
Applications
Successful            The natural logarithm of one plus the number of patents granted during the year by the listed company itself, and its branches.
Patent Applications
Patent Stock          The stock of granted patents computed according to equation (1), to reflect the long-term nature of patent assets.
Citation              The natural logarithm of one plus the number of citations by the patents of the listed company itself.
Citation per Patent   The natural logarithm of one plus citations-per-patent of the listed company itself.
Relative Citation
                      The natural logarithm of one plus citations-per-patent corrected using HJT (2001)'s fixed effect method.
Strength
CAR_CAPM              Cumulative abnormal return, during the three-day window [0, + 2] around the patent-grant date. Excess return is based on CAPM.
                      Specifically, we fit the market model over [-275,-25] period to get the expected returns on the firm's stock.
CAR_Market            Cumulative abnormal return, during the three-day window [0, + 2] around the patent-grant date.
                      Excess return is generated by deducting market return from the raw stock return.




                                                                            44
         Appendix A
         Continued

Variables               Description
Independent variables
College Degree          An indicator variable equal to 1 if the CEO at least owns a bachelor degree, and zero otherwise.
CapIntensity            The natural logarithm of the ratio of net property, plant and equipment to the number of employees.
CEO's Age               CEO age in years.
Tobin's q               The market value of assets divided by the book value of assets.
ROA                     Return on assets.
Firmsize                The natural logarithm of total assets.
Cash flow               Cash flow from operation, scaled by lagged firm size.
Chairman CEO            An indicator variable equal to 1 when CEO is also the chairman of the board, and zero otherwise.
SOE                     An indicator variable equal to 1 if the company is a state owned enterprise, and zero otherwise.
Unlucky                 An indicator variable equal to 1 if the CEO was born during the cohort of 1948-1959, and zero otherwise.
POST                    An indicator variable equal to 1 if the year exceeds 1977, and zero otherwise.
EventTime               A distance variable equal to year minus 1977.
NumPatent               The natural Logarithm of the number of patents granted to firm i on the same grant date t.
Tenure                  The mean of the values of tenure corresponding to the patents granted to the firm on the same day.
Age                     The mean of the values of CEO's age corresponding to the patents granted to the firm on the same day.
Salary                  The natural Logarithm of CEO's annual salary.
CEO Share               The number of stock shares held by CEO scaled by total shares.
GovernmentBack          An indicator variable equal to 1 if the CEO has any government background
                        (Currently does or used to work in the government), and zero otherwise.


                                                                     45
FinanceBack                           An indicator variable equal to 1 if the CEO has any financial working background, and zero otherwise.

                                                                                     Appendix B
                                                                                 Balanced covariates

        This table shows the balanced check for covariates of RDD. Covariates are regressed against treatment variable, POST, to examine whether covariates are
        continuous around the cut-off-year. K represents the polynomial order of RDD model. Window represents the bandwidth. Panel I shows the results using a (-3
        year, +3 year) window. Panel II shows the results using a (-5 year, +5 year) window. Definitions of covariates are provided in Appendix A. Industry fixed
        effects, province fixed effects are included in each regression. Standard errors are clustered at province level. T-statistics are in parentheses.* Indicates significant
        at 10%; **significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

        Panel I: (-3 year, +3 year) Window

         Dependent variable                  ROA           Cash Flow           Firmsize             Chairman CEO                Tobin's q         CapIntensity      SOE
                                             (1)           (2)                 (3)                  (4)                         (5)               (6)               (7)
         POST                                0.001         -0.092              -0.161*                0.004                     0.116               -0.036          -0.018
                                             (0.2)         (-1.19)             (-1.93)              (0.19)                      (0.61)            (-0.30)           (-0.56)
         Industry fixed effects              Yes           Yes                 Yes                  Yes                         Yes               Yes               Yes
         Province fixed effects              Yes           Yes                 Yes                  Yes                         Yes               Yes               Yes
         Cluster at Province                 Yes           Yes                 Yes                  Yes                         Yes               Yes               Yes
         K                                   1             1                   1                    1                           1                 1                 1
         Window                              (-3,+3)       (-3,+3)             (-3,+3)              (-3,+3)                     (-3,+3)           (-3,+3)           (-3,+3)
         Observations                        1260          1260                1206                 1260                        1260              1254              1260
         Adjusted-R2                         0.1453        0.2269              0.3201               0.0982                      0.2348            0.2526            0.2984




                                                                                           46
Appendix B
Continued

Panel II: (-5 year, +5year) Window

 Dependent variable              ROA       Cash Flow   Firmsize   Chairman CEO   Tobin's q   CapIntensity   SOE
                                 (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)            (5)         (6)            (7)
 POST                            -0.003    0.397         -0.085   -0.008         0.127       -0.064         -0.006
                                 (-0.82)   (0.54)      (-1.55)    (-0.45)        (0.97)      (-0.64)        (-0.47)
 Industry fixed effects          Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes
 Province fixed effects          Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes
 Cluster at Province             Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes
 K                               1         1           1          1              1           1              1
 Window                          (-5,+5)   (-5,+5)     (-5,+5)    (-5,+5)        (-5,+5)     (-5,+5)        (-5,+5)
 Observations                    2445      2334        2336       2445           2445        2432           2445
 Adjusted-R2                     0.1321    0.0265      0.2731     0.0926         0.2217      0.2362         0.2449




                                                             47
