                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DO YOUTH EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMS WORK? EVIDENCE FROM THE NEW
                              DEAL

                                             Anna Aizer
                                              Shari Eli
                                        Adriana Lleras-Muney
                                            Keyoung Lee

                                         Working Paper 27103
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w27103


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                               June
We are very grateful to many research assistants     2020
                                                  that worked on this project, especially to Ryan Boone,
Taehoon Kang and Kyle Sherman. We have benefitted from comments from participants in the various
conferences. We are particularly indebted to Rodrigo Pinto for many valuable contributions. This research
was funded by the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada and by the Social Security
Administration Grant #NB17-16. This research was also supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration
through grant #5- RC08098400-10 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA
Retirement Research Consortium. The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the author(s)
and do not represent the views of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. This
project was also supported by the California Center for Population Research at UCLA (CCPR), which
receives core support (P2C- HD041022) from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development (NICHD). Finally, his material is based upon work supported by
the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-1650604. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. All errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Anna Aizer, Shari Eli, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Keyoung Lee. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Youth Employment Programs Work? Evidence from the New Deal
Anna Aizer, Shari Eli, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Keyoung Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 27103
June 2020, Revised July 2020
JEL No. J01,J08,J38,J68

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) ­ the first and largest youth training program in
the U.S. in operation between 1933 and 1942 ­ to provide the first comprehensive assessment of
the short- and long-term effects of means-tested youth employment programs. We use digitized
enrollee records from the CCC program in Colorado and New Mexico and matched these records
to the 1940 Census, WWII enlistment records, Social Security Administration records, and death
certificates. We find that enrollees who spent more time in CCC training grew taller, lived longer
lives and had higher lifetime earnings as a result of their participation in the program. We also
find modest increases in the educational attainment of the participants and increases in short term
geographic mobility. In contrast, we find no evidence that their labor force participation or wages
increased in the short run. To assess the internal and external validity of the results, we compare
our estimates to those derived from a randomized evaluation of Job Corps, the modern version of
the CCC, conducted in the 1990s. The RCT's results show that our empirical strategy delivers
estimates that are in line with the experimental estimates. Overall, we find significant long-term
benefits in both longevity and earnings, suggesting short and medium-term evaluations
underestimate the returns of training programs, as do those that fail to consider effects on
longevity.

Anna Aizer                                       Adriana Lleras-Muney
Brown University                                 Department of Economics
Department of Economics                          9373 Bunche Hall
64 Waterman Street                               UCLA
Providence, RI 02912                             Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER                                         and NBER
anna_aizer@brown.edu                             allerasmuney@gmail.com

Shari Eli                                        Keyoung Lee
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Toronto                            8283 Bunche Hall
150 St. George Street                            UCLA
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7                              Los Angeles, CA 90095
CANADA                                           keyounglee@gmail.com
and NBER
shari.eli@utoronto.ca


A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27103
I.    Introduction
Unemployment rates are typically highest among the young, particularly those from poor
backgrounds and during recessions. At the height of the Great Recession, unemployment rates
for those over age 25 peaked at 8.4% in 2010 but were as high as 19.6% for those aged 16-24
(US Bureau of Labor Statistics 2018). To address youth unemployment, government-run
employment training programs specifically target young adults. However, the short run effects of
these programs have been shown to be modest, at best, and there is very limited evidence of their
effectiveness over the long run. There is also very limited evidence on the effects of these
programs on non-labor market outcomes and on the mechanisms by which labor market effects
operate (Card, Kluve, and Weber 2018, Barnow and Smith 2015, Crepon and van den Berg
2016).
      We re-evaluate the short- and long-run effects of means-tested employment and training
programs targeted at young adults by studying the impact of the Civilian Conservation Corps
(CCC). The CCC was the first and largest employment program in U.S. history and was
implemented during a period of profound levels of youth unemployment ­ the Great Depression.
Unemployment rates among young adults during the Depression were estimated to be as high as
60 percent, depending on how partial employment is counted. 1 To address high youth
unemployment, the CCC was created in 1933 by the Roosevelt Administration. It employed
young men aged 17 to 23 in unskilled, manual labor. Under the Army's supervision, enrollees
were sent to work in camps in rural areas where they were also fed, housed and given access to
medical treatment. In addition to work experience, the CCC provided academic and vocational
courses as well as cash transfers to the families of poor unemployed youths. The CCC also
helped enrollees obtain employment upon completion. Enrollment in the CCC was voluntary and
enlistment periods lasted 6 months with an option to re-enlist up to three times. Between 1933
and 1942, the CCC had three million enrollees and operated about 2,600 camps. Several
programs in existence today such as Job Corps, Youth Conservation Corps, JobsFirstNYC, and
CalWORKs are modeled after the CCC.2



1
  Salmond (1967) reports that in 1932, 25 percent of youths were unemployed, and another 29 percent were only
employed part-time. Rawick (1957) estimates that about 20% of youths were unemployed and another 30% were
working part-time.
2
  Levine (2010).


                                                                                                                1
       We collect a new, large individual-level data set of CCC participants and their long-term
outcomes. We digitize administrative records from the CCC program in Colorado and New
Mexico covering the population of men in the CCC program between 1938 and 1943. Our data
include dismissal records on more than 25,000 men and details their demographic characteristics,
compensation, enlistment duration and reasons for leaving the program. We matched these
enrollee records to 1940 Census records, WWII enlistment records, Social Security
Administration records, and individual death certificates. These data allow us to investigate the
effects of the CCC on important long-run outcomes and mediators including education, health,
geographic mobility, employment, earnings and longevity.
      To estimate the effect of the program, we exploit variation in the service duration of the
enrollees. Treatment duration varied from a few days to more than two years with the average
enrollee participating for approximately nine months. We show that the determinants of duration
are complex and that those who trained for long periods were not necessarily from higher or
lower SES backgrounds. Moreover, many ended their training for arbitrary reasons. We confirm
these observations by investigating the reasons for dismissal. To assess the validity of our
approach, we use the rich data from Colorado to perform some placebo tests. We find that
duration does not predict pre-CCC labor outcomes or health, though we do find some effects on
education. We then explicitly control for many individual and aggregate characteristics that
predict participation and long-term outcomes and assess the sensitivity of our results to adding
these covariates, informally and formally, as suggested by Oster (2017).
      We find that individuals who trained longer in the CCC also lived longer. These gains
appear to be driven by the improved health of the participants (measured by height and weight)
as well as their increased geographic mobility towards richer areas, and their larger lifetime
incomes. These effects are larger among Hispanics, and for those serving in times of high
unemployment. We also find modest increases on educational attainment and in the probability
of serving in WWII. In the short run, we find no evidence that their labor force participation,
employment, or wages increased--these effects are very small and statistically insignificant.
Overall, the results are consistent with the hypothesis that the program provided important in-
kind goods and services to disadvantaged populations in a time of need, improving their long-
term health and survival. They are also consistent with the program having returns in the labor
market.



                                                                                                    2
           To further investigate the internal and external validity of our findings, we make use of
publicly available experimental data from the Job Corps (JC) program, the largest job training
program in the US targeting youth with an annual budget of $1.7 billion. The JC experiment
followed randomly assigned participants for four years. 3 With these data, we are able to follow
Lalonde (1986), using experimental data to shed light on the internal validity of a study based on
observational data. Although the JC data pertains to youth training that took place in the 1990s,
the program was modeled after the CCC and so retained many similar features. We focus on men
that participated in the RCT for comparability. We document that JC participants are quite
similar to CCC participants with regard to socio-economic characteristics (with some notable
exceptions), and that they train for similar durations and quit for similar reasons.
           The estimated treatment effects of training from the JC RCTs are similar in both direction
and magnitude to the effects of duration in a simple OLS model that controls for basic
observables at baseline, suggesting that our estimation strategy is internally valid. The results
also speak to external validity. The original JC RCT reported that the program increases
education levels, has small effects on employment rates and has positive, but statistically
insignificant, effects on wages among those employed. We replicate these findings for men. We
also document that JC and CCC both increased geographic mobility and improved health. Our
results from CCC are similar in the short-term to the effects of JC, except for employment and
wages.
           This suggests that our long-run estimates of job training based on the CCC are likely
informative about the long-run effects of JC, particularly for health. There does exist a single
study examining the effects of JC on labor market outcomes over 20 years using administrative
tax data. Schochet (2018) finds no employment or earnings effects in the overall sample, though
there are some positive effects for individuals who were older at baseline. They also report a
40% reduction in SSDI benefits, suggesting JC improved health, consistent with our longevity
results. Using data from the Social Security Administration, we find CCC resulted in an increase
of roughly 4.6% in lifetime earnings for the average enrollee. These effects are larger than the
2% (imprecise) increase Schochet (2018) documented, suggesting that the 20-year evaluation
underestimates the returns of the program, or alternatively, that the economic conditions
prevailing in the 20 years after the training took place have large effects on its return.

3
    There was a longer 9-year follow-up as well, but these data are not publicly available.


                                                                                                       3
        Our results suggest that JC participants today may live longer as a result of the program.
As such, job training evaluations that focus only on the labor market impact of the program may
underestimate the overall benefits. Our findings also suggest that there are in fact positive
returns to investing in young adults, contrary to the commonly stated findings that returns on
human capital investment are low after age 18. Our conclusion differs from that of Hendren and
Sprung-Keyser (2020), who report low values for JC, because we are able to incorporate large
increases in longevity, as well as increases in lifetime earnings into the benefits of the program.
        This paper also contributes to the broader evaluation of the New Deal programs
developed during the Great Depression. The Great Recession of 2008 renewed interest in
understanding whether and for whom government programs deployed during large economic
crises can be effective. Fishback (2017) provides a comprehensive survey of the literature on the
effects of New Deal programs, and reports that studies show New Deal programs increased
internal migration, lowered crime and reduced mortality in the short run. (See also Fishback,
Haines and Kantor, 2007 and Vellore 2014.) Our results are consistent with these findings for
migration and health. To our knowledge, there have not been any statistical studies of the long-
term causal effects of the CCC program or of any other New Deal program on individual lifetime
outcomes.


II.    Background: The CCC Program


Program Overview. The CCC, which was signed into law on March 31, 1933, was created by
President Franklin Delano Roosevelt by executive order "for the relief of unemployment through
the performance of useful public work and for other purposes." 4 The CCC had two objectives:
1) to provide relief to unemployed youth; and 2) to preserve and enhance natural resources.
Because of the prevailing view at the time that the provision of work would be more beneficial to
the unemployed than the receipt of cash transfers "relief through work" rather than "direct relief"




4
  The program was extended in 1935, 1937 and 1939, and ended in 1942 when Congress voted against another
renewal, despite prior efforts to make the program permanent. In addition, the program was originally called the
Emergency Conservation Work Program, but its name was changed in 1937 to Civilian Conservation Corps, its
popular name. Data Appendix Figure 1 contains a timeline describing the major changes to the program throughout
its existence.


                                                                                                               4
was a basic tenet of all the work programs in the New Deal. There was also a belief that idle
youth would commit crimes and cause social disturbances (Brock 2005).
       The untapped work capacity of idle youth was to be used to create national parks and
forests, and to help cope with the Dust Bowl. One of the primary appeals of the CCC was that
the work of enrollees would not directly compete (in terms of labor) with private sector
activities. As the program evolved, it added education components, which became mandatory in
1937. The nature of the program changed again in 1941 when military training was added to the
program as a result of growing tension in Europe during World War II. 5


Size and allocation of projects and enrollees. The federal government commissioned the CCC to
build national parks, preserve forests and irrigate land. Within weeks of the creation of the CCC
program, 1,250 projects had been submitted and 749 camp sites had been approved by the
director of the CCC and the President. 6 Camp locations were chosen to be close to work sites,
and to minimize the distance to communities that would supply them. Most camps had 200
enrollees at a time. Many smaller "side camps" were also created to allow for work in remote
locations.7


Eligibility. Only unmarried unemployed men, ages 17 to 25, who were American citizens, were
eligible.8 Preference was given to those in greater need--in practice, CCC enrollees were often
selected from families already enrolled in relief programs. 9 Government reports at the time
confirm that enrollees were poorly educated, with little work experience, and undernourished
(McEntee 1942).10 Enrollees had to present in good physical condition (an examination was

5
  Although perhaps unintended, and due to the fact that the military was in charge of running the camps, another
perceived benefit of the CCC program was that "enrollees made splendid soldier material" (McEntee 1942).
6
  US Department of Labor Report, 1933.
7
  Local labor could be employed when there were needs for specific skills to complete a project. Although initially
some communities were concerned with possible increases in crime resulting from nearby camps, most communities
eventually welcomed and moreover demanded camps be placed nearby, with the notable exception of black-only
camps, and camps with a large share of Hispanics. The CCC program was popular and many communities
welcomed the camps and the monies that it brought (Parham, 1981). A nation-wide poll in 1936 showed that more
than 80 percent supported the continuation of the program, and this support was larger in the Rocky Mountain states
(Paige 1985). However, there were racial tensions (Rawick 1957)
8
  There were some changes to these initial criteria, importantly age eligibility of juniors was modified twice. Data
Appendix Figure 1 documents some of the important changes in the history of the program.
9
  In 1935 when the program was expanded, it became a requirement that enrollees be drawn from relief rolls, though
in practice this was not always the case. In 1937 this requirement was eliminated.
10
   For example, in 1939 and 1940, about 52% had 8 years of schooling or less (Annual Report 1940).


                                                                                                                  5
required at enlistment) and have no history of criminal activity. 11 Finally, they had to be willing
to send a substantial portion of their wages to an assigned family member and to move to the
designated camp location for the duration of the enrollment period. After the enrollee signed the
contract there was a two-week conditioning period, after which enrollees were sent to a camp. 12


Compensation and program cost. Enrollees were required to work 40 hours per week and paid
$30 per month, of which $25 was sent home to a designated family member. 13 The government
also paid for the transportation to and from the camp, provided housing, uniforms, food, dental
and medical care, and workers' compensation insurance. Thus, it is estimated that the real
monthly wages of CCC enrollees was $66.25 per month. 14 CCC administration estimated that on
average a CCC camp would spend about $5,000 per month in local markets. 15


Duration of enrollment. Individuals initially enrolled for a six-month period, and were allowed to
re-enroll, for a maximum of two years (4 terms). Although the average enrollee worked for 9
months, there is large variation. CCC contracts could be terminated unilaterally by the
government, based on governmental needs, at any point. Many individuals deserted, resigned or
were expelled prior to completing their contract. Enrollees could leave early if they had secured
employment, were enrolled in a formal schooling program or for "urgent and proper call"
reasons, for instance the death of a parent or some other personal emergency. Enrollee turnover
was costly, and efforts were made to keep it low.


Education and training components. Vocational training and skill provision were always a part
of the program. In addition to on-the-job training, camps offered several vocational courses.


11
   Enrollees were vaccinated against typhoid, paratyphoid and smallpox at enlistment.
12
   In addition to accepting "juniors"--that is youth 18-25 to be trained, the CCC program also made veterans
eligible. There was also a large CCC program for American Indians, which operated under somewhat different rules
and was managed by the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Finally, the CCC also enrolled LEM "local enlisted men" which
had skills and knowledge not available among its Army personnel. The total number of men training in the CCC was
reported to be 3.2 million, LEMs accounted for 263,000, Indians 127,000, and veterans. There was a small separate
program for women started in 1936 which eventually served about 8,500 women nationwide in about 80 camps.
13
   Later in the program, a portion was retained as savings and given to enrollees upon dismissal.
14
   See BLS (1941). Levine (2010) reports this program was considerably more expensive than Works Progress
Administration as it was estimated to cost approximately $800 per enrollee. Critics of the program pointed out that
direct relief would have cost an estimated $250 per year instead (McEntee 1942). The value of the training and of
the work achieved in terms of conservation is of course not considered in this estimate.
15
   Paige (1985).


                                                                                                                 6
Attendance was voluntary. Soon after the creation of the CCC, there was a realization that an
educational component would be needed as a large number of enrollees were illiterate or had
education levels so low it prevented them from performing their assigned tasks at the camp. 16 An
education program was put into place by March of 1934, and the 1937 extension of the CCC
program included an important requirement that the CCC provide at least ten hours a week of
general or vocation training.17 Participation was not mandatory unless the enrollee was illiterate.


a. The CCC in Colorado and New Mexico
We study the program using administrative data from Colorado (CO) and New Mexico (NM).
Both CO and NM were relatively poor states during the Great Depression, though NM was
poorer and arguably one of the poorest states at the time. Estimates from National Income
Accounts for 1930 suggest that per capita annual personal income was $571 in CO, and $329 in
NM, while the nationwide average was $618. 18 About a quarter of the population in CO was on
relief in 1933; New Mexico had the highest share of the population on relief in the nation
(Hinton 2008).19
       Due to the large number of parks and forests in these states, and the severe impact of the
Dust Bowl, CO and NM had disproportionate participation in the CCC Colorado and New
Mexico had disproportionate participation in the CCC program. In a given year, on average,
there were 34 main camps operating in CO and 32 in NM in operation in a given year. 20 The
number of individuals training in CO and NM was disproportionately large. In CO, a total of
57,944 men served, of which 35,000 came from CO. In NM, a total of 54,500 served of which
32,300 came from NM.21 Enrollees in Colorado and New Mexico were disproportionately
Hispanic.22




16
   Britton reports than in Northern camps an average of 3 to 5 percent of enrollees were illiterate, but as many as
25% were illiterate in Virginia camps.
17
   Act of June 28, 1937, Public No 163, 75th Congress.
18
   Bureau of Economic Analysis NIPA 1929-today. SA1-3
19
   Census of relief 1933. Table 9.
20
   Final report. This number does not include the so-called side camps, which were smaller in size than typical
camps, whose population hovered around 200 men.
21
   Cohen (1980).
22
   New Mexico also had a large share of Native Americans. Native Americans had their own CCC programs which
operated separately within Indian reservations and were administered by the Bureau of Indian Affairs. See Parman
(1971) for details. We have no data on the Indian CCC program.


                                                                                                                      7
III.    Estimation Strategy and Estimation Issues
We estimate the effect of the program on lifetime outcomes by comparing outcomes for those
who served longer and shorter periods among individuals who served. This strategy is similar to
what Flores et al. (2012) do to estimate the returns to the number of courses taken in JC and to
Lechner et al. (2011), who evaluate impacts of short and long training programs in Germany.
The intuition behind this approach is simple: if training increases skills through some standard
production function, then more training should result in greater skills, though the rate of increase
might change with the level of training.
        We use the following specification,
                   =  +                                                +        +                 (1)
where        is an outcome, such as employment or age at death for individual i born in year b
training in CCC camp j, and             includes individual-level and camp-level covariates. The
independent variable of interest is                                         , the duration of training in
years. We estimate equation (1) clustering the standard errors at the application county and
enrollment year-quarter level, though the results are not sensitive to this choice. 23
        The coefficient b identifies the causal effect of duration on a given outcome only if
duration is uncorrelated with other determinants of the outcome, conditional on the observables.
There are several threats to identification. First, duration is measured with error because dates are
often incomplete or missing, possibly causing downward bias in the estimates. Second, there is a
possible omitted variable bias: it may be that individuals with higher abilities trained longer
because they benefitted more from the program and were able to better adapt to military life in
camps (positive selection). Alternatively, poorer individuals may have had stronger incentives to
train in the CCC because they were more in need of the payment that they and their families
received (negative selection). Third, it is also possible that camp characteristics are omitted. For
example, individuals might have stayed longer in camps with good weather, and good weather
could improve long-term health (positive selection). Demand for work might have been greater
in places where the dust bowl hit, leading enrollees to stay longer in unhealthy locations
(negative selection). In these cases, the coefficient on duration would be biased.


23
  We also experimented with alternative approaches and estimate results clustering at the application county,
enrollment year level. Overall, we found these alternatives do not materially impact our conclusions, and the
evidence suggests that there is little correlation across individuals in the data.


                                                                                                                8
          To address these concerns, we take multiple approaches. First, we investigate the
determinants of duration to determine the extent of possible selection issues. We also make use
of the reasons why individuals dropped out to understand who leaves early and why. Then, to
account for selection on observables, we explore how the inclusion of individual- and camp-level
covariates affect the estimates of the effect of duration. We estimate bounds using the method
proposed by Oster (2017). For a subset of the data we also conduct placebo tests to see if
duration predicts pre-CCC enrollment outcomes (education, labor market experience, height and
weight). Finally, we use the data from JC to investigate whether our approach generates biases in
the estimates by comparing OLS type estimates to the estimates derived from the RCT. 24


IV.       Data and descriptive statistics


     A.    Data collection
Colorado (CO) Enrollees. We digitized the entirety of CCC records contained at the State
Archives of Colorado. These records include original applications of all individuals who
applied.25 The entire collection, which includes 21,538 individuals, accounts for the population
of individuals who trained between 1937 and 1942 but not for those who enrolled prior to
1937.26 The applications contain the following: name, address, date of birth, place-of-birth,
height, weight, race, and social security number (SSN), marital status, whether the father or
mother is living, number of brothers, number of sisters, number of family members in household,
rural status, farm ownership, occupation of main wage earner in household, educational details,
employment status and history. With the exception of information on height, weight and race,
which were collected upon medical examination, the rest was self-reported. In addition, previous
CCC enrollment information was collected, and information on the designated allottee(s) (the
family member who would receive the allotment from the CCC): name, relationship and amount
allotted, for up to two allottees. If the individual was rejected, it is noted in the file. Otherwise we


24
   We also investigated a large number of IVs to instrument for individual duration including the use of weather,
camp closures, measures of the intensity of the Dust Bowl and leave-out duration at the camp. Unfortunately, most
of the IV estimates we produced had large standard errors and suffered from weak IV problems.
25
   Of the 35,000 that trained in CO and came from CO, about 30,000 were junior and veterans, and 5,000 were non-
enrolled personnel (hired from local population), and about 500 were part of the Indian CCC program.
26
   We established based on published reports from the CCC that the records account for the complete population of
records starting in 1937 (see Data Appendix Figure 4).


                                                                                                                9
observe the discharge information detailing the company and camp the individual attended,
reason for dismissal, the date of dismissal, and whether the dismissal was honorable.


New Mexico (NM) Enrollees. We digitized the entirety of CCC records from the New Mexico
State Records Center, which has the entire set of discharge forms for the state from 1938 to
1942. These records include information on 9,699 individuals, covering the population of
individuals that trained in state from 1938 to 1942.27 For each individual, the records contain the
following: name, date of birth, address, family information (head of family, address of family,
and relationship to enrollee), allottee information (name, address and relationship to allottee, for
up to two allottees), enrollment date, assigned camp, date and reason for dismissal and whether
the dismissal was honorable. Because enrollment forms are unavailable, NM records contain
substantially less information on participants than CO records.


Camp-level Data. We collected information on the exact location of camps. In particular, each
camp was assigned to a zip code within a county using post-office codes. Then, we coupled
camp location information (latitude and longitude) with historical weather patterns (temperature
and precipitation), which come from PRISM Climate Group. Additionally, we retrieve longitude
and latitude information of closest towns and individual's residence cities from the United States
Board of Geographic Names, and use them to compute (Euclidian) distances to the closest towns
and to each enrollee's hometown. Using the camp name, we can construct indicators for the
agency (and thus the type of work) that created the camp. We use our records to construct
average characteristics of enrollees (such as the fraction under age 18) in each camp and point in
time. Finally, we match camps to census county-level information about the county in which it
was located, such as unemployment rates.


Death Records. The administrative data from CO and NM was matched to death records
(including the Social Security Death Master File and state-level death records) to identify the
date of death and social security number of each enrollee. This match was done manually by
trained genealogists at BYU, who found CCC enrollees in the collection of records kept by


27
  We established based on published reports from the CCC that the records account for the complete population of
records starting in 1938 (see Data Appendix Figure 4).


                                                                                                               10
Ancestry.com and FamilySearch.org. A summary of this process is available in Appendix 6. We
find death dates for 88% of CO recipients and 75% of NM recipients, representing much higher
match rates than typically found in the literature. 28 We use these data to compute the age at death
using the date of death in the death certificate and date of birth in the CCC application. 29 We also
match the data using automated methods as a robustness check.


1940 and WWII records. We match our records to the Federal Census of 1940 and to WWII
Enlistment Records. These matches are made using the Abramitzky, Mill, and Perez (2018)
algorithm. Details of the procedure are available in Data Appendix D and E. The 1940 census
includes location, demographics (race and ethnicity, marital status, place of birth, household
information), and labor market information (employment occupation and wages). We
successfully match 44% of individuals to the census, and about 29% to WWII enlistment
records. This lower match rate to WWII records is to be expected: not all individuals enlisted or
served in WWII, even when they were eligible. Also, not all records of those who served
survived.30


Social Security Records. We match our data to the Master Beneficiary Record File (MBR) in the
Social Security administration, which contains information on individual lifetime earnings,
disability, and retirement. (More details are available in Data Appendix 1F.) We merge these




28
   Our match rates are higher than those typically found in the literature (which range from 20 to 50%) for two
reasons (Bailey et al. 2017, Abramitzky et al 2019 ). First, administrative records contain information not just on
individuals but also on their family members. This greatly improves our ability to find individuals by using
information from family trees and various vital registration records. Second, the death records come from various
sources. Most commonly these come from the Death Master File (DMF) which includes the universe of death
certificates in the US starting in the mid 1970s. But the collection also includes records from other sources,
including state vital registration sources, deaths during WWII, and gravestones. A few individuals are observed as
dying during CCC training.
29
   Mortality information is missing for some individuals for several reasons. First, some individuals died prior to
1975, which is the first year of complete death records in the Social Security Death Master File (For more
information about coverage of the DMF, refer to Hill and Rosenwaike (2001). In this case, we might find a death
record for them if one exists in state vital records. Second, some individuals might still be alive, so the age at death
is censored. Based on SSA life tables we compute that about 1.1% of individuals born in 1920 (our median birth
year) would be expected to be alive by 2017. Lastly, we might not have found individuals who died in the 1975-
2017 interval due to measurement error and matching errors. The key issue for estimation will be whether missing
data is differentially missing for those that trained for linger durations.
30
   Several cards were lost to fire or were unreadable. See https://aad.archives.gov/aad/series-
description.jsp?s=3360&cat=all&bc=sl


                                                                                                                       11
data on SSNs.31 We are able to match 52% of our records to the MBR records. But only those
that apply for benefits (social security pensions or disability) appear in the MBR. We have
information on 80% of individuals who survived to age 65, so our match rate for the targeted
population is high. In these records we can observe the Primary Insurance Amount (PIA), which
is a proxy for lifetime earnings. The PIA corresponds to the pension a person receives if they
start receiving retirement benefits at his/her normal retirement age. The PIA is a non-linear
transformation of the AIME (average indexed monthly earnings), which computed as the average
of the highest 35 years of earnings after adjusting for inflation.


     B. Sample Selection.
For our analysis, we restrict attention only to individuals for whom we can observe duration of
training, camp, and the outcome of interest. Therefore, we drop individuals who have no birth
year, enrollment year, discharge year or application county, as well as those whose entire
discharge records are missing. This results in a sample of 23,722 men out of 26,292. Appendix
Table 1 details the number of observations that are lost due to missing data.
      For the mortality analysis, we make additional restrictions. We include only individuals
with age of death information but investigate the effects of missing data and also use imputations
in alternative specifications. The final mortality sample contains information on 17,639 men.
This estimation sample generally is representative of the initial data (Table 1) except that, by
construction, the age at death is significantly higher. For the lifetime outcomes from the SSA,
our sample includes 12,455 individuals, 64% of the original analytic sample. Again, this sample
is relatively representative of the initial full sample in many dimensions (duration, YOB, age,
height, weight, education, father alive, mother alive, household size, farm) with some notable
exceptions (Table 1). By construction, the age at death in this sample is higher because only
those who survive to at least 62 are eligible to apply for pensions. We also see fewer Hispanics,
more people who lied about their age, and more people who sent money to their mothers. But
these differences are not too large. We investigate the extent of sample selection further below.



31
  We only observe SSN if they person reported it in the application in CO, or if it is available in the death
certificate. However, SSNs are not available for anyone who died after 2008 (these are masked for privacy reasons)
or for those who died young and never applied for a SS card.



                                                                                                                12
     C. Summary Statistics: CCC Training and Lifetime Outcomes
Pre-CCC Characteristics. Characteristics of the men in our data are presented in Table 1a and
1b. The average CCC enrollee enlisted around 1939 and was 18.7 years old, but many enrollees
appear to have misrepresented their age: 22% overstated their age (their age in the death
certificates suggest they were younger than they reported), and another 11% understated their
age. While some of these discrepancies might be due to errors in matching individuals to death
certificates, they might also indicate that many men, particularly the young ones, were quite
desperate to train and lied about their age to gain eligibility.32
       As expected, more detailed data for CO suggest that the enrollees were relatively
disadvantaged. On average, enrollees completed 8.7 years of schooling and came from a
household of about 5 individuals. About 25% came from a farm, 20% had a deceased father and
15% had a deceased mother. Despite height and weight examinations to exclude the unhealthy,
about 7% were underweight. Imputing the ethnic origin of the participants, we estimate that
about 45% were Hispanic.33 In the Online Appendix we show that these young men came from
poorer counties than the average males of the same age in CO and NM in the 1930 and 1940
census, consistent with them being recruited from relief rolls. Consistent with the fact that CO
and NM were very poor states, CO and NM enrollees were even more disadvantaged than the
average CCC enrollee in the nation--they are substantially younger, shorter, weigh less, have
more dependents, and more of them have fewer than 4 years of schooling. 34 Data Appendix
Figure 6 documents this graphically. Data on the camps suggest that they were typically rural in
nature and as such, located relatively far from the enrollees' hometowns (150 miles on average).


Post CCC outcomes. Table 1b shows the mean outcomes for CCC enrollees after they left the
program. The average enrollee eventually lived to be 70 years old, below what SSA cohort life
tables predict for male cohorts born in 1920 who survived to age 17 (71). In our estimation
sample, conditioning for dying after 45, the average enrollee lived to be 73.6 years old, which is


32
   A few of the men are not junior (less than 1%) which can also explain a small fraction of the violations in the age
criteria. Individual accounts of CCC participants include accounts of lying and over-eating in order to qualify, see
Melzer (2000).
33
   See Data Appendix for method of imputation.
34
   We check this by comparing the means in our estimation sample to the published national means. These were
published in Annual Report of the Director of the Civilian Conservation Corps: Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1937
Appendix H: Census of Civilian Conservation Corps Enrollees.


                                                                                                                    13
also lower than 74.5 from the SSA cohort life tables. This evidence is consistent with the fact
CCC men were poor and came from poor states. Among those in the SSA records, the average
PIA was around 430 dollars per month. In 1940, 91% of those who had already completed their
training were in the labor force, and 72% were working conditional on being in the labor force,
making about 400 dollars in annual wages. A substantial fraction (29%) were living in a different
county from their prior county of residence. Similar patterns are observed in the WWII
enlistment data.35


 V.     Determinants of Training Duration.
We start by investigating the determinants of enrollment duration. On average enrollees in our
estimation sample trained for 9.8 months (S.D. 0.7) or 0.82 years. Aggregate data on the national
CCC program from a 1937 CCC Census shows that the distribution of duration in our states
(using CO) is skewed slightly towards shorter durations than the national distribution (Data
Appendix Figure 6).
        There is large variation in the duration of training. Figure 1, Panel A shows the histogram
of duration in months. It shows spikes exactly at 6, 12, 18 and 24 months, corresponding to 1, 2,
3 and 4 terms. However, most individuals (62%) dropped out in the middle of their assignment
(Table 1a, 38% ended due to "end of term"). And there is significant variation in duration among
those serving partial terms: 9% of individuals trained fewer than 2 months and a few individuals
(about 1%) trained for more than 3 years despite program rules. Figure 2 Panel A shows that
among those who left before completing their term, 21% deserted, 15% were dismissed "for the
convenience of the government" (e.g., the camp closed), 12% left for a job, and another 12% left
because of an "urgent and proper call" (e.g., a family member was sick, though the specific
reason is not generally noted).
        Figure 2 also shows that those leaving before completing their term tend to have shorter
average durations. Individuals with honorable discharges trained for longer, suggesting positive
selection into duration. However, among those who quit early, the results are more ambiguous:
individuals with "urgent and proper calls" trained less than those who deserted. Furthermore,


35
  At the time of WWII enlistment (around 1942) 30% were living in a different county from their prior county of
residence.



                                                                                                                  14
those who were rejected upon further examination trained for just as long as those who were
dismissed for the convenience of the government. Thus, short durations may have resulted from
either positive or negative circumstances.
       To investigate the determinants of duration we estimate simple OLS regressions of the
duration of training as a function of individual, family, and camp characteristics. We include
year-of-birth fixed effects (YOB) because different cohorts were eligible to train for different
amounts of time (Data Appendix Figure 5). We include county-of-enlistment by quarter-of-
enlistment (CQE) fixed effects for two reasons. This addresses the fact that the number and types
of camps that were opened varied over time and space, affecting where individuals ended up
serving and potentially the duration of training. It also addresses differential selection based on
location and time over the program years because the type of individuals who apply for training
(and other government benefits) varies substantially with economic conditions (Méndez and
Sepúlveda. 2012).
       Figure 3 shows the results for selected characteristics, with full results shown in Appendix
Table 2. In examining the relationship between personal characteristics and duration, no clear
relationship emerges. Individuals who reported being older than they truly were trained for
shorter durations whereas those who were older trained for longer durations. Those who were
farther away from home also trained for shorter. 36 Surprisingly, individuals with a higher weight,
who were presumably healthier individuals, trained for shorter durations. Height, which is a
marker of improved nutrition and health during the growing years, does not predict training
duration. Those with more education trained for longer but so did those who came from larger
households or whose parents were deceased. 37
       This evidence is not consistent with a single narrative of selection. There appear to be three
groups of enrollees. First, some who served for longer because they were positively selected,
such as those with more education, older, or honorably dismissed. A second group seems to be
negatively selected and in need of the CCC payments, such as those from more disadvantaged



36
  Other traits predict durations: e.g. those who were paid more and those that were not juniors trained longer.
37
  These results are qualitatively similar if we estimate regressions separately for CO and NM (see Appendix Table
2) but some coefficients are only significant in one state. Notably Hispanics were more likely to train longer in NM
but not in CO. Individuals who were older than they reported trained longer in CO but not in NM. Weather is a
significant predictor in CO but not in NM. There are no cases in which the coefficients are statistically significant
and of opposite signs.


                                                                                                                   15
backgrounds. Third, some appear to have more or less random reasons due to good or bad luck,
such as a job appearing, a camp closing or having an emergency at home.
       The evidence also suggests that, conditional on individual characteristics and place and
time of enrollment, camp conditions mattered, as shown in Appendix Table 2. For instance, in
places with less rain and milder weather, individuals trained for longer, as did those assigned to
camps farther from cities. Peer characteristics also mattered. Durations were longer in camps
with larger Hispanic shares of the population or with more men under 18, but shorter in camps
with many men who misrepresented their age or sent smaller amounts to their families.
       In sum, the primary evidence shows that desirable traits in an enrollee or in a camp did not
necessarily lead to longer durations, and there is no single narrative of selection.


VI.      The Long-Term Effect of CCC Training on Mortality and Lifetime Earnings
We now investigate the effect of duration of enrollment on lifetime outcomes, namely mortality
and earnings.


      A. Mortality results
For this analysis, we restrict attention to individuals who died after age 45 to avoid WWII related
deaths and who have been linked to a death certificate. The results are not sensitive to these
restrictions. Figure 4 shows the relationship between average duration of training and mean age
at death among CCC men: the longer an enrollee trained, the longer he lived. The relationship is
positive and linear. Figure 5 shows the estimated density of the age at death for individuals who
trained for less than one term, between 1 and 2 terms, and more than three terms. The
distribution of the age at death appears to shift to the right for those who trained for longer.
       Next, we estimate an accelerated failure time model of the age at death on duration in
which we add controls for the characteristics of the enrollees and the camps to examine whether
and how our estimates change in response. The first column of Table 2 with no controls shows a
very precise coefficient on duration of 0.013. Controlling for cohort fixed-effects and county-of-
enrollment-quarter-of-the-year (CQE) fixed-effects (column 2) does not change the coefficient
estimate. Including family and individual characteristics (column 3) lowers the coefficient to
0.011. Adding camp characteristics (column 4), peer characteristics (column 5), or camp fixed
effects (column 6) changes the coefficient very little. The magnitudes imply that one more year



                                                                                                   16
of training increased the age at death by one year (roughly 1.3 percent of 73.6 years of life).
Given that the average duration was 9 months, the program increased age at death by 0.8 years
for the average enrollee. When we limit our sample to CO where the records contain a lot more
important baseline information, such as education, height, etc., the results are again similar
(column 7).38
      The fact that the coefficient is essentially unchanged from columns 1-7 suggests that
selection bias may be small. However, to more formally assess the magnitude of the omitted
variable bias, we re-estimate these coefficients under various assumptions about the
unobservables following Oster (2017). If delta (the proportionality value) is assumed to be 1 (i.e.,
unobservables as important as observables) then our coefficient would be 0.0136. Alternatively,
if delta is assumed to be -1, we would estimate 0.0127. Thus, one more year of training would
increase the age at death between 0.96 and 1.02 years.
      Coefficients on other covariates (shown in Appendix Table 3) are interesting and shed
some light on the issue of selection. They show that variables that predict longer duration do not
always predict longer lives, providing additional evidence that selection into duration is unlikely
to drive our results. More educated individuals trained longer and lived longer as well. Similarly,
individuals who were accepted but eventually rejected trained for shorter durations and lived
shorter lives, consistent with accounts that these shorter durations were mostly related to physical
disabilities. On the other hand, individuals who were older than they reported, trained for longer
durations but lived shorter lives. Similarly, those who lived far away trained longer but lived
shorter lives.
      Finally, to examine possible non-linearities, Figure 6 shows the results of the regression of
probability of survival to age x on duration for every age between 45 and 90. The coefficients are
small and statistically insignificant at younger ages, when the survival is very high. They become
positive and statistically significant starting at age 56 and continue to increase and peak between
ages 68 and 78, and then decline thereafter. As a function of the baseline survival rate, which is
declining throughout, the effects rise until age 67, and then decline.




38
  For NM and for CO records with missing data we impute using the mean and include a series for dummies to
indicate when the covariate is missing.


                                                                                                             17
Sample attrition. About 20% of the original sample is missing information on age at death. We
assess whether missing age at death is systematically related to training duration (with or without
conditioning on covariates). Table 3 shows that, without controls, the missing rates are not a
function of training duration. But conditional on camp, family and individual characteristics, age
at death is about 9% less likely to be missing for those who trained for an additional year. This
suggests that differential attrition could bias our OLS estimates. To address this issue, we
estimate survival models where we make various assumptions about the missing data. The results
in Appendix Table 4 show that our findings are robust to various imputation approaches.


Quality of the longevity data. Our main results use the information found by trained genealogists
from multiple sources to determine the age at death. To assess the quality of the data and whether
the hand matching procedure introduces unknown biases, we replicate the results using machine
matches only. To do this we use the EM algorithm to match our records to the Death Master File.
The results in Appendix Table 8 show that we still obtain a positive and statistically significant
coefficient of duration on age at death that is very similar in magnitude to our main estimates.


   B. Lifetime income results
We examine the effects of the program on lifetime income by investigating the effects of
duration on the Primary Insurance Amount (PIA), our proxy for lifetime earnings. The PIA is the
amount of Social Security pension an individual would receive if they retired at the normal
retirement age. To compute PIA, the SSA takes the average of an individuals' best 35 years of
earnings, known as the AIME (Average Indexed Monthly Earnings). The SSA transforms the
AIME into pension amounts using a non-linear formula, where each additional dollar earned is
weighted by a smaller factor as earnings increase, with the weights tapering to zero. Thus, the
formula compresses the distribution of PIA compared to the distribution of earnings. Because the
PIA computation changed in 1979, we focus on results post-1979, but show results for the pre-
1979 sample as well.
      We plot the mean PIA as a function of duration for the sample claiming after 1979 and find
a flat or slightly negative relationship between duration and PIA (Figure 7). This relationship
reverses once we control for year of birth (Figure 8). We investigate these results further by
estimating OLS regressions. Without covariates there is indeed a negative and statistically



                                                                                                     18
significant relationship that is however very small in magnitude (Table 2 Panel B, column 1).
Consistent with the figures the coefficient reverses and becomes positive and statistically
significant when we add controls for birth cohort and for quarter and county of enlistment
(column 2). It remains stable thereafter regardless of the additional controls we add: one more
year of training increases the pension amount by $17 per month, or 3.9% relative to the mean. If
we convert this to the effect on the AIME, it corresponds to a 5.6% increase relative to the mean.
Panel C shows we obtain similar results in the sample who claimed before 1979: increasing
training by a year raises PIA by 2.8% and AIME by 4.9%, though this is not statistically
significant. If we compute the weighted average between the two samples, we find that a year of
training lead to a 3.7% increase in PIA and a 5.5% increase lifetime earnings.
      These results do not appear to be driven by sample selection or attrition in the SSA data.
This can be seen from Table 3 Panel B, which shows that there is no effect of duration on
whether we match an enrollee to MBR. As an additional check, Table 3 Panel C shows that, even
when restricting the sample to those matched to the MBR, the effect of duration on longevity is
very close to the results from the full sample.
      We can compare the size of the gains by comparing our returns to the returns to schooling.
The coefficient of years of schooling in the regression of column 6 of Panel B is 10.57 (s.e. =
1.4) so the effect of a year of school on the PIA is smaller than the $17 we estimate for one year
of JC, though schooling is measured with error, potentially causing downward bias in the
estimate of schooling. Alternatively, OLS estimates of the returns to schooling for our cohorts
range from 5% (Goldin and Katz 2000) to 8% (Clay et al 2012). Based on these estimates, the
returns to one year of CCC training are roughly equivalent to a year of school or a bit larger.
      Given that enrollees participated for 0.83 years, the effect of CCC on lifetime earnings are
about 4.6%. For reference, the latest evaluation of JC, which tracks individual tax records 20
years after the program, finds that participation in JC had a statistically insignificant increase in
wages of 2%, with our effects well within their confidence interval [-4%; 8%]. There are at least
two reasons why the returns are lower for JC. The JC evaluation only uses 15 years of labor
market outcomes, whereas we use 35 years. The shorter length of the evaluation may lower the
estimated returns. Alternatively, the post-WWII economy was better for low-skilled labor than
the economy of the early 2000s, which had stagnant wages for low-income groups (Piketty, Saez
and Zucman 2018).



                                                                                                    19
       C. Treatment Effect Heterogeneity
        A recent meta-analysis of 200 training programs around the world by Card, Kluve, and
Weber (2018) suggests substantial heterogeneity in estimated impacts. Other recent reviews
(Barnow and Smith 2015, Crépon and van den Berg 2016) come to similar conclusions. While
we cannot evaluate gender differences (women were ineligible for the CCC), we can investigate
other differences that have been found important, such as age, SES and economic conditions at
the time of enlistment (Appendix Table 5).39
        We find that the poorest and most disadvantaged benefitted more, provided they were in
good health. The effects were also larger when unemployment was higher. These findings are
consistent with Card et al. (2018)'s finding of larger effects of job training in recessions and
among the more disadvantaged. Our results differ in one important way from existing work: we
find larger pension gains for the young, and significant benefits for Hispanics. 40
        In sum, the average enrollee remained in the program for 0.83 years. This led to an
increase of about 0.8 years of life and 4.6% increase in lifetime earnings. We now investigate
short term effects.


VII.      Short-Term Outcomes: Evidence from the 1940 Census and WWII Enlistment
          Records
        What might explain the long-run effects? To investigate, we examine the impact of training
on short-run outcomes. First, we investigate the effects on employment and wages, the standard
outcomes that are typically assessed in job training programs. Next we investigate other
mechanisms that include formal education, health improvements, and geographic mobility.


     A. Labor market outcomes: Evidence from the 1940 census




39
   Effects are generally larger for women partly explaining why our results are more modest than those found by
Attanasio et al. (2017) (or Kugler et al. 2015) who evaluate programs in Colombia after ten years and find large
effects on earnings of about 11% for men and 18% for women. But our estimates for men are still lower than what
these studies find.
40
   We suspect these differences are due to several factors: 1-we compute Hispanic ancestry and do not rely on self-
reports, b-our enrollees are from only 2 states with large number of Hispanics in the population; 3-the country of
origin among our enrollees differs substantially from today.


                                                                                                                  20
       Table 4 shows estimated effect of training duration on outcomes as measured in the 1940
census. We constrain our sample to 9,518 men who participated in CCC before January 1 st, 1940,
of whom we find 43% percent in the 1940 census.41 On average these men had left the CCC two
years before the 1940 census.
       CCC training duration appears to have little effect on the short-run labor market outcomes
of CCC enlistees. Most men (91%) are in the labor force, and longer CCC training had at best a
very small effect on this outcome: a 1.5% increase relative to the mean of 0.91. We observe no
effect on employment (conditional on labor force participation) during the week prior to the
Census. There appears to be a small, negative and imprecise effect of duration on weeks worked
and earnings.42 Overall, our results are consistent with the observation in recent reviews that the
labor market effects are more positive in the long run than in the short run.


     B. Health and military service: Evidence from WWII enlistment records
       Table 5 presents results on other short-run outcomes. Because these outcomes are observed
at different points in time, in these regressions we include age at enlistment dummies. Duration
does predict whether we find enrollees in these records. Each year of CCC training leads to about
a 3-percentage point increase in the probability we find the individual in the WWII enlistment
records, about a 10% increase relative to the mean, robust and statistically significant. This result
is not surprising: the army organized and administered life in the camps, and CCC men who
trained for a long time were well acquainted with military life. Some men (2% in our data) ended
their CCC engagement to enlist in the military directly, particularly toward the end of the
program in 1942. Given that we have not found differential matching rates in any of our other
data, we do not believe differential matching explains this result. Rather, we conclude that the
program made men more likely to serve.
       We observe measured height and BMI in the WWII enlistment data for about 5,500
observations. We find that one more year of training translated into roughly 1 more inch of
height--this result is statistically significant and relatively robust to the inclusion of covariates


41
   Duration does not predict whether we find an enrollee in the 1940 census once we include birth cohort and
county-quarter fixed effects (Table 4 top panel).
42
   For example, the largest coefficient for weeks worked is -0.937 which corresponds to 3.4% change relative to the
mean of 28 weeks worked. Similarly, we observe a negative but statistically insignificant effect on earnings,
corresponding to about a 3% decrease in wages at the mean.


                                                                                                                 21
once cohort dummies are included as controls. 43 While this effect is small relative to the mean
(about 1.5%), it is large by historical standards: for example, it took British men 100 years for
their average height to increase by 6 inches (Fogel 1994). This result holds conditional on height
at enlistment, so it corresponds to additional growth rather than initial differences in height.
       It might seem surprising that the program increased heights given that these enrollees'
average age is 19. However, undernourished populations grow more slowly and achieve their
final adult height at older ages (Steckel 1986) and our results are consistent with this. Also note
that our effects are consistent with national reports of the CCC program that the average height
gain was half an inch (McEntee 1942). Our estimates are a bit larger, possibly because our
population is more disadvantaged than the average CCC enrollee. Also recall that individuals in
the CCC received food and medical care, including vaccinations, as part of their participation in
the program, likely improving their nutritional status. Finally recall that many individuals (9% in
our estimation) were likely younger than they reported.
          Consistent with this, the results for BMI, which is a commonly used indicator of short-
term nutrition, also show statistically significant increases, across specifications, implying gains
of about 5-6% on BMI depending on the specification. The final CCC report documents an
average weight gain of enrollees during the program of 11 pounds (McEntee 1942), and our
results suggests that 40-60% of these gains persisted. 44


     C.     Effects on education, and geographic mobility
          We conclude by showing results on formal years of schooling and geographic mobility,
which are observed in both the Census of 1940 and WWII Enlistment Records. For these
outcomes, we combine information from the two sources to maximize sample size. 45 We control




43
   Controlling for cohort matters a lot because individuals born in more recent cohorts are taller but less likely to
serve for long, since the program ended with WWII. This possibly explains the negative correlation in the raw data.
44
   For an average enrollee in our sample, adding 11 pounds would translate to a gain of 8%, so our results suggest
that about 40-60% of the weight gain obtained during the program persisted.
45
   Because the WWII records contain the latest information, we take information from WWII if the enrollee can be
found in WWII record and 1940 Census if cannot be found in WWII record and discharged before 1940. For
education and marriage, we take the value at WWII, which is later than 1940, if observed in WWII and the value at
1940 Census if only observed in the Census. For moving, we code some as moved if they moved counties in either
1940 or in WWII. The results are not qualitatively different if we run the regressions separately although they are
less frequently statistically significant as a result of the smaller sample size. Results available upon request.


                                                                                                                   22
for the time since discharge (or equivalently the year of observation) to account for the fact the
outcomes are not observed at the same time.
      We find a positive and statistically significant effect of duration on years of schooling of
about 0.18 years, relative to a mean of 9.4 years of schooling and controlling for education at
baseline (Table 5). When we restrict our analysis to those with non-missing baseline education,
the estimate declines to 0.12 and remains significant at the 5% level. 46 Though small in absolute
terms, this represents one tenth of the standard deviation of schooling in WWII records, and it is
larger than the effect of many education policies, such as child labor laws, on educational
attainment during the early 20th century.47
      This magnitude is somewhat larger than what one would expect based on the number of
individuals that gained formal education during their CCC enlistment and suggests that perhaps
individuals obtained school after participating in the CCC. CCC reports indicate that 8% of men
obtained additional schooling during the program. 48 Assuming 8% obtained one more year of
school, this would result in a gain in years of schooling of 0.08, below but close to our estimate.
Given that about 3.5% of enrollees in our data cited education as an explicit reason for leaving
the program, post-CCC education gains likely accounts for the rest of the effect.
      Finally, we look at the relationship between duration and short and long-term geographic
mobility. In Table 6, we compare the county of individuals in their original CCC application
with the county of residence indicated in the 1940 Census records, the WWII records and in the
death certificates. Thirty five percent of participants moved in the short term. Training for more
time in the CCC substantially increased the likelihood of moving. The coefficient on duration is
positive and statistically significant in many specifications, hovering around 0.05; thus one more
year of training increases the chance of moving by about 15%. This is substantial particularly
during this period, which was characterized by historically low migration nationwide, at least
across states.49 Moreover, when CCC men moved, they moved to locations with higher paying
weekly or annual wages in 1940, and thus potentially better economic opportunities, as well as

46
    Results available upon request.
47
    For example, see Lleras-Muney (2002) or Goldin and Katz (2008). One more year of compulsory schooling led to
about 0.05 years of schooling.
48
    The final report states that over one hundred thousand enrollees (3%) were taught how to read and write in the
CCC program, 4% of men received primary school degrees (8th grade), 0.6% got their high school diplomas and a
handful (270 out of more than 3 million) obtained college degrees. Thus, about 7-8% obtained some schooling.
49
   In the 1940 census 12% of people report living in a different county than in 1935.
https://www.census.gov/dataviz/visualizations/010/


                                                                                                               23
 lower mortality, measured by the average county level mortality from 1950 to 1968. 50 Over the
 long run, however, most individuals moved and the effect of duration on mobility fades.
         In sum, enrollees who served longer had better health, more schooling and greater short-
 term mobility towards healthier, richer places. But in the short run, there appear to be no effects
 on labor market outcomes.51


VIII.      Internal and External Validity: Comparisons to Modern Job Corps program
 To shed some light on the internal and external validity of our results, we analyze data from the
 modern Federal Job Corps program (JC hereafter), which was modeled after the CCC. 52 Using
 publicly available data from a randomized evaluation of the JC program conducted in 1994-
 1996, we first compare JC and CCC enrollees along a number of dimensions, including prior
 schooling and training duration. We then compare our estimated treatment effects (using OLS
 methods) with JC estimates based on randomization to assess the validity of our research design.
 We then compare estimates of duration in JC and the CCC on short run outcomes.


        A. Comparing CCC and JC Enrollees.
 JC participants differ from CCC participants in two key respects: JC includes women and
 married individuals, whereas the CCC excluded both. If we restrict attention to men in JC, Table
 7 shows that overall, JC and CCC participants are similar. Both are young (19 years old on
 average) and have relatively few years of schooling. JC participants have completed 10 years of
 schooling, compared with 8.5 for the CCC enrollees, and 19% have graduated from high school
 compared with 12% of the CCC enrollees. Our sample has considerably more Hispanics, due to
 the fact we concentrate on CO and NM, whereas the JC data is national.




 50
    We use this measure instead of the county mortality from 1940 onwards because of the disruptions that occurred
 during the WWII.
 51
    For CO we have baseline measures for several outcomes: height, weight, education and prior labor market
 experience. In our main results we control for these. However, this allows us to test if duration predicts these pre-
 labor market outcomes. Appendix Table 6 shows that duration does not predict these pre-CCC outcomes, except for
 education. These results suggest that by in large our approach produces unbiased estimates of the effects of the
 program.
 52
    The current website (https://www.doleta.gov/job_corps/) states that "The program helps eligible young people
 ages 16 through 24 complete their high school education, trains them for meaningful careers, and assists them with
 obtaining employment." "Students can earn a high school diploma or the equivalent, and college credits. Job Corps
 also offers tuition-free housing, meals, basic health care, a living allowance, and career transition assistance."


                                                                                                                    24
     Participants are also similar in terms of duration of enrollment and reasons for unenrolling.
Mean duration is 9.44 months (s.d. 7.47) for CCC and 5.8 months (s.d. 6.6) for JC. The main
reason for the lower duration of the JC participants is that 20% never serve (Figure 2).
Conditional on training, the duration among the treated group in JC is 7.8 months. Rates of
completion are similar across the two programs as are the reasons for leaving. 53 Finally, and
perhaps most importantly, when we try to predict duration in the JC, we also find evidence of
both positive and negative selection into duration, as well as evidence that duration might have
ended at a random time, just as we found in the CCC data (Figure 3). 54


     B. Comparison of experimental and non-experimental estimates.
We reproduce the JC randomized evaluation results in Schochet et al. (2008) using only the
sample of males (Table 8).55 In the first column we present estimates that compare the outcomes
of those assigned to treatment to those of the control. In the second column we present the
implied effects of training duration by estimating the implied 2SLS effect of duration using the
randomized treatment status as an instrument. Thus, these estimates represent the causal effect of
duration under a certain set of assumptions. 56 The third and fourth columns show the results of
our OLS strategy for JC and for CCC, respectively, which we discuss below. 57


OLS as a reasonable approximation of experimental estimates in the JC data. We find that OLS
estimates are a reasonable approximation of the causal impact of duration on short run outcomes
in the JC data. For example, the 2SLS estimate of duration on years of schooling using



53
   About 30% of JC enrollees complete the program, compared with 38% of the CCC. And of those who leave
before completing, 30% in the JC and 22% in the CCC "deserted" while 12% and 4%, respectively, left because of
employment opportunities.
54
   We find that education, Hispanic ethnicity, non-native speakers trained longer and individuals with a criminal
history or those with shorter work histories trained for shorter periods of time (Figure 3 Panel B). As in the CCC,
participants that found employment and those that deserted, were rejected or had urgent and proper calls also served
shorter durations compared to those that completed their term.
55
   The results in the first column are almost identical to those in Schochet et al. (2008) except that we are restricting
the sample to males and we constructed a few new outcomes (years of education, mobility and marriage). We can
reproduce the full RCT results very closely using the full sample.
56
   Assuming that there are no heterogeneous treatment effects, and that the effect of training duration on the
outcomes is linear starting at 0.
57
   Appendix Table 7 shows that the treated and control groups are balanced among males only suggesting that the
RCT results for this subsample are valid. However, we show both groups since the original RCT was not designed
or powered to estimated effects among males only.


                                                                                                                      25
assignment to treatment as an instrument is 0.39. When we use data only from the treated group
and estimate the effect of training duration on education using OLS, the coefficient we would
estimate is 0.36, statistically indistinguishable from the experimental estimate. We find similar
effects in the OLS and RCT settings for employment, weeks worked, and log earnings
conditional on employment. The OLS approach underestimates annual earnings (including zeros)
and over-estimates mobility, but the results are still similar given the estimated standard errors.


Comparing CCC estimates with the JC estimates. We find that the JC and the CCC programs
both had positive and statistically significant effects on education, geographic mobility and
health. The latter two outcomes had not previously been examined, although the 20-year
evaluation did report that a 40% reduction in SSDI benefits among JC participants. We find that
JC increases the likelihood that respondents report being in excellent or very good health. Thus
the JC evidence on health is similar to CCC findings for height and BMI. 58
         However, we find different effects of JC and CCC training on labor market outcomes.
While small positive effects on employment, weeks worked, and annual earnings are found in the
JC program, we find that the CCC program had no significant effects on employment and
earnings in the short run. The differences might be due to the effects of experience: the labor
market outcomes are measured on average only two years after leaving the CCC program, but
they are measured 3 years out for JC. The differences could also be driven by the fact that labor
market conditions differed at the time of the evaluation and were still quite dire in the 1930s and
early 1940s.
         Overall, we conclude that CCC participants are comparable in some important dimensions
to JC participants: they are young and uneducated, and they participate in training for about 7 to
9 months. In the short run, both programs appear to raise educational attainment and geographic
mobility and improve health. JC has more beneficial labor market effects in the short run. But
CCC appears to have increased lifetime earnings, suggesting the 20-year evaluation might
underestimate the effects of the program. This suggests that in the long-term JC participants will
benefit from JC by living longer lives and enjoying greater pensions.


IX.        Discussion.

58
     Results are similar if we use the entire scale or only look at whether the respondents are in excellent health alone.


                                                                                                                        26
       In the long run, we find that individuals who participated longer in CCC had increased
longevity by about 0.8 years. In the short run (within 2 years of training), we find no significant
effects of training duration on labor force participation, employment, or earnings. We do
however find significant income effects (4.6%) in the long-term despite no short-term effects,
consistent with Card et al.'s (2018) findings. We also find small improvements in education and
relatively large increases in geographic mobility, height, and BMI.
       Our longevity finding is consistent with the literature on the determinants of mortality.
Height and normal BMI are both associated with longevity (Fogel 1994), and both indicators of
health improved with CCC duration. The education of the men (formal and informal) also
increased, and education is associated with longevity (Cutler et al. 2006). Greater lifetime
earnings are also associated with lower mortality (Chetty et al. 2016). Finally, the enrollees
moved to locations with lower mortality, which Finkelstein et al. (2019) and Deryugina and
Molitor (2019) show also increase longevity.
       Was the program worth it? We calculate the Marginal Value of Public Funds (MVPF) to
answer the question, following the approach by Hendren and Sprung-Keyser (2019). The CCC
program costs include: 1) upfront cost of the program and 2) increases in social security payouts
from enrollees both living longer and having increased PIA. These costs are mitigated by tax
increases from earnings benefits of the program. The program benefits include: 1) willingness to
pay (WTP) for life extensions, 2) increase in after-tax earnings, 3) $30 per month wage paid
(most of which went to families), and 4) the value of other services received by enrollees during
the program, such as room and board. The MVPF is estimated to be 2.13 including the WTP for
life increase, and 0.96 excluding the WTP for life increase. 59 Thus our conclusions are similar to




59
  Assumptions made and details of calculation are presented in the Online Appendix. Some of the increases in life
expectancy could lead to greater government spending through Medicare, potentially lowering the marginal value of
public funds (Hendren and Sprung-Keyser 2019). Families received transfers, which could have benefitted them but
also potentially distorted their behaviors. We do not have estimates of these effects. We do not assess the general
equilibrium effects of job training programs. Recent research suggests these effects could be substantial and possibly
offset the benefits to individuals (Crepon et al. 2013). Relatedly, the CCC program had impacts not just on the
individuals that participated in the program but also on the communities where the CCC operated. In the short run
these effects were driven in part by the economic and social activity that the camps generated, bringing men and
resources to nearby towns. These short-term effects ended with the end of the program and the closure of the parks.
But the changes in the landscape related to the building of national parks and forests, and the irrigation of the land,
might have affected these communities more permanently. We do not incorporate these. Van der Berg et al. (2016)
discuss this extensively--full cost benefit evaluations of training programs are rare and difficult to do.


                                                                                                                    27
Hendren and Sprung-Keyser (2019) 60 in that the MVFP is below one when computed based on
earnings, but they differ once we incorporate longevity gains.
      Historical accounts suggest that the program may have positively affected other "soft
skills," improved mental health, and enlarged social networks, but we have no data to assess
these effects. For example, enrollees reported making many life-long friendships and
experiencing improvements in their state of mind. Additionally, the Army ran the CCC camps
and imposed rules of behavior that were likely unusual for most individuals and may have been
beneficial. Criminality is an important outcome which may have been affected as well. Though
we do not observe these outcomes directly, we do observe that the CCC increased the probability
that young men served in the Army, consistent with a change in either discipline or attitudes
towards national service. Also, worth noting is that the program likely benefitted not just
enrollees and their families, but the communities and the landscape where the CCC operated.
Future work should attempt to measure these outcomes and conduct a more extensive cost-
benefit evaluation of the program.
      Our results have important implications for evaluations of job training programs. The vast
majority of evaluations focus on labor market outcomes in the short- to medium-term and find
small and/or insignificant effects. We confirm these findings in our data. But we observe large
changes in lifetime outcomes that are not usually studied, namely health, military service, and
geographic mobility. As previous scholars have noted, these findings suggest that it is essential
to evaluate multiple mechanisms and indicators of well-being when assessing the impacts of
various interventions.
      Individuals entering the labor force today will begin their job search in the midst of high
unemployment rates not seen since the Great Depression. Our results suggest that job training
during periods of high unemployment has the potential to generate significant long-term benefits
for participants, particularly on health outcomes. Thus, the results may be highly applicable to
more modern periods with high rates of unemployment, such as the Great Recession of 2009 and
the 2020 global pandemic. Our findings demonstrate these programs can improve both health
and labor market outcomes. However, the contrast between our findings and the long-term
evaluation of the JC program also underscores that the labor market benefits of training programs


60
  They compute an MVFP of 0.18 for JC. This computation does not incorporate the lower SSDI claims or the
potential life extensions we compute here.


                                                                                                            28
may depend heavily on the economic conditions that prevail in the decades that follow the
program. Indeed, this point has been raised by Rosenzweig and Udry (2019) who have
documented that the causal impact of multiple types of investment (including education) can
vary significantly over time with changes in aggregate economic conditions. Whether and how
the returns to modern job training programs varies with both current and future economic
conditions is an important area for future monitoring and study.




                                                                                              29
References

Abramitzky, Ran, and Mill, Roy and Perez, Santiago. 2020. "Linking individuals across
    historical sources: a fully automated approach". Historical Methods: A Journal of
    Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History, vol 53(2), pages 94-111.

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, Katherine Eriksson, James J. Feigenbaum, and Santiago
    Pérez. Automated linking of historical data. No. w25825. National Bureau of Economic
    Research, 2019.

Andrews, Isaiah and James Stock. 2018. "Robust Inference with Weak Instruments." NBER
     Econometrics minicourse.

Attanasio, Orazio, Arlen Guarín, Carlos Medina, and Costas Meghir. 2017. "Vocational Training
     for Disadvantaged Youth in Colombia: A Long-Term Follow-Up." American Economic
     Journal: Applied Economics, 9 (2): 131-43.

Bailey, Martha, et al. How Well Do Automated Linking Methods Perform? Lessons from US
      Historical Data. No. w24019. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.

Barnow, Burt S. and Jeffrey Smith. 2015. "Employment and Training Programs" NBER WP#
     21659. October.

Bell, Felicitie C. and Miller, Michael L. 2005. "Life Tables for the United States Social Security
      area 1900-2100. SSA Pub. No. 11-11536.

Britton, James Ensign. 1958. The education program of the Civilian Conservation Corps"
      Master's theses. Paper 135. University of Richmond.

Brock, Julia K. 2005. "Creating Consumers: The Civilian Conservation Corps in Rocky
     Mountain National Park". Florida State University. Electronic thesis. Treatises and
     Dissertations. Paper 3012.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1941. "Eight Years of CCC Operations, 1933 to 1941," Monthly
     Labor Review, Volume 52, pages 1405-1413.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2018. "Great Recession, great recovery? Trends from the Current
     Population Survey," Monthly Labor Review, April 2018.

David Card, 2011. "Origins of the Unemployment Rate: The Lasting Legacy of Measurement
     without Theory," American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol.
     101(3), pages 552-557.

Card, David & Jochen Kluve & Andrea Weber, 2018. "What Works? A Meta Analysis of
      Recent Active Labor Market Program Evaluations," Journal of the European Economic
      Association, vol 16(3), pages 894-931.



                                                                                                30
Card, D., & Krueger, A. B. (1992). Does school quality matter? Returns to education and the
      characteristics of public schools in the United States. Journal of political Economy, 100(1),
      1-40.

Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas Turner,
     Augustin Bergeron, and David Cutler. 2016. "The association between income and life
     expectancy in the United States, 2001-2014." JAMA 315, no. 16 1750-1766.

Clay, K., Lingwall, J., & Stephens Jr, M. (2012). Do schooling laws matter? evidence from the
      introduction of compulsory attendance laws in the united states (No. w18477). National
      Bureau of Economic Research.

Cohen, Stan. 1980. The tree Army. A pictorial history if the Civilian Conservations Corps, 1933-
     1942. Pictorial Histories Publishing Company. Missoula Company, Montana.

Cook, T. D., Shadish, W. R., & Wong, V. C. (2008). Three conditions under which experiments
     and observational studies produce comparable causal estimates: New findings from within
     study comparisons. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management: The Journal of the
     Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management , 27(4), 724-750.

Crépon, Bruno and Gerard J. van den Berg, "Active Labor Market Policies," Annual Review of
     Economics, 2016, 8, 521­546.

Crépon, B., Duflo, E., Gurgand, M., Rathelot, R., & Zamora, P. (2013). Do labor market policies
     have displacement effects? Evidence from a clustered randomized experiment. The
     quarterly journal of economics, 128(2), 531-580.

Cunha, Flavio and Heckman, James J., and Schennach, Susanne M. 2010. "Estimating the
    technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation." Econometrica. Vol. 78, No. 3
    (May 2010) 883-931.

Cutler, D., Deaton, A., & Lleras-Muney, A. (2006). The determinants of mortality. Journal of
      economic perspectives, 20(3), 97-120.

Dahl, Gordon B., and Kostol, Andreas R., and Mogstad, Magne. 2014. "Family Welfare
      Cultures". The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Davis, J., & Heller, S. B. 2017. "Rethinking the benefits of youth employment programs: The
     heterogeneous effects of summer jobs". National Bureau of Economic Research. No.
     w23443

Deryugina, Tatyana, and Molitor, David (2019). Does When You Die Depend on Where You
     Live? Evidence from Hurricane Katrina. NBER Working Paper 24822.




                                                                                                 31
Dobbie, Will, and Gronqvist, Hans, and Niknami, Susan, and Palme, Marten, and Priks, Mikael.
     2018. "The Intergenerational Effects of Parental Incarceration". National Bureau of
     Economic Research. No. w24186.

Fechner, Robert. 1937 "The Educational contribution of the Civilian Conservation Corps." The
     Phi Delta Kappan. Vol 19, no. 9, may 1937, pp 305-307, 309.

Federal Security Agency. Annual Report of the Director of the Civilian Conservation Corps:
     Fiscal Year Ended June 30 1937. United States Government Printing Office. Washington.

Federal Security Agency. Annual Report of the Director of the Civilian Conservation Corps:
     Fiscal Year Ended June 30 1938. United States Government Printing Office. Washington.

Federal Security Agency. Annual Report of the Director of the Civilian Conservation Corps:
     Fiscal Year Ended June 30 1939. United States Government Printing Office. Washington.

Federal Security Agency. Annual Report of the Director of the Civilian Conservation Corps:
     Fiscal Year Ended June 30 1940. United States Government Printing Office. Washington.

Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams.2019. "Place-BasedDrivers of
     Mortality: Evidence from Migration." NBER Working Paper 25975.

Fishback, Price, 2017. "How Successful Was the New Deal? The Microeconomic Impact of New
     Deal Spending and Lending Policies in the 1930s," Journal of Economic Literature, vol
     55(4), pages 1435-1485.

Fishback, Price, Michael Haines, and Shawn Kantor. 2007. "Births, Deaths, and New Deal Relief
     During the Great Depression." Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (February): 1-14.

Flores, C. A., Flores-Lagunes, A., Gonzalez, A., & Neumann, T. C. (2012). Estimating the
      effects of length of exposure to instruction in a training program: the case of job corps.
      Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 153-171.

Fogel, Robert W, 1994. "Economic Growth, Population Theory, and Physiology: The Bearing of
     Long-Term Processes on the Making of Economic Policy," American Economic Review,
     American Economic Association, vol. 84(3), pages 369-395, June.

Gelber, A., Isen, A., & Kessler, J. B. (2016). The Effects of Youth Employment: Evidence from
     New York City Lotteries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 131(1), 423-460.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz. "Education And Income In The Early Twentieth Century:
     Evidence From The Prairies," Journal of Economic History, 2000, v60(3,Sep), 782-818.

Goldin, C., & Katz, L. F. (2008). Mass secondary schooling and the state: the role of state
     compulsion in the high school movement. In Understanding long-run economic growth:




                                                                                                   32
     Geography, institutions, and the knowledge economy (pp. 275-310). University of Chicago
     Press.

Heckman, J. J., LaLonde, R. J., & Smith, J. A. (1999). The economics and econometrics of active
    labor market programs. In Handbook of labor economics (Vol. 3, pp. 1865-2097). Elsevier.

Hendren, N., & Sprung-Keyser, B. D. (2019). A Unified Welfare Analysis of Government
     Policies (No. w26144). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hill, Mark E. and Rosenwaike, Ira. 2001. "The Social Security Administration's Death Master
      File: The Completeness of Death Reporting at Older Ages". Social Security Bulletin. Vol.
      64, no 1, pp 44-51.

Kugler, Adriana, Maurice Kugler, Juan Saavedra and Luis Omar Herrera Prada (2015). "Long-
     Term Direct and Spillover Effects of Job Training: Experimental Evidence from
     Colombia" NBER Working Paper 21607.

LaLonde, R. J. (1986). Evaluating the econometric evaluations of training programs with
    experimental data. The American economic review, 604-620.

Lechner Michael, Ruth Miquel and Conny Wunsch 2011. Journal of the European Economic
     Association, Volume 9, Issue 4, 1 August 2011, Pages 742­784.

Levine, Linda. 2010. "Job Creation Programs of the Great Depression: the WPA and the CCC"
     Congressional Research Service 7-5700.

Lleras-Muney, A. (2002). Were compulsory attendance and child labor laws effective? An
      analysis from 1915 to 1939. The Journal of Law and Economics, 45(2), 401-435.

McEntee, JJ. 1940. Final Report of the Director of the Civilian Conservation Corps, fiscal year
    ended June 30, 1940. United States Government Printing Office. Washington DC.

McEntee. JJ. 1942. Final Report of the Director of the Civilian Conservation Corps, April, 1933
    through June 30, 1942. Federal Security Agency M-2125.

Melzer, Richard Anthony (2000). Coming of Age in the Great Depression: The Civilian
     Conservation Corps in New Mexico, Yucca Tree Press.

Méndez, Fabio, and Facundo Sepúlveda. 2012. "The Cyclicality of Skill Acquisition: Evidence
    from Panel Data." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4 (3): 128-52.

Montoya, Maria. 1995 "The roots of Economic and Ethnic Divisions in Northern New Mexico:
    The case of the Civilian Conservation Corps" Western Historical Quarterly. Vol. 26, No. 1
    (Spring, 1995), pp. 14-34




                                                                                              33
Oster, E. (2017) "Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence."
      Journal of Business & Economic Statistics. Vol. 37, No. 2, pp. 187-204

Paige, John C. 1985 The Civilian Conservations Corps and the National Park Service: An
      administrative History. Report number NPS-D-189, National Park Service, Department of
      the Interior. Washington DC.

Parham, Robert Bruce. 1981 "The Civilian Conservation Corps in Colorado, 1933-1942." Master
     Thesis. University of Colorado.

Parman, D. L. 1971. The Indian and the Civilian Conservation Corps. Pacific Historical Review,
    40(1), 39-56.

Piketty, T., Saez, E., & Zucman, G. (2018). Distributional national accounts: methods and
      estimates for the United States. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2), 553-609.

Price, Charles. 1939. The Administration of the Civilian Conservation Corps. Harper eds.

Rawick, George Philip. 1957. "The New Deal and Youth: The Civilian Conservation Corps, the
     National Youth Administration and the American Youth Congress," Doctoral thesis,
     History Department, University of Wisconsin.

Ripani, Laura, Pablo Ibarraran, Jochan Kluve and David Rosas-Schady. 2018. "Experimental
     Evidence on the Long Term Impacts of a Youth Training Program," Industrial and Labor
     Relations Review, 20(10): 1-38.

Rosenzweig, M. R., & Udry, C. (2020). External validity in a stochastic world: Evidence from
     low-income countries. The Review of Economic Studies, 87(1), 343-381.

Salmond, John A. "The Civilian Conservation Corps, 1933-1942" (Durham, North Carolina:
     Duke University Press, 1967)

Steckel, R. (1986). A Peculiar Population: The Nutrition, Health, and Mortality of American
     Slaves from Childhood to Maturity. The Journal of Economic History, 46(3), 721-741.
     Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/2121481

Schochet, Peter Z. John Burghardt and Sheena McConnell. 2008. "Does Job Corps Work?
     Impact Findings from the National Job Corps Study" The American Economic Review, Vol.
     98, No. 5 (Dec., 2008), pp. 1864-1886.

Schochet, Peter Z. (2018). "National Job Corps Study: 20-Year Follow-Up Study Using Tax
     Data". Mathematica Policy Research Report.

Wickens, James F. 1979. Colorado in the Great Depression. New York, Garland publishing




                                                                                               34
U.S. Department of Labor. 1933. "Handbook for Agencies selecting men for emergency
     conservation work" Emergency Conservation Work, Bulletin No. 3. Washington GPO May
     1, 1933.

Vellore, Arthi. 2018. "The Dust Was Long in Settling": Human Capital and the Lasting Impact
     of the American Dust Bowl." The Journal of Economic History, 78(1): 196-230.

Wolfenbarger, Deon. 1992. "New Deal Resources on Colorado's Eastern plains." National Park
     Service. United States Department of the Interior.




                                                                                              35
Table 1a: Summary Statistics From Enrollment Records

                                                                                                                       Analytic Sample (matched
                                                                Analytic Sample              Mortality Sample                   to MBR)
                                                               N     mean       sd          N     mean       sd          N       mean      sd

Characteristics in Enrollment Application
Birth year                                                  23,722 1920 3.712            17,639 1920     3.649          12,455    1920     3.546
Age at enrollment                                           23,488 18.75 2.122           17,449 18.73    2.170          12,330    18.74    2.242
Enrollment year                                             23,722 1939 1.902            17,639 1939     1.894          12,455    1939     1.889
Reported age younger than DMF*                              23,722 0.0888 0.284          17,639 0.113    0.317          12,455    0.130    0.336
Reported age older than DMF*                                23,722 0.167 0.373           17,639 0.219    0.413          12,455    0.253    0.435
Age is 17 or 18                                             23,488 0.564 0.496           17,449 0.535    0.499          12,330    0.513    0.500
Not Eligible                                                23,722 0.0151 0.122          17,639 0.0143 0.119            12,455   0.0139    0.117
Allottee is father                                          23,722 0.334 0.472           17,639 0.332    0.471          12,455    0.330    0.470
Allottee is mother                                          23,722 0.466 0.499           17,639 0.475    0.499          12,455    0.475    0.499
Non-junior                                                  23,722 0.00628 0.0790        17,639 0.00675 0.0819          12,455   0.0067   0.0818
Hispanic (imputed using hispanic index)                     23,722 0.484 0.500           17,639 0.451    0.498          12,455    0.432    0.495
Additional information in CO records
Highest grade completed                                     14,507     8.592 2.109       11,235     8.674    2.081       8,225    8.700    2.055
Household size excluding applicant                           7,870     4.745 2.600        6,283     4.763    2.591       4,730    4.725    2.575
Live on farm?                                                8,101     0.248 0.432        6,460     0.253    0.435       4,846    0.252    0.434
Height (Inches)                                              8,141     67.80 3.089        6,475     67.88    3.083       4,860    67.92    3.053
Weight (100 pounds)                                          8,234     1.385 0.171        6,561     1.390    0.172       4,922    1.391    0.171
Body Mass Index                                              8,115     21.21 2.178        6,461     21.23    2.174       4,849    21.23    2.190
Underweight                                                  8,115    0.0694 0.254        6,461    0.0689    0.253       4,849   0.0685    0.253
Overweight                                                   8,115    0.0450 0.207        6,461    0.0461    0.210       4,849   0.0462    0.210
Father Living                                                7,943     0.799 0.401        6,339     0.803    0.398       4,765    0.806    0.396
Mother Living                                                8,006     0.850 0.357        6,391     0.855    0.352       4,808    0.855    0.352
Tenure in county (years)                                     5,432     12.66 6.483        4,326     12.68    6.504       3,353    12.59    6.522
Ever had a paid regular job?                                 8,841     0.375 0.484        7,022     0.386    0.487       5,256    0.394    0.489
Male White Unemployed / Male White Pop 1937                 23,709    0.0885 0.0397      17,629    0.0864   0.0388      12,450    0.085   0.0378
Male White Unemployed / Male White Pop 1940                 23,709    0.0710 0.0308      17,629    0.0696   0.0299      12,450   0.0688   0.0291
Service Characteristics
First allottee amount (dollars per month)                   22,970 21.63 3.772           17,088 21.67    3.721          12,097 21.70   3.683
Duration of service (yrs)                                   23,722 0.821 0.706           17,639 0.826    0.708          12,455 0.816   0.701
Ever Rejected?                                              23,722 0.0194 0.138          17,639 0.0201 0.140            12,455 0.0199 0.1397
=1 if disabled                                              23,722 0.00847 0.0917        17,639 0.00686 0.0825          12,455 0.0069 0.0828
Gap in service (more than 3 months)                         23,722 0.160 0.366           17,639 0.173    0.378          12,455 0.180   0.384
Reason ended: End of term                                   23,722 0.379 0.485           17,639 0.379    0.485          12,455 0.372   0.483
Reason ended: Employment                                    23,722 0.116 0.320           17,639 0.124    0.329          12,455 0.125   0.331
Reason ended: Convenience of the government                 23,722 0.145 0.352           17,639 0.151    0.358          12,455 0.154   0.361
Reason ended: Urgent and Proper Call                        23,722 0.117 0.321           17,639 0.122    0.327          12,455 0.125   0.330
Reason ended: Deserted                                      23,722 0.222 0.416           17,639 0.206    0.404          12,455 0.205   0.404
Reason ended: Rejected upon examination                     23,722 0.00915 0.0952        17,639 0.00754 0.0865          12,455 0.0069 0.0828
Reason ended: No Record                                     23,722 0.0128 0.112          17,639 0.0120 0.109            12,455 0.012   0.109
Honorable Discharge                                         23,722 0.767 0.423           17,639 0.785    0.411          12,455 0.786   0.410
Camp Characteristics
Distance from home to camp in miles (derived)               22,405     154.8   207.1     16,645     157.2    208.0      11,740    159.5    209.1
1st closest city distance form camp (miles)                 23,480     26.68   22.50     17,454     26.57    22.26      12,322    26.40    22.06
2nd closest city distance form camp (miles)                 23,480     49.86   22.49     17,454     49.33    22.32      12,322    48.71    22.17
Mean precipitation in camp 1933-1942                        23,202     33.43   9.281     17,253     33.52    9.321      12,174    33.66    9.382
Mean min temp in camp 1933-1942                             23,202     1.459   3.474     17,253     1.382    3.457      12,174    1.265    3.450
Mean max temp in camp 1933-1942                             23,202     17.51   4.114     17,253     17.39    4.108      12,174    17.24    4.106
Camp Mean Hispanic (imputed using hispanic index)           23,722     0.482   0.313     17,639     0.462    0.312      12,455    0.430    0.329
Camp Type: Department of Grazing                            23,671     0.135   0.341     17,593     0.132    0.339      12,455    0.131    0.337
Camp Type: Federal Reclamation Project                      23,671    0.0553   0.229     17,593    0.0566    0.231      12,455    0.056    0.230
Camp Type: Fish and Wildlife Service                        23,671    0.0118   0.108     17,593    0.0111    0.105      12,455   0.0106    0.102
Camp Type: National Forest                                  23,671     0.295   0.456     17,593     0.290    0.454      12,455    0.292    0.454
Camp Type: National Monument                                23,671    0.0191   0.137     17,593    0.0184    0.134      12,455   0.0188    0.136
Camp Type: National Park                                    23,671     0.105   0.307     17,593     0.108    0.310      12,455    0.108    0.310
Camp Type: Soil Conservation                                23,671     0.307   0.461     17,593     0.311    0.463      12,455    0.306    0.461
Camp Type: State Park                                       23,671    0.0524   0.223     17,593    0.0527    0.223      12,455    0.054    0.226
Camp Type: Other                                            23,671    0.0202   0.141     17,593    0.0206    0.142      12,455   0.0214    0.145
Notes: Basic sample includes records with duration (begin and end date of enrollment), camp id and enrollment county. The analytical sample for
the mortality analysis only includes those not missing death age and death age more than 45. When multiple records were found for a single
individual we use the information in the first enrollment record. *Reported age being younger (older) than DMF OR than the oldest (youngest)
reported if the individual has multiple enrollment spells.
Table 1b: Summary Statistics From Death Certificate, 1940 and WWII Records

                                                                                           Analytic Sample for          Analytic Sample (MBR
                                                              Analytic Sample               mortality Analysis                matched)
                                                            N      mean       sd           N      mean       sd          N      mean      sd

Death Certificate Data
Age at death                                              19,377    69.82    16.84      17,639    73.62    12.03       12,348    74.76     9.25
=1 if missing age at death                                23,722    0.183    0.387      17,639      0        0         12,455    0.009    0.092
Survive at 70                                             19,377    0.587    0.492      17,639    0.644    0.479       12,348    0.706    0.456
P(70), imputed to 0 if missing                            23,722    0.479    0.500      17,639    0.644    0.479       12,455    0.700    0.458
Imputed Prob of Survival at 70 Using Age at Discharge     23,718    0.589    0.446      17,636    0.644    0.479       12,455    0.705    0.454

1940 Census Data
Matched to 1940 Census                                    23,722    0.449    0.497      17,639    0.479    0.500       12,455    0.487    0.500
Panel a: those that served before 1940
Year of birth                                             4,217     1918      3.836      3,410    1918      3.803      2,451     1918     3.559
Age at last birthday (in years)                           4,217     21.77     3.836      3,410    21.75     3.803      2,451     21.74    3.559
Hispanic                                                  4,217     0.279     0.449      3,410    0.258     0.438      2,451     0.245    0.430
White                                                     4,217     0.991    0.0933      3,410    0.992    0.0903      2,451     0.991    0.092
In labor force                                            4,217     0.909     0.288      3,410    0.912     0.283      2,451     0.909    0.288
Working, conditional on labor force                       3,833     0.711     0.453      3,110    0.718     0.450      2,228     0.711    0.453
Wage, conditional on working                              2,983     405.3     361.0      2,424    401.8     337.4      1,764     410.8    360.7
Lives in CO                                               4,217     0.776     0.417      3,410    0.787     0.409      2,451     0.790    0.407
Lives in NM                                               4,217     0.166     0.372      3,410    0.152     0.360      2,451     0.144    0.351
Years of educ                                             4,159     8.770     2.477      3,363    8.842     2.445      2,415     8.873    2.420
Moved Residence Counties                                  4,215     0.299     0.458      3,408    0.291     0.454      2,450     0.296    0.457
Panel b: those that served after 1940
Year of birth                                              636      1,920     3.486       532     1,920     3.493       418      1921     2.621
Age at last birthday (in years)                            636      19.66     3.486       532     19.62     3.493       418      19.45    2.621
Hispanic                                                   636      0.365     0.482       532     0.340     0.474       418      0.330    0.471
White                                                      636      0.994    0.0791       532     0.992    0.0865       418      0.995    0.069
In labor force                                             636      0.879     0.326       532     0.883     0.321       418      0.880    0.325
Working, conditional on labor force                        559      0.719     0.450       470     0.711     0.454       368      0.712    0.453
Wage, conditional on working                               440      253.8     167.2       366     258.6     172.1       282      252.9    149.6
Lives in CO                                                636      0.855     0.352       532     0.868     0.338       418      0.864    0.344
Lives in NM                                                636      0.134     0.341       532     0.122     0.328       418      0.129    0.336
Years of educ                                              629      8.347     2.135       526     8.390     2.114       413      8.370    2.097
Moved Residence Counties                                   636      0.145     0.352       532     0.139     0.346       418      0.136    0.344
WWII Records
Matched to WWII records                                   23,722    0.306    0.461      17,639    0.338    0.473       12,455    0.347    0.476
Birth year                                                 7,263    1,920    2.810       5,954    1,920    2.831        4,321    1920     2.815
Enrollment year                                            7,262    1,942    1.424       5,954    1,942    1.439        4,321    1942     1.45
Years of education                                         7,263    9.395    1.787       5,954    9.404    1.785        4,321    9.399    1.766
Height in inches*                                          5,971    67.52    6.089       4,876    67.70    6.098        3,510    67.73    6.164
Weight in lbs**                                            5,641    138.6    26.19       4,595    138.7    25.70        3,327    139.4    27.17
BMI                                                        5,466    21.55    4.500       4,451    21.50    4.101        3,214    21.55    4.399
Ever Married                                               7,256    0.215    0.411       5,947    0.221    0.415        4,316    0.224    0.417
Home State CO                                              7,232    0.591    0.492       5,928    0.605    0.489        4,300    0.617    0.486
Moved Residence Counties                                   7,215    0.303    0.460       5,914    0.296    0.457        4,290    0.303    0.46
Home State NM                                              7,232    0.319    0.466       5,928    0.305    0.460        4,300    0.289    0.453
Birthplace CO                                              7,215    0.444    0.497       5,913    0.451    0.498        4,295    0.462    0.499
Birthplace NM                                              7,215    0.322    0.467       5,913    0.309    0.462        4,295    0.292    0.455
Birthplace Rest of US                                      7,215    0.230    0.421       5,913    0.237    0.425        4,295    0.244    0.429
Notes: Basic sample includes records with duration (begin and end date of enrollment), camp id and enrollment county. The analytical sample for
the mortality analysis only includes those not missing death age and death age more than 45. When multiple records were found for a single
individual we use the information in the first enrollment record. * Dropped values below 40. ** Dropped values below 90 and over 350
Table 2: Effect of Service Duration on Longevity and Lifetime Earnings
                                            (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)
                                                       Add Birth,
                                                      County-qtr     Add Indiv    Add Camp      Add Peer      Add Camp
VARIABLES                               No Controls Dummies          Controls       Chars        Chars           FE          CO Only
Panel A: Longevity for the full sample
Duration of service (yrs)                0.013***      0.013***      0.011***     0.011***      0.013***       0.013***      0.013***
                                          (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)
Observations                              17,086         17,086       17,086       17,086        17,086         17,086        10,944
R-squared                                  0.003          0.117        0.126        0.127         0.128          0.138         0.149
Mean Dep                                   73.62          73.62        73.62        73.62         73.62          73.62         73.30

Panel B: What is the effect of duration on PIA in the MBR sample? (Claimed 1979 and later)
Duration of service (yrs)                -1.675*** 21.706*** 19.893*** 19.717***                18.979***     17.083***     15.459***
                                           (2.869)      (3.743)      (3.827)      (3.841)        (4.284)       (4.636)       (5.414)
Observations                               10,241       10,241        10,241      10,241          10,241        10,241         6,525
R-squared                                   0.000        0.200         0.215       0.216           0.218         0.233         0.254
Mean Dep                                   437.70       437.70        437.70      437.70          437.70        437.70        449.34
Mean Implied AIME                          950.94       950.94        950.94      950.94          950.94        950.94        987.31
Implied AIME Increase                       -5.23        67.83         62.17       61.62           59.31         53.38         48.31

Panel C: What is the effect of duration on PIA in the MBR sample? (Claimed earlier than 1979)
Duration of service (yrs)                13.075***     12.552**     12.692**       10.713*         8.819         8.792         8.088
                                          (3.857)       (6.107)       (6.313)       (6.481)       (7.394)      (10.585)      (11.020)
Observations                                1,562        1,562         1,562         1,562         1,562         1,562         1,284
R-squared                                   0.007        0.456         0.503         0.507         0.511         0.557         0.526
Mean Dep                                   314.02       314.02        314.02        314.02        314.02        314.02        317.41

Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Sample is restricted only to those that died after age >= 45.
Table 3: Effect of Service Duration on Missing Data and Sample Selection
                                             (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)        (7)
                                                      Add Birth,
                                                      County-qtr   Add Indiv      Add Camp      Add Peer     Add Camp
VARIABLES                               No Controls Dummies         Controls        Chars        Chars          FE       CO Only
Panel A: Does duration predict whether longevity is missing?
Duration of service (yrs)                  0.001      -0.017***    -0.020***      -0.020***     -0.017***    -0.015***   -0.008
                                          (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.005)   (0.006)
Observations                              22,964        22,964       22,964         22,964        22,964       22,964    14,116
R-squared                                  0.000         0.111        0.196          0.197         0.198        0.206     0.200
Mean Dep                                    0.18          0.18         0.18           0.18          0.18         0.18      0.15

Panel B: Does duration predict being in the MBR sample?
Duration of service (yrs)                 -0.006    0.004***         0.010*        0.011*         0.009        0.005      0.002
                                          (0.005)     (0.001)        (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.007)      (0.007)    (0.009)
Observations                              22,980      22,980         22,980        22,980        22,980       22,980     14,116
R-squared                                  0.000       0.102          0.205         0.206         0.206        0.212      0.187
Mean Dep                                    0.53        0.53           0.53          0.53          0.53         0.53       0.57

Panel C: Is the effect of duration on longevity for the MBR sample the same as in the full sample?
Duration of service (yrs)                 0.013***       0.010***    0.009***       0.009***      0.012***   0.011***    0.014***
                                           (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)
Observations                               11,953         11,953       11,953        11,953        11,953     11,953       7,913
R-squared                                   0.005          0.157        0.169         0.169         0.170      0.185       0.190
Mean Dep                                    74.81          74.81        74.81         74.81         74.81      74.81       74.78

Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Table 4: Effect of Service Duration on Labor Market Outcomes Observed in the 1940 Census
                                               (1)        (2)      (3)         (4)       (5)     (6)     (7)
                                                     Add Birth,
                                                      County-
                                               No         qtr   Add Indiv Add Camp Add Peer Add Camp
Regression of Outcome on Duration           Controls Dummies Controls         Chars     Chars     FE   CO Only
Census
Found in Census Records                    Mean Dep      0.43
Duration of service (yrs)                   -0.015**    0.009     0.007       0.009     0.006   0.012   0.011
                                             (0.007)   (0.010)   (0.010)     (0.010)   (0.011) (0.012) (0.013)
Observations                                  9,518     9,518     9,518       9,518     9,518   9,518   7,553
R-squared                                     0.001     0.137     0.152       0.154     0.155   0.166   0.154

In Labor Force                           Mean Dep        0.91
Duration of service (yrs)                 0.014**      0.013*     0.013*     0.015**     0.016*      0.019*     0.018*
                                          (0.006)      (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.010)    (0.011)
Observations                               4,052        4,052      4,052      4,052       4,052       4,052      3,374
R-squared                                  0.001        0.272      0.279      0.280       0.280       0.305      0.286

Working in Census Week | Labor Force     Mean Dep        0.71
Duration of service (yrs)                  0.006       -0.004     -0.005      -0.004     -0.010      -0.015     -0.011
                                          (0.011)      (0.014)    (0.014)     (0.014)    (0.019)     (0.022)    (0.023)
Observations                               3,684        3,684      3,684       3,684      3,684       3,684      3,067
R-squared                                  0.000        0.265      0.279       0.283      0.286       0.310      0.295

Weeks Worked in 1939^                    Mean Dep       27.88
Duration of service (yrs)                  0.669       -0.691     -0.911      -0.937     -0.896       0.265      0.227
                                          (0.732)      (1.044)    (1.049)     (1.029)    (1.082)     (1.199)    (1.213)
Observations                               2,360        2,360      2,360       2,360      2,360       2,360      2,208
R-squared                                  0.000        0.314      0.345       0.351      0.354       0.383      0.361

Total Annual Wage in 1939^               Mean Dep 383.71
Duration of service (yrs)                 16.773  -12.266        -18.948     -20.038    -21.185     -14.497    -14.633
                                         (16.061) (23.145)       (23.911)    (23.533)   (25.577)    (26.389)   (26.652)
Observations                               2,148    2,148          2,148       2,148      2,148       2,148      2,011
R-squared                                  0.001    0.318          0.352       0.357      0.359       0.391      0.376

Ln Total Annual Wage | Working^          Mean Dep      471.25
Duration of service (yrs)                  0.047       -0.035     -0.047      -0.042     -0.051      -0.014     -0.012
                                          (0.039)      (0.052)    (0.051)     (0.052)    (0.058)     (0.062)    (0.062)
Observations                               1,749        1,749      1,749       1,749      1,749       1,749      1,649
R-squared                                  0.001        0.396      0.447       0.452      0.454       0.487      0.456

Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Sample are those whose first term in CCC is before
1940 and are not enrolled in 1940. The 1940 Census was taken on April 1, 1940. ^ Sample are those whose first term in
CCC is before 1939 and are not enrolled in 1939. Census asks labor force and work status on the week before the Census
enumeration, while wage information and weeks worked is asked for the year before the Census 1939.
Table 5: Effect of Service Duration on WWII Service, Health and Education Observed in WWII Enlistment and 1940
                                          (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)
                                                 Add Birth,
                                                  County-                 Add
                                          No         qtr     Add Indiv Camp Add Peer           Add
Regression of Outcome on Duration Controls Dummies Controls              Chars     Chars    Camp FE CO Only
WW2
Found in WWII Records                  Mean Dep 0.31
Duration of service (yrs)              0.018*** 0.036*** 0.034*** 0.035*** 0.038*** 0.038*** 0.042***
                                        (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.007)    (0.007)   (0.009)
Observations                            22,963     22,963     22,963    22,963    22,963     22,963    14,116

Enlistment Year                      Mean Dep 1942.24
Duration of service (yrs)            -0.181*** 0.976*** 0.975*** 0.976*** 0.966*** 0.962*** 0.964***
                                       (0.025)  (0.008)  (0.008)  (0.008)  (0.009)  (0.010)  (0.011)
Observations                            7,018    7,018    7,018    7,018    7,018    7,018    4,785

Height                               Mean Dep 67.55
Duration of service (yrs)             -0.022 1.098*** 1.098*** 1.097*** 1.161*** 1.143*** 1.207***
                                      (0.103) (0.190)  (0.191)  (0.190)  (0.209)  (0.221)  (0.276)
Observations                           5,770   5,770    5,770    5,770    5,770    5,770    3,816

BMI                                  Mean Dep 21.53
Duration of service (yrs)            -0.134** 0.789*** 0.829*** 0.822*** 0.874*** 1.018*** 1.157***
                                      (0.064)  (0.191)  (0.191)  (0.190)  (0.195)  (0.204)  (0.265)
Observations                           5,287    5,287    5,287    5,287    5,287    5,287    3,454

Combined WW2 Census
Education                            Mean Dep 9.23
Duration of service (yrs)            -0.072** 0.299*** 0.185*** 0.186*** 0.188*** 0.169*** 0.115***
                                      (0.035)  (0.041)  (0.035)  (0.036)  (0.038)  (0.040)  (0.043)
Observations                           9,586    9,586    9,586    9,586    9,586    9,586    6,907

Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Sample are those found in WWII records.
WWII: additionally includes the age at enlistment dummies. Combined: additionally includes age at observation
dummies, where if observed in Census, the age is 1940 - birth year.
Table 6: Effect of Service Duration on Geographic Mobility Over the Lifetime
                                            (1)      (2)         (3)         (4)     (5)      (6)     (7)
                                                  Add Birth,
                                                   County-                   Add
                                            No       qtr     Add Indiv Camp Add Peer          Add
Regression of Outcome on Duration        Controls Dummies Controls          Chars   Chars  Camp FE CO Only
Panel a: Short-term geographic mobility (Combined WW2 and Census)
Moved to a Different State              Mean Dep 0.09
Duration of service (yrs)               -0.014*** 0.023*** 0.024*** 0.023*** 0.028*** 0.026*** 0.033***
                                          (0.004)  (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006) (0.007)  (0.007) (0.009)
Observations                               9,568    9,568       9,568       9,568   9,568    9,568   6,891

Moved to a Different County           Mean Dep 0.33
Duration of service (yrs)               0.006 0.053*** 0.054*** 0.053*** 0.062*** 0.057*** 0.067***
                                       (0.007) (0.009)  (0.009)  (0.009)  (0.011)  (0.011)  (0.012)
Observations                            9,568   9,568    9,568    9,568    9,568    9,568    6,891

New County Has Higher Yearly Wage Than Sending County                  Mean Dep 0.59
Duration of service (yrs)            -0.005   0.046**       0.049**     0.047** 0.062**      0.077**   0.079**
                                    (0.020)   (0.020)       (0.020)     (0.021) (0.026)      (0.034)   (0.035)
Observations                          1,452    1,452         1,452       1,452   1,452        1,452     1,209

New County Has Above Median Mortality Rate (1950-1968)         Mean Dep 0.38
Duration of service (yrs)        -0.061*** -0.071*** -0.068*** -0.072*** -0.068*** -0.065*** -0.064**
                                   (0.012)    (0.019)  (0.019)   (0.020)   (0.021)   (0.024)  (0.026)
Observations                        3,003      3,003    3,003     3,003     3,003     3,003    2,403

Panel b: Long-term geographic mobility
Died in a Different State            Mean Dep    0.5
Duration of service (yrs)              -0.016* -0.020*      -0.025** -0.025** -0.026**       -0.029*    -0.027*
                                       (0.008) (0.012)       (0.012)  (0.012)  (0.013)       (0.015)    (0.015)
Observations                            7,235   7,235         7,235    7,235    7,235         7,235      4,784

Died in a Different County            Mean Dep   0.8
Duration of service (yrs)               0.003  -0.002        -0.004     -0.003     0.003      0.005      0.002
                                       (0.007) (0.010)       (0.010)    (0.010)   (0.010)    (0.011)    (0.012)
Observations                            7,231   7,231         7,231      7,231     7,231      7,231      4,781

New County Has Above Median Mortality Rate (1950-1968)         Mean Dep 0.25
Duration of service (yrs)        -0.030*** 0.004        0.006    0.005   0.003                0.006      0.009
                                   (0.008)    (0.012)  (0.012)  (0.012) (0.013)              (0.015)    (0.016)
Observations                        5,313      5,313    5,313    5,313   5,313                5,313      3,678


We assume that the person lived in the county of application when definining wheter a person moved. Robust
standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Sample are those found in WWII records. WWII:
additionally includes the age at enlistment dummies. Combined: additionally includes age at observation dummies,
where if observed in Census, the age is 1940 - birth year.
Table 7: Characteristics of Eligible Job Corps Applicants and Comparison to CCC
                                                                       Job Corps Data                 CCC
                                                                       All
Characteristic                                                                    Males only       Males Only
                                                                    Applicants
Baseline Characteristics
Duration (in years, only positive durations)                          0.67           0.652            0.819
Male                                                                   0.6              1               1
Age at application                                                    18.8          18.728            18.75
White, non-Hispanic                                                    0.3           0.304             NA
Black, non-Hispanic                                                    0.5           0.451             NA
Hispanic                                                               0.2           0.169            0.484
Other                                                                  0.1           0.076             NA
Years of education                                                    10.2          10.042            8.581
High school diploma or more (including GED)                            0.2            0.19            0.12
Ever arrested                                                          0.3           0.332             NA
Had a job in the past year                                             0.6           0.662             NA
Ever had job                                                           0.8           0.808            0.375
Average earnings in the past year (dollars)                          2974.9        3255.739            NA
Mean for outcomes
Duration for treated (years, duration > 0)                             0.67          0.652            0.826
Duration for treated (years)                                          0.483          0.487            0.819
Years of school                                                      11.145          11.07            9.403
Employment (in week of the survey)^                                   0.606          0.631             0.71
Weeks worked in previous year                                         30.62          32.17            27.88
Total ann. earnings in prev. yr                                     10538.31       11947.78          382.43
Total ann. earnings in prev. yr (weeks worked > 0)                  12990.85       14471.77          466.69
Moved^^                                                               0.198          0.207             0.34
Self-reported health status in 12 months^^^                           1.786          1.733              NA
Self-reported health status in 30 months^^^                           1.799          1.739              NA
Self-reported health status in 48 months^^^                           1.809          1.757              NA
Self-reported health excellent or good (12-month)*                    0.838          0.855              NA
Self-reported health excellent or good (30-month)*                    0.838          0.856              NA
Self-reported health excellent or good (48-month)*                    0.828          0.842              NA
Reason ended: End of term                                              0.31          0.302            0.378
Reason ended: Employment                                              0.042          0.038            0.116
Reason ended: Convenience of the government                           0.001            0              0.145
Reason ended: Urgent and Proper Call                                   0.09          0.056            0.116
Reason ended: Deserted                                                0.331          0.373            0.223
Reason ended: Rejected upon examination                                  0             0             0.0101
Reason ended: No Record                                               0.228          0.232           0.0127
Observations: Baseline                                               14327           8646               NA
Observations: Outcomes                                               11313           6528               NA
Source: Baseline data. ^employment is not conditional on labor force participation. ^^for Job Corps it is
defined as living more than 20 miles away from baseline residence. For CCC it is defined as living in a
different county than the county of residence at the time of enrollment. For Job Corps, employment is
defined as having a job during the 208th week after the baseline survey (four years). ^^^Self-reported
health status with 1 = excellent health, 2 = good, 3 = fair, and 4 = poor health. *Constructed variable that is
equal to 1 if self-reported health status is 1 or 2 (excellent health or good health).
Table 8: Comparison to Job Corps
                                                                        Jobs Corps Data                         CCC
                                                                      RCT                       OLS             OLS
                                                                             2SLS
                                                         Coefficient on Instrument          Coefficient     Coefficient
                                                          Treatment Duration with           on Duration     on Duration
                                                         Dummy (ITT) Treatment                (years)+        (years)

Years of school                                            0.184***        0.393***          0.360***        0.169***
                                                            (0.039)         (0.084)           (0.041)         (0.040)
N                                                            6,280           6,280             3,407           9,620

Employment (in week of the survey)^                         0.026**         0.056**          0.060***          0.006
                                                            (0.013)         (0.027)           (0.015)         (0.025)
N                                                            6,022           6,022             3,285           2,686

Weeks worked in previous year                              1.615***        3.443***          2.629***          0.434
                                                            (0.536)         (1.142)           (0.610)         (1.203)
N                                                            6,235           6,235             3,382           2,383

Total Annual Earnings in previous year                    969.765***     2,083.466***      1,055.435***       -16.226
                                                           (280.804)       (603.598)         (336.311)        (26.061)
N                                                            6,081           6,081             3,317            2,168

ln(Earnings) | weeks worked>0                                 0.038          0.080            0.078**          -0.010
                                                             (0.027)        (0.057)           (0.031)         (0.061)
N                                                             5,009          5,009             2,753          23,103

Moved^^                                                      0.018*         0.038*           0.060***        0.054***
                                                             (0.011)        (0.023)           (0.014)         (0.011)
N                                                             6,301          6,301             3,419           9,603

Self-reported health excellent or good (12-month)^^^       0.035***        0.073***           0.020*
                                                            (0.009)         (0.020)           (0.010)
N                                                            5,920           5,920             3,234

Self-reported health excellent or good (30-month)^^^         0.018*         0.037*            0.020*
                                                             (0.010)        (0.020)           (0.011)
N                                                             5,458          5,458             2,944

Self-reported health excellent or good (48-month)^^^         0.016*         0.034*             0.013
                                                             (0.010)        (0.020)           (0.011)
N                                                             6,279          6,279             3,407

Duration of training in months                                                                 5.829
Individual controls?                                           No             No                Yes             Yes



Sample is males only. +Sample includes all treated, including those with zero duration. Controls include year and
quarter of baseline, year and quarter of 48-mo followup survey, whether individual was enrolled in non-residential
program and baseline characteristics such as whether individual had child, was ever arrested, had ever used drugs,
had a job, had a job in the previous year, ever had a job, race, native language, on welfare as a child, education,
baseline marital status and others. ^ Employment is not conditional on labor force participation. ^^ For Job Corps it is
defined as living more than 20 miles away from baseline residence. For CCC it is defined as living in a different county
than the county of residence at the time of enrollment. For Job Corps, employment is defined as having a job during
the 208th week after the baseline survey (four years). Earnings conditional on employment only includes the earnings
of individuals employed during the 208th week after the baseline survey. ^^^ Constructed variable that is equal to 1 if
self-reported health status is 1 or 2 (excellent health or good health).
           Figure 1: Distribution of Service Duration in the CCC Records and Jobs Corps

                                                  Panel A: CCC




                                              Panel B: Jobs Corps




Notes: We exclude durations greater than 3 years (less than 1% of the observations) in this figure. Mean duration is
9.44 months (s.d. 7.47) for CCC and 5.8 months (s.d. 6.6) for Jobs Corps.
                            Figure 2: Distribution of Reason for Discharge

                                               Panel A: CCC




                                           Panel B: Jobs Corps




Note: Values on top of the bar graph are mean duration (in years) for each category: EOT (End of Term), Emp
(employment outside the program), COG (Convenience of the Government), UrgProp (Urgent and Proper Call),
Desert, Rej (Rejected), No Rec (No record). Reasons for Jobs Corps was harmonized to match with CCC's reasons
for discharge.
                                      Figure 3: Determinants of Duration

                                                   Panel A: CCC




                                               Panel B: Jobs Corps




Note: Estimates and 95% confidence intervals plotted for coefficient estimates on selected variables from regressing
duration on various individual, camp, and peer characteristics. Coefficients in diamond are statistically significant at
the 95% level. Mean duration for the estimation sample is 0.84 years for CCC and 0.49 years for Jobs Corps. Full
results of the regression estimates are shown in Appendix Table 2.
                        Figure 4: Longevity Increases with CCC Service Duration




Notes: figure plots the linear fit of mean death age within each percentile bin of duration. Data: Administrative
records matched to death certificates. See text for more details.
                    Figure 5: CCC Enrollees Who Served More Terms Lived Longer




Notes: this figure plots the estimated density of the age at death, separately for those serving less than one term, 1-2
terms and 3 terms or more.
       Figure 6: Effect of Service Duration on the Probability of Survival to Different Ages




Notes: On the left y-axis, this figure reports the coefficients (and standard errors) from running linear regressions of
the probability that the person survived to a given age a on duration, where age ranges from age 45 to age 90. The
regressions use the administrative data we collected and control for all observables at baseline (see Table 2 for
details). On the right y-axis we plot the survival rate.
                                     Figure 7: CCC Duration and PIA




Notes: Authors computation based on administrative program data matched to the Master Beneficiary Records, for
those claiming 1979 or later.
                                       Figure 8: CCC Duration and PIA




Notes: Authors computation based on administrative program data matched to the Master Beneficiary Records, for
those claiming 1979 or later. This restricts the sample to enrollees serving less than 3 years and uses residuals from
regressing PIA on birth year.
Appendix Table 1: Sample Selection
Sample Restriction                Itself    Sequential
All                                   26290    26290
Camp Exist                            25165    25165
Enrollment Exist                      24832    23943
Duration Exist                        26050    23722
Final analytic sample                 26050    23722

Death Age Exist                       21457      19377
Death Age Restrict                    24386      17639
Final analytic sample for mortality   24386      17639


The rows show many observations survive after
dropping for each restriction. Itself column shows how
many observations survive if we drop for just the
restriction in the row. Sequential column shows the
final observations that survive when we drop for each
reason sequentially. Our working sample is 23,889,
where we additionally lose observations to Death Age
Exist for death age analysis
Appendix Table 2: Determinants of CCC Service Duration
                                                            (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
                                                                                                                    CO Non-
                                                          Indiv       Camp                 Add County-              missing
VARIABLES                                                Controls    Controls   Indiv+Camp Quarter FE CO Only        Only
Individual characteristics
Ever Rejected?                                           -0.201***                 -0.020      -0.007      -0.009       0.060
                                                           (0.033)                (0.034)     (0.031)     (0.034)     (0.038)
=1 if disabled                                           -0.446***              -0.464***   -0.328***   -0.363***     -0.237*
                                                           (0.055)                (0.055)     (0.050)     (0.061)     (0.127)
Non-junior                                               0.834***               0.840***     0.509***    0.574***       0.005
                                                           (0.122)                (0.119)     (0.097)     (0.127)     (0.235)
Reported Age Younger than DMF^                             0.033*                  0.026        0.003       0.003      -0.005
                                                           (0.019)                (0.019)     (0.014)     (0.020)     (0.024)
Reported Age Older than DMF                              0.081***               0.089***    -0.047***     -0.029*      -0.033
                                                           (0.015)                (0.015)     (0.012)     (0.016)     (0.025)
Not Eligible                                              0.300**                 0.265*      0.174**      0.186*    0.662***
                                                           (0.139)                (0.141)     (0.077)     (0.106)     (0.134)
Age is 17 or 18                                          0.100***               0.103***    -0.037***   -0.045***      -0.020
                                                           (0.014)                (0.014)     (0.011)     (0.014)     (0.021)
Allottee amount                                          0.058***               0.060***       -0.001       0.009    0.026***
                                                           (0.004)                (0.005)     (0.004)     (0.006)     (0.009)
Allottee is father                                       0.045***               0.045***        0.001       0.001      -0.003
                                                           (0.017)                (0.017)     (0.013)     (0.019)     (0.027)
Allottee is mother                                       0.045***               0.045***        0.017       0.030       0.012
                                                           (0.017)                (0.016)     (0.014)     (0.019)     (0.027)
Gap in service                                           -0.201***              -0.156***   -0.158***   -0.126***   -0.113***
                                                           (0.016)                (0.015)     (0.013)     (0.016)     (0.020)
Log distance from home to camp (miles)                   -0.016***               -0.013**    -0.011**   -0.015***    -0.021**
                                                           (0.005)                (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.008)
Hispanic (imputed using hispanic index)                  0.078***               0.058***      0.026**      -0.014       0.007
                                                           (0.014)                (0.014)     (0.013)     (0.017)     (0.019)
Highest grade completed (CO only)                        0.024***               0.021***     0.019***    0.016***      0.007*
                                                           (0.003)                (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.004)
Household size excluding applicant (CO only)             0.012***               0.013***     0.007***    0.008***    0.007***
                                                           (0.003)                (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)
Live on farm? (CO only)                                  0.053***               0.053***        0.016       0.012       0.017
                                                           (0.016)                (0.017)     (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.017)
Height (Inches) (CO only)                                   0.002                  0.001        0.000      -0.000      -0.001
                                                           (0.003)                (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
Weight (100 pounds) (CO only)                            -0.189***              -0.154***     -0.085*    -0.113**      -0.019
                                                           (0.054)                (0.052)     (0.045)     (0.047)     (0.045)
Father Living (CO only)                                  -0.054***              -0.055***      -0.018      -0.015      -0.006
                                                           (0.019)                (0.019)     (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.017)
Mother Living (CO only)                                  -0.088***              -0.095***   -0.051***   -0.056***      -0.032
                                                           (0.021)                (0.021)     (0.016)     (0.017)     (0.024)
Tenure in county (years) (CO only)                          -0.001                 -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001
                                                           (0.001)                (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
Camp characteristics
=1 if camp is in enrollment state                                                       -0.094***       0.053     0.154*** 0.165***          -0.027
                                                                                          (0.034)      (0.051)     (0.058)   (0.059)         (0.066)
Mean precipitation in camp 1933-1942                                                       -0.001       -0.001   -0.004***    0.001           0.001
                                                                                          (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)   (0.002)         (0.003)
Mean min temp in camp 1933-1942                                                            0.010      0.014**     0.030*** 0.027***           0.012
                                                                                          (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.008)   (0.008)         (0.010)
Mean max temp in camp 1933-1942                                                         -0.018***    -0.021***   -0.034*** -0.022**          -0.006
                                                                                          (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.007)   (0.009)         (0.011)
Camp Type: Department of Grazing                                                        0.131***     0.123***       -0.075    0.117          -0.052
                                                                                          (0.044)      (0.041)     (0.063)   (0.087)         (0.116)
Camp Type: Federal Reclamation Project                                                   0.118**      0.099**       -0.055    0.147           0.031
                                                                                          (0.047)      (0.045)     (0.070)   (0.096)         (0.120)
Camp Type: Fish and Wildlife Service                                                     0.106**        0.024    -0.383***
                                                                                          (0.051)      (0.048)     (0.131)
Camp Type: National Forest                                                                 0.008        -0.006     -0.106*    0.024           -0.091
                                                                                          (0.043)      (0.041)     (0.060)   (0.078)         (0.109)
Camp Type: National Monument                                                              0.145*        0.121    -0.303***  -0.265*           -0.166
                                                                                          (0.088)      (0.084)     (0.090)   (0.147)         (0.179)
Camp Type: National Park                                                                   0.069        0.060      -0.117*   -0.012           -0.165
                                                                                          (0.044)      (0.042)     (0.063)   (0.079)         (0.101)
Camp Type: Soil Conservation                                                            0.121***     0.100***       -0.075    0.092           -0.070
                                                                                          (0.040)      (0.038)     (0.059)   (0.080)         (0.108)
Camp Type: State Park                                                                      -0.031       -0.041     -0.119*   -0.078           -0.176
                                                                                          (0.054)      (0.050)     (0.069)   (0.090)         (0.147)
Log distance to closest city (miles)                                                      -0.007*     -0.007**     0.011**    0.000          0.022**
                                                                                          (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.005)   (0.007)         (0.008)
Log distance to 2nd closest city (miles)                                                   0.028       0.035*       -0.017  -0.044*            0.012
                                                                                          (0.019)      (0.019)     (0.022)   (0.025)         (0.037)
Peer Char: Hispanic at enrollment                                                       0.386***     0.239***     0.249***    0.015            0.051
                                                                                          (0.044)      (0.047)     (0.070)   (0.071)         (0.098)
Peer Char: Age at enrollment                                                            -0.200***    -0.235***   -0.319*** -0.313***           0.052
                                                                                          (0.021)      (0.023)     (0.034)   (0.035)         (0.041)
Peer Char: Reported Age Younger than DMF                                                0.483***      0.381**    -0.607*** -0.579**           0.478*
                                                                                          (0.170)      (0.169)     (0.211)   (0.254)         (0.262)
Peer Char: Reported Age Older than DMF                                                   -0.276**    -0.452***   -1.025*** -0.814***           0.397
                                                                                          (0.127)      (0.137)     (0.200)   (0.236)         (0.318)
Peer Char: Not Eligible (First enrollment)                                              1.861***     1.587***     1.349***   -0.295           1.949*
                                                                                          (0.256)      (0.273)     (0.389)   (0.452)         (1.041)
Peer Char: Allottee amount                                                              0.083***     0.030***    -0.255*** -0.360***       -0.305***
                                                                                          (0.005)      (0.007)     (0.017)   (0.024)         (0.018)
Peer Char: Allottee: Father                                                                -0.083       -0.120       0.019   -0.040            0.088
                                                                                          (0.126)      (0.122)     (0.149)   (0.177)         (0.198)
Peer Char: Allottee: Mother                                                                -0.163       -0.117      -0.032   -0.078           -0.221
                                                                                          (0.126)      (0.128)     (0.133)   (0.147)         (0.202)
Peer Char: Gap in service                                                               -0.931***    -0.692***   -0.652***   -0.156        -1.462***
                                                                                          (0.098)      (0.099)     (0.133)   (0.140)         (0.191)
Constant                                                                    -1.457***   3.342***     2.800***    12.992*** 14.686***        6.747***
                                                                              (0.458)     (0.518)      (0.569)     (0.868)   (0.991)         (0.807)

Observations                                                                 17,639       17,086      17,086       17,086      10,944        3,013
R-squared                                                                     0.181        0.160       0.222        0.574       0.482        0.465
Mean Dep                                                                       0.83         0.84        0.84         0.84        0.76         0.67
FE                                                                              BD           BD          BD        BD,CYQ      BD,CYQ       BD,CYQ
Sample                                                                          All          All         All          All         CO           CO
Reason                                                                          N            N           N            N           N            N
Number of County-Quarter Groups                                                                                     1,789       1,231         477
Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Only Duration <= 3 years, death age >= 45 are included in regression. Variables
imputed if missing and missing dummies included. County Unemployment is from ICPSR compilation of County statistics from 1937 Census of
Unemployment and 1940 Decenniel Census. Those values are given to enrollment years 1937, 1938 for 1937 Census and 1939-1942 for 1940 Census. ^
=1 if reported age in CCC documents is smaller than in the DMF, or maximum of all reported age for enrollee.
Appendix Table 3: Full Regressions of Log Death Age on Duration
                                                     (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
                                                              Add Birth,
                                                              County-qtr   Add Indiv   Add Camp    Add Peer    Add Camp
VARIABLES                                        No Controls Dummies       Controls      Chars      Chars         FE       CO only

Duration of service (yrs)                        0.013***     0.013***     0.011***    0.011***    0.013***    0.013***      0.009**
                                                  (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.004)
Ever Rejected?                                                             -0.031***   -0.031***   -0.031***   -0.030***   -0.031***
                                                                             (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.012)
=1 if disabled                                                               -0.006      -0.006      -0.006      -0.004        0.008
                                                                             (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.023)
Non-junior                                                                    0.002       0.004       0.003      -0.000       -0.034
                                                                             (0.018)     (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.025)
Reported age younger than DMF^                                             -0.019***   -0.019***   -0.019***   -0.019***     -0.010*
                                                                             (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)
Reported age older than DMF                                                -0.022***   -0.022***   -0.022***   -0.022***   -0.017***
                                                                             (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.005)
Not Eligible                                                                  0.010       0.011       0.010       0.011        0.014
                                                                             (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.022)
Age is 17 or 18                                                              0.007*      0.007*      0.007*      0.007*        0.004
                                                                             (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.005)
First allottee amount (dollars per month)                                     0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000        0.000
                                                                             (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
Allottee is father                                                           0.008*      0.008*      0.008*       0.008        0.003
                                                                             (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)
Allottee is mother                                                            0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001       -0.001
                                                                             (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)
Gap in service (more than 3 months)                                           0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001       -0.006
                                                                             (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.005)
Log distance from home to camp                                                0.001       0.002       0.002       0.002        0.002
                                                                             (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.002)
Hispanic (imputed using hispanic index)                                    0.018***    0.018***    0.018***    0.019***    0.018***
                                                                             (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.006)
Highest grade completed (CO only)                                          0.004***    0.004***    0.004***    0.005***    0.005***
                                                                             (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
Household size excluding applicant (CO only)                               0.003***    0.003***    0.003***    0.003***    0.003***
                                                                             (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
Live on farm? (CO only)                                                      0.011*      0.011*      0.011*      0.011*      0.011**
                                                                             (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)
Height (Inches) (CO only)                                                     0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001        0.001
                                                                             (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
Weight (100 pounds) (CO only)                                               -0.042**    -0.041**    -0.041**    -0.041**    -0.041**
                                                                             (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.018)
Father Living (CO only)                                                       0.000       0.001       0.000      -0.000       -0.000
                                                                             (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)
Mother Living (CO only)                                                       0.008       0.008       0.008       0.008        0.007
                                                                             (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)
Tenure in county (years) (CO only)                                           -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001       -0.001
                                                                             (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
=1 if camp is in enrollment state                                                        -0.015      -0.017
                                                                                         (0.012)     (0.012)
Mean precipitation in camp 1933-1942                                                      0.000       0.000
                                                                                         (0.000)     (0.000)
Mean min temp in camp 1933-1942                                                          -0.002      -0.002
                                                                                         (0.001)     (0.002)
Mean max temp in camp 1933-1942                                                           0.000       0.001
                                                                                         (0.001)     (0.001)
Camp Type: Department of Grazing                                                        -0.020        -0.019
                                                                                        (0.024)      (0.024)
Camp Type: Federal Reclamation Project                                                  -0.017        -0.019
                                                                                        (0.025)      (0.026)
Camp Type: Fish and Wildlife Service                                                    -0.012        -0.013
                                                                                        (0.032)      (0.033)
Camp Type: National Forest                                                              -0.015        -0.013
                                                                                        (0.024)      (0.025)
Camp Type: National Monument                                                            -0.006        -0.001
                                                                                        (0.028)      (0.028)
Camp Type: National Park                                                                -0.021        -0.017
                                                                                        (0.024)      (0.025)
Camp Type: Soil Conservation                                                            -0.010        -0.007
                                                                                        (0.024)      (0.024)
Camp Type: State Park                                                                   -0.013        -0.012
                                                                                        (0.024)      (0.025)
Log distance to closest city                                                           -0.002**     -0.002**
                                                                                        (0.001)      (0.001)
Log distance to 2nd closest city                                                         0.003         0.005
                                                                                        (0.006)      (0.006)
Peer Char: Hispanic at enrollment                                                                      0.002       -0.024      -0.010
                                                                                                     (0.014)      (0.021)     (0.023)
Peer Char: Age at enrollment                                                                         0.011**      0.014**       0.011
                                                                                                     (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.007)
Peer Char: Reported Age Younger than DMF                                                               0.006       -0.031      -0.058
                                                                                                     (0.043)      (0.057)     (0.066)
Peer Char: Reported Age Older than DMF                                                                -0.017       -0.007      -0.054
                                                                                                     (0.029)      (0.037)     (0.040)
Peer Char: Not Eligible (First enrollment)                                                            -0.029       -0.070     -0.188*
                                                                                                     (0.051)      (0.077)     (0.098)
Peer Char: Allottee amount                                                                             0.002       -0.000       0.004
                                                                                                     (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.004)
Peer Char: Allottee: Father                                                                          -0.050*     -0.079**     -0.081*
                                                                                                     (0.030)      (0.038)     (0.044)
Peer Char: Allottee: Mother                                                                           -0.004        0.003       0.019
                                                                                                     (0.025)      (0.031)     (0.036)
Peer Char: Gap in service                                                                             -0.025       -0.026       0.008
                                                                                                     (0.026)      (0.033)     (0.033)
Reason for discharge (code) = 2, Emp                                                                                           -0.006
                                                                                                                              (0.006)
Reason for discharge (code) = 3, COG                                                                                           -0.007
                                                                                                                              (0.006)
Reason for discharge (code) = 4, UrgProp                                                                                       -0.009
                                                                                                                              (0.006)
Reason for discharge (code) = 5, Desert                                                                                        -0.017
                                                                                                                              (0.019)
Reason for discharge (code) = 6, Rej                                                                                           -0.016
                                                                                                                              (0.031)
Reason for discharge (code) = 7, No Rec                                                                                         0.001
                                                                                                                              (0.019)
Honorable Discharge                                                                                                             0.007
                                                                                                                              (0.019)
Constant                                        4.274***     4.391***     4.308***     4.294***     4.063***    4.363***     4.309***
                                                 (0.002)      (0.137)      (0.159)      (0.168)      (0.206)     (0.162)      (0.183)

Observations                                       17,086       17,086       17,086       17,086        17,086       17,086       10,944
R-squared                                           0.003        0.117        0.126        0.127         0.128        0.138        0.149
Mean Dep                                            73.62        73.62        73.62        73.62         73.62        73.62        73.30
FE                                                  None        BD,CYQ      BD,CYQ        BD,CYQ       BD,CYQ BD,CYQ,Camp     BD,CYQ,Camp
Sample                                               All          All          All           All          All          All          CO
Number of County-Quarter Groups                                  1,789        1,789        1,789         1,789        1,789        1,231
Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Sample only includes duration <= 3 years and death age >= 45.
Appendix Table 4: Effect of Service Duration on Survival Rates by Age
                                                               (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)

Panel A: Survival to age 70                               Mean Dep    0.65
Duration of service (yrs)                                 0.030*** 0.032*** 0.028*** 0.035*** 0.030*** 0.030***
                                                           (0.005)  (0.006)  (0.006)  (0.007)  (0.008)  (0.008)
Observations                                               17,086

Panel B: Survival to age 70 missing imputed               Mean Dep    0.64
Duration of service (yrs)                                 0.022*** 0.026*** 0.023*** 0.028*** 0.023*** 0.016**
                                                           (0.004)  (0.005)  (0.005)  (0.006)  (0.006) (0.007)
Observations                                               21,269

Panel C: Survival to age 70 missing imputed to 0          Mean Dep    0.52
Duration of service (yrs)                                 0.024*** 0.037*** 0.037*** 0.040*** 0.034*** 0.020***
                                                           (0.005)  (0.006)  (0.006)  (0.007)  (0.007)  (0.008)
Observations                                               21,269

County-Quarter FE                                                N           Y           Y       Y          Y          Y
Controls                                                         N           N           Y       Y          Y          Y
Peer + Camp Controls                                             N           N           N       Y          Y          Y
Camp FE                                                          N           N           N       N          Y          Y
Type of Dismissal                                                N           N           N       N          N          Y
Standard errors (clustered at the application county and enrollment year-quarter level) in parentheses, *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1. Sample only includes death ages >= 45. Panel B imputes survival probability using the age at discharge,
birth year, and life tables from SSA. Panel C imputes 0 for missing survival probability.
Appendix Table 5: Heterogeneity in OLS effects
                                                       (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)         (9)
                                                                                                         Allottee     Allottee     Allottee   Urate above Urate below
Sample                                                 CO          NM        Age <= 18     Age > 18      Mother       Father        Other       median      median
Panel A: Log Death Age
Duration of service (yrs)                           0.013***     0.014**      0.014***     0.013***     0.018***       0.009         0.011      0.017***       0.013
                                                     (0.003)     (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.006)       (0.009)      (0.004)      (0.009)
Observations                                         11,148       6,243         8,042        9,349        8,253        5,801         3,337        8,238        2,742

Panel B: PIA
Duration of service (yrs)                           15.677*** 19.203**       25.859***      11.645       12.425*      15.848*      31.316*     29.252***      15.337*
                                                     (5.375)   (9.202)        (6.878)       (7.209)      (6.956)      (9.045)      (17.003)     (9.434)       (7.893)
Observations                                          6,641     3,779          5,680         4,740        5,077        3,536        1,807        3,415         3,520

                                                       (10)        (11)        (12)        (13)       (14)        (15)        (16)        (17)                 (18)
                                                                   Not       BMI < 18.5 BMI 18.5-25 BMI >= 25   Phase 2     Phase 3     Phase 4              Random-
Sample                                               Hispanic    Hispanic      (CO)        (CO)       (CO)    (1935-1937) (1937-1940) (1940-1942)              ized
Panel A: Log Death Age
Duration of service (yrs)                           0.018***     0.009**        0.008      0.013**        0.098      0.022***      0.022***       0.015      0.020***
                                                     (0.005)     (0.004)       (0.071)     (0.007)       (0.137)      (0.006)       (0.005)      (0.009)      (0.005)
Observations                                          7,864       9,527          433        5,627          290         3,852         7,256        6,049        5,170

Panel B: PIA
Duration of service (yrs)                           19.052** 19.827***        -17.382      21.666**     -724.479       6.741      23.239***    40.099***     17.739**
                                                     (7.672)  (6.285)        (127.386)      (9.369)         -         (9.789)      (7.662)      (14.172)      (8.346)
Observations                                          4,720    5,700            309          3,943        204          1,739        4,597        4,049         3,097


Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Sample is restricted only to those that died after age >= 45 and restrictions described by column
headings. The specification uses the most restrictive specification with Camp FE, which was the specification used in Table 2, Column 6.
Appendix Table 6: Placebo Tests for CO Only
                                          (1)        (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)
                                                  Add Birth,
                                                  County-qtr    Add Indiv   Add Camp      Add Peer    Add Camp
Regression of Outcome on Duration     No Controls Dummies       Controls      Chars        Chars         FE        CO Only

Education                             Mean Dep        8.72
Duration of service (yrs)              0.223***     0.225**     0.261***     0.257***     0.216**      0.212*       0.212*
                                        (0.080)     (0.095)      (0.091)      (0.090)     (0.107)      (0.118)      (0.118)
N                                        2,987       2,987        2,987        2,987       2,987        2,987        2,987

Height                                Mean Dep        67.94
Duration of service (yrs)               -0.035       -0.218      -0.062       -0.054       -0.162      -0.209       -0.209
                                       (0.125)       (0.170)     (0.146)      (0.149)      (0.179)     (0.186)      (0.186)
N                                        2,334        2,334       2,334        2,334        2,334       2,334        2,334

Weight (100 pounds)                   Mean Dep        1.40
Duration of service (yrs)              -0.012*       -0.016      -0.008       -0.008       -0.005      -0.002       -0.002
                                       (0.007)       (0.011)     (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.010)
N                                       2,067         2,067       2,067        2,067        2,067       2,067        2,067

Ever Had a Paid Job                   Mean Dep        0.45
Duration                                -0.007       -0.018      -0.048       -0.061       -0.065      -0.048       -0.048
                                       (0.032)       (0.051)     (0.048)      (0.047)      (0.049)     (0.059)      (0.059)
Observations                             1,104        1,104       1,104        1,104        1,104       1,104        1,104

Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variables are pre-program characteristics of
individuals. Each column's specification corresponds to column specifications in Table 5. Regressions do not include imputed
values.
Appendix Table 7: Balance Test of Baseline Characteristics for Job Corps Applicants
                                                                     Full sample                                Males only
Characteristic                                      Treatment Control             Difference       Treatment Control       Difference
Male                                                  0.591       0.599       -0.008     (0.009)
Age                                                   18.861     18.826        0.035     (0.038)    18.735   18.717    0.018  (0.047)
White - Non-Hispanic                                  0.274       0.265        0.009     (0.008)    0.309    0.295     0.014   (0.01)
Black - Non-Hispanic                                  0.476       0.478       -0.002     (0.009)     0.45    0.452    -0.002  (0.011)
Hispanic                                              0.174       0.181       -0.007     (0.007)    0.163    0.178   -0.015* (0.008)
Non-English Native Language                           0.141       0.143       -0.001     (0.006)     0.14    0.144    -0.004  (0.008)
Has Child                                             0.181       0.179        0.002     (0.007)    0.106    0.108    -0.002  (0.007)
Childhood Household Head - Mother                     0.483        0.49       -0.007     (0.009)     0.45    0.467    -0.016  (0.011)
Highest Grade Completed - Mother                      11.516     11.539       -0.022     (0.051)    11.678   11.658     0.02  (0.062)
Highest Grade Completed - Father                      11.471     11.578       -0.107     (0.064)    11.605   11.608   -0.003  (0.079)
Never on Welfare During Childhood                      0.47       0.459        0.012     (0.009)    0.489    0.485     0.004  (0.012)
Highest Grade Completed                               10.069     10.081       -0.012     (0.027)    9.953    9.969    -0.016  (0.032)
High School Degree                                    0.178       0.182       -0.004     (0.007)    0.139    0.142    -0.003  (0.008)
GED                                                   0.047       0.055      -0.008* (0.004)         0.05    0.052    -0.001  (0.005)
Ever Worked                                             0.8       0.788        0.011     (0.007)    0.812    0.801     0.011  (0.009)
Worked in Past Year                                   0.649        0.64        0.009     (0.008)    0.666    0.655     0.012   (0.01)
Currently has Job                                     0.215       0.208        0.007     (0.007)    0.221    0.204    0.017*  (0.009)
Months Worked in Past Year                            6.055       6.127       -0.072     (0.092)    6.028    6.067    -0.039  (0.113)
Earnings in Past Year (if employed during past year) 3019.377 2903.822 115.556 (103.731)           3319.099 3156.064 163.035 (137.756)
Typical Hours Worked (if employed during past year) 35.635       35.344        0.291     (0.348)    36.922   36.73     0.192   (0.44)
Typical Wage (if employed during past year)           5.062       5.078       -0.017     (0.033)    5.167    5.194    -0.027  (0.042)
Received AFDC                                         0.316       0.316       -0.001     (0.009)    0.244    0.242     0.002   (0.01)
Received Food Stamps                                  0.437       0.446       -0.009     (0.009)     0.37    0.378    -0.008  (0.011)
Received Any Welfare                                  0.578       0.585       -0.007     (0.009)    0.511    0.518    -0.007  (0.012)
Ever Used Drugs                                       0.386       0.376         0.01     (0.009)     0.43    0.423     0.007  (0.011)
Ever Arrested                                         0.264       0.266       -0.001     (0.008)    0.337    0.326     0.011   (0.01)
Non-residential Job Corps Participant                 0.137       0.141       -0.004     (0.006)    0.067    0.072    -0.005  (0.005)
Obs                                                    8813       5514        14327                  5036     3610     8646
Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Data source is baseline data for Job Corps program from Schochet et
al. (2008). If employed during past year is measured as the individual worked for at least 2 weeks in the previous year.
Appendix Table 8: The Effect of Service Duration for Machine-Matched Sample
                                            (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)     (7)
                                                   Add Birth,
                                                    County-
                                            No         qtr    Add Indiv Add Camp Add Peer Add Camp
VARIABLES                                Controls Dummies Controls        Chars    Chars      FE   CO Only
Panel A: Longevity from CCC for the machined-matched sample
Duration of service (yrs)               0.013*** 0.011*** 0.010*** 0.010*** 0.011*** 0.010** 0.017***
                                          (0.002)    (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.003)  (0.004)  (0.004) (0.005)
Observations                               8,833      8,833     8,833     8,833    8,833    8,833   5,904
R-squared                                  0.003      0.186     0.192     0.194    0.195    0.212   0.220
Mean Dep                                   72.64      72.64     72.64     72.64    72.64    72.64   72.41

Panel B: Longevity from DMF for the matchine-matched sample
Duration of service (yrs)             0.013*** 0.011*** 0.010*** 0.010*** 0.012*** 0.012*** 0.019***
                                       (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) (0.004)  (0.005)
Observations                            9,175     9,175      9,175   9,175   9,175   9,175    6,071
R-squared                               0.003     0.181      0.186   0.188   0.189   0.205    0.214
Mean Dep                                72.65     72.65      72.65   72.65   72.65   72.65    72.42

Panel C: Does duration predict whether they are machine-matched to DMF?
Duration of service (yrs)               0.015*** 0.024*** 0.026*** 0.026*** 0.024*** 0.022*** 0.020**
                                         (0.005)   (0.006)    (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.007)   (0.007)     (0.009)
Observations                             22,964    22,964      22,964      22,964     22,964     22,964     14,116
R-squared                                 0.000     0.110       0.153       0.153      0.154      0.161      0.165
Mean Dep                                  0.41      0.41        0.41        0.41       0.41       0.41       0.44
Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. In Panel A, we use death age calculated from
CCC birth year and death age from hand-matched sources. In Panel B we use death age calculated from DMF birth
date and death date from the machine match. Sample is restricted only to those that died after age >= 45 for Panels
A and B.
