                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CHANGES IN BLACK-WHITE INEQUALITY:
                          EVIDENCE FROM THE BOLL WEEVIL

                                           Karen Clay
                                        Ethan J. Schmick
                                        Werner Troesken

                                       Working Paper 27101
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27101


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We would like to thank Andy Ferrara, Daniel Jones, Jessica LaVoice, Allison Shertzer, and
Randy Walsh for helpful comments and suggestions. This paper also benefited from comments
by seminar participants at Marquette University, the American Economic Association Annual
Conference, the Liberal Arts Colleges Development Economics Conference, and the North
American Regional Science Association Conference. Karen Clay acknowledges financial support
from Heinz College, Carnegie Mellon University.The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Karen Clay, Ethan J. Schmick, and Werner Troesken. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Changes in Black-White Inequality: Evidence from the Boll Weevil
Karen Clay, Ethan J. Schmick, and Werner Troesken
NBER Working Paper No. 27101
May 2020, Revised June 2020
JEL No. I24,J10,J62,N32

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the effect of a large negative agricultural shock, the boll weevil, on black-
white inequality in the first half of the twentieth century. To do this we use complete count
census data to generate a linked sample of fathers and their sons. We find that the boll weevil
induced enormous labor market and social disruption as more than half of black and white fathers
moved to other counties following the arrival of the weevil. The shock impacted black and white
sons differently. We compare sons whose fathers initially resided in the same county and find that
white sons born after the boll weevil had similar wages and schooling outcomes to white sons
born prior to its arrival. In contrast, black sons born after the boll weevil had significantly higher
wages and years of schooling, narrowing the black-white wage and schooling gaps. This decrease
appears to have been driven by relative improvements in early life conditions and access to
schooling both for sons of black fathers that migrated out of the South and sons of black fathers
that stayed in the South.

Karen Clay                                        Werner Troesken
Heinz College                                     University of Pittsburgh
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
kclay@andrew.cmu.edu

Ethan J. Schmick
Washington & Jefferson College
60 S. Lincoln St.
Washington, PA 15301
eschmick@washjeff.edu
1         Introduction

Black-white inequality has been remarkably persistent in recent decades, and this per-
sistence has been a topic of much research and a focus of policymakers. Historical work
has focused on the Great Migration, which helped close the black-white wage gap in the
mid-twentieth century and reduced inequality (Margo, 1995; Boustan, 2009; Collins and
Wanamaker, 2014; Derenoncourt, 2019). Contemporary work has focused on early envi-
ronment through programs such as Moving to Opportunity, which moved families across
neighborhoods within cities, and on important differences in intergenerational mobility
across different locations in the United States (Chetty et al., 2014; Chetty, Hendren and
Katz, 2016).

        This paper uses a large negative agricultural shock that both induced large-scale mi-
gration and plausibly changed the early life environment of children born after the shock
to examine how these two factors affected black-white inequality of fathers and sons in
the first half of the twentieth century. The large negative agricultural shock was the
boll weevil, a cotton pest that decreased cotton production and spread throughout the
American South between 1892 and 1922. The boll weevil led to declines in cotton produc-
tion, disruption in tenancy arrangements, increases in food production, and widespread
migration (Lange, Olmstead and Rhode, 2009; Ager, Brueckner and Herz, 2017a). While
there were many other large shocks in the first half of the twentieth century including
the Mississippi Floods of 1927 and the Dust Bowl (Hornbeck and Naidu, 2014; Hornbeck,
2012), the boll weevil was a very large shock, affecting approximately 22% of the U.S.
population.1

        To examine the effect of the boll weevil, black and white fathers are observed in the
1900 or 1910 U.S. Census in the years before the boll weevil arrived in the county they
resided in. These fathers are then linked to the next decadal census (1910 or 1920) after
the arrival of the boll weevil. This allows us to observe whether the father migrated,
where he migrated to, and any changes in his occupation. Sons observed in their fathers'
    1
        22% represents the share of the U.S. population that lived in a cotton growing county in 1900.


                                                      2
households in 1900, 1910, and 1920 are then linked to the 1940 Census, which allows
us to observe their wage income, years of schooling, occupation, and whether they have
migrated from their fathers last location.

   We present three main results. First, we find the shock impacted black and white
sons differently. We compare sons whose fathers initially resided in the same county
and find that white sons born before and after the boll weevil had similar wage and
schooling outcomes. In contrast, black sons born after the boll weevil had significantly
higher wages and years of schooling, narrowing the black-white wage and schooling gaps.
The black-white wage gap decreased by 12% to 22% (depending on specification) and the
black-white schooling gap decreased by 6%.

   Second, the relative gains for black sons born after the boll weevil were widespread.
Specifically, they were not driven by the 5% of black fathers who migrated out of the
South. We do find evidence that black sons born after the boll weevil to fathers who
migrated out of the South experienced large additional gains wages, although the effect
is not significant. Importantly, sons of black fathers that did not move out of the South
still experienced a decrease in the black-white wage gap by 22 to 24%.

   Third, the available evidence suggest that the gains were likely driven by early life
conditions for black sons born after the boll weevil. The black population was extremely
impoverished, so the boll weevil could have improved maternal, fetal, and infant health
through reduction in mother's work effort both while pregnant and after birth. In ad-
dition, the variety and nutritive value of food production improved following the boll
weevil (Clay, Schmick and Troesken, 2019). Both changes could have led to relative
improvements in black infant health as compared to white infant health. Evidence from
comparison of brothers, nutrition conditions of counties in North Carolina, and the heights
of black recruits during World War II are all consistent with early life conditions having
played an important role for black sons.

   While the setting is historical, this work is well suited to shed light on issues of
contemporary interest. It sheds light on the intergenerational effects of shocks that induce

                                             3
migration, particularly of disadvantaged groups. It also highlights the importance of early
life environment, for the children of families that migrate and those that do not.

    This paper contributes to two primary literatures. The first is the literature on black-
white inequality. Scholars have discussed migration as a general mechanism through
which the black-white wage gap fell (Margo, 1995; Boustan, 2009; Collins and Wana-
maker, 2014; Derenoncourt, 2019). In line with this literature, our paper finds that black
sons born after the boll weevil whose fathers moved out of the South saw large relative
wage gains. Black sons of fathers who moved out of the South are, however, a small share
of the overall sample. Our paper finds that relative wage gains for these cohorts were
driven by black sons born after the boll weevil whose fathers stayed in the South. Their
gains appear to be the result of improvements in early life conditions.

    The second is the large literature on the effect of early life shocks on long run outcomes
(Almond and Currie, 2011; Almond, Currie and Duque, 2018) and the two subliteratures
that examine the role of maternal nutrition (Linnemayr and Alderman, 2011; Almond and
Mazumder, 2011; Adhvaryu et al., 2016) and focus on black-white inequality (Almond,
Currie and Herrmann, 2012; Bhalotra and Venkataramani, 2015; Almond and Mazumder,
2011). Our paper builds on the literatures by examining an important historical setting
where there are effects on both black and white sons from the decisions of their fathers' to
migrate or stay. A father's decision to migrate may change his income and the nutritional
and disease environment. On the other hand, if a father chose to remain in the South the
early childhood environment for his children, especially the nutrition environment, might
have changed.




2     The Boll Weevil

The boll weevil appeared in Texas in 1892. From there, it progressed North and East
through the cotton belt. By 1922, the boll weevil had spread throughout the entire cotton




                                              4
                                       2
growing region of the United States.       Scholars have treated the arrival of the boll weevil
in the cotton belt during the early 1900s as an exogenous shock that disrupted cotton
production and broadly impacted the Southern economy.

      The U.S. Department of Agriculture (1951), Ransom and Sutch (2001), Lange, Olm-
stead and Rhode (2009), and Ager, Brueckner and Herz (2017a) all find that the arrival of
the boll weevil had large negative effects on cotton yields and production.Ager, Brueckner
and Herz (2017a), Bloome, Feigenbaum and Muller (2017), and Ager, Brueckner and Herz
(2017b) show that the arrival of the boll weevil had an adverse effect on tenancy, local
labor markets, marriage and fertility. These adverse effects on tenancy and local labor
markets induced many individuals to migrate within and across states (Lange, Olmstead
and Rhode, 2009; Ager, Brueckner and Herz, 2017a). The arrival of the weevil had a
large positive effect on the production of other crops (Ager, Brueckner and Herz, 2017a;
Clay, Schmick and Troesken, 2019; Lange, Olmstead and Rhode, 2009). Clay, Schmick
and Troesken (2019) provide evidence that the arrival of the boll weevil may have led to
improved nutrition. We explore the evidence on migration and nutrition further in the
next two subsections.



2.1      Migration

Using county level panel data on population and a difference in differences strategy,
Lange, Olmstead and Rhode (2009) document sizeable net migration associated with
the boll weevil. Counties with the highest cotton shares saw the greatest declines in
population, while counties with lower cotton shares saw smaller declines. Ager, Brueckner
and Herz (2017a) and Feigenbaum, Mazumder and Smith (2019) also find that high cotton
counties experienced significant out migration with the later study linking this migration
to a decrease in the violence and repression experienced by Southern blacks in cotton
producing counties.
  2
    See Lange, Olmstead and Rhode (2009) or Hunter and Coad (1923) for a year-by-year map of the
boll weevils' progression through the cotton belt.



                                                5
   Collins and Wanamaker (2015) use a large linked sample of black and white men in
the South for 1910-1930 to examine the early decades of the Great Migration. They find
black and white migrants experienced increases in income relative to black and white
non-migrants. While their focus is primarily on the Great Migration, they examine
migration to more and less cotton intensive states and find that blacks and whites were
less likely to move to cotton intensive states. Their work does not speak directly to the
boll weevil, because in 1910 some men are observed after the boll weevil had arrived in
their county, while others are observed before the boll weevil had arrived. However, their
work highlights important differences in the propensity to migrate and the destinations
of whites and blacks, an issue we will examine as well.



2.2    Early Life Conditions

The diet for poor whites and blacks in the South consisted primarily of salt pork, molasses,
and corn. For example, Edgar (2012) argued that in South Carolina debt forced many
farmers to plant cotton, which had higher expected returns than other crops. As a result,
South Carolina had to import $70 to $100 million worth of food annually. For poverty-
stricken tenant farmers with little ready cash, this meant that there was less to eat. The
consequent increased dependence on a diet of pork, cornbread, and molasses made poor
Carolinians more susceptible to disease (Edgar 1992, p. 47). For poor pregnant women,
a low nutrient diet and in some cases physical labor in the fields may have adversely
affected their fetuses.

   Ager, Brueckner and Herz (2017a), Clay, Schmick and Troesken (2019), and Lange,
Olmstead and Rhode (2009) provide evidence that the arrival of the boll weevil led to
increases in the local production of food crops and declines in pellagra, a nutritional
disease associated with niacin deficiency. Clay, Schmick and Troesken (2019) show that
declines in pellagra appear to have been driven by increases in locally produced nutrient
rich food. Specifically, there were increases in corn, peanut, and sweet potato acres per
capita after the arrival of the boll weevil. Midwestern milled corn was degerminated,

                                             6
which greatly reduced its nutritional value. Increased use of local milled corn, which
retained its germ, contributed to the decline in pellagra.

    The early life literature provides possible channels through which the boll weevil
may have affected child outcomes, which included improved nutrition and income for
children whose fathers migrated and improved nutrition for children whose fathers did
not migrate. Improved maternal nutrition and household income are linked to higher birth
weight (Almond and Mazumder, 2011; Rossin, 2011; Almond, Hoynes and Schanzenbach,
2011; Hoynes, Miller and Simon, 2015; Lindo, 2011). Aizer and Currie (2014) (p. 856)
conclude that "health at birth is an important predictor of long-term outcomes, including
education, income, and disability." Improvements in early childhood nutrition, disease
environment, and income are also linked to higher test scores and wages (see Almond,
Currie and Duque (2018) for a review of this literature).

    Importantly, for our paper, the boll weevil did have an effect on educational outcomes.
Using detailed data for Georgia, a large cotton producing state, Baker (2015) finds that
the boll weevil affected the enrollment in school of black children, but not white children.
Black children often helped to harvest the cotton during the September to December
time frame. Reductions in cotton production reduced demand for child labor, allowing
more children to attend school. Baker, Blanchette and Eriksson (2020) examine the long-
run impacts of the boll weevil on educational attainment. They find evidence that men
who were 4-18 years old when the boll weevil arrived in a county had 0.25 years higher
educational attainment than men who were 19-30 years old.




3     Data

To study the impact of the boll weevil on black-white inequality we generate a linked
sample of fathers and their sons. We relate fathers' migration and sons' births to the
year that the boll weevil first arrived in the county the father was initially living in. Data
on the year the boll weevil first arrived in a county are taken from Lange, Olmstead and


                                              7
Rhode (2009), which originally came from USDA boll weevil maps.3 Counties invaded
by the boll weevil between 1892 and 1922 are shown in Figure 1.



3.1      Linking

Appendix Figure A.1 provides details on the linking procedure that we use to generate
our sample of fathers and sons. We begin by looking for fathers in the 1900 or 1910
Censuses that had a son aged 18 or younger and who were living in a county that would
be invaded by the boll weevil in the next ten years (i.e. fathers in the 1900 Census must
have been living in county that would be invaded by the boll weevil between 1900 and
1910; step 1. in Figure Appendix A.1). We then link these fathers to the next decadal
census (step 2. in Appendix Figure A.1). By linking these fathers we are able to observe
whether they migrated out of their initial county, state, or region of residence. We then
take the set of sons of successfully linked fathers (step 3 in Appendix Figure A.1) and
link the sons from the 1900, 1910, or 1920 Censuses to the 1940 Census to obtain their
adult outcomes (step 4 in Appendix Figure A.1). The result of this linking algorithm is
a data set that allows us to observe whether a father migrated around the time the boll
weevil arrived in the county he was initially living in and it provides outcomes for both
fathers and their sons.

      To perform all of the linking we employ the ABE algorithm, which is commonly used
in economics and was developed by Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (Abramitzky,
Boustan and Eriksson (2012), Abramitzky, Boustan and Eriksson (2014), Abramitzky,
Boustan and Eriksson (2019)). This algorithm is similar to the algorithm used in Ferrie
(1996) and Long and Ferrie (2013). We begin by adjusting first names for common
nicknames and then standardize each first and surname using the NYSIIS algorithm,
which transforms a name into a phonetic code. We then restrict our sample to individuals
  3
     We reviewed the original USDA boll weevil map published in Hunter and Coad (1923) and found
a few discrepancies between the map and the coding of the boll weevil arrival in Lange, Olmstead and
Rhode (2009). The map shows that the boll weevil arrived in Cherokee County, South Carolina in 1920,
but it is coded as 1921 in Lange, Olmstead and Rhode (2009). The map shows the boll weevil arriving
in Iredell County and Wake County, North Carolina in 1921, but it is coded in Lange, Olmstead and
Rhode (2009) as 1922. We changed the coding in these cases to align with the original map.

                                                 8
who are unique by NYSIIS first name, NYSIIS surname, birthplace, birth year, and race.
Using these variables we search for the individual in the census we want to link them to.
If we find a unique match we declare this observation to be a match. If we find multiple
matches the observation is discarded. If we do not find a unique match we continue
to search for individuals who match exactly on NYSIIS first name, NYSIIS surname,
birthplace, and race, but we now allow birth year to differ by up to one year (e.g. if an
individual in the 1910 Census reports a birth year of 1902 we will search for individuals
in the 1940 Census with a birth year of 1901 and 1903). If still no unique match is found
we continue to search for individuals who match exactly on NYSIIS first name, NYSIIS
surname, birthplace, and race but we now allow birth year to differ by up to two years.

   The results from this linking procedure are displayed in Appendix Table A.1. We
begin with 565,000 black fathers and 1,010,000 white fathers with sons under the age
of 19 who were observed in the 1900 or 1910 Censuses living in a county that would
be invaded by the boll weevil in the next ten years. We were able to successfully link
22% of black fathers and 30% of white fathers to the next census. We then locate the
sons of these successfully linked fathers and link them to the 1940 Census. We were able
to successfully link 20-21% of black sons and 28-29% of white sons to the 1940 Census.
The final sample has 42,000 black fathers, 55,000 black sons, 136,000 white fathers, and
195,000 white sons.

   A concern with any linked sample is whether it is representative of the overall popula-
tion. Appendix Table A.2 addresses this issue by comparing a number of characteristics
of the linked sample to the entire set of individuals that we attempted to link for both
fathers and their sons. Of note, we are significantly more likely to link fathers living in
owner occupied housing and literate fathers. We are, also, significantly more likely to
link sons living in owner occupied housing and urban areas. While we find significant
differences between the linked sample and the sample that we attempted to link along
numerous other dimensions, most of these differences are very small in magnitude (e.g.
75.9% of black fathers in the linked sample were farmers, while 75.2% of fathers in the
entire sample were farmers).
                                            9
3.2      Summary Statistics for Fathers and Sons

Panel A of Table 1 provides summary statistics on migration and other father charac-
teristics by race. One striking feature is the extent to which fathers have moved in the
ten year interval between censuses. Only 37% of black fathers and 46% of white fathers
were still living in the county that they were observed in ten years earlier. Recall that
all fathers initially lived in a county that would be invaded by the boll weevil within ten
years. Blacks and whites differ by where they moved, with 27% of white father, but 38%
of black fathers moving to a different county within the same state. In contrast, 24% of
black fathers and 26% of white fathers moved out of the state they were first observed
in. Only 5% of black fathers moved out of the South, while 8% of white fathers moved
out of the South. To better understand fathers' migration decisions, Appendix Table A.3
presents a descriptive regression of the determinants of black and white fathers moving
out of the county or the state they were originally observed in. Younger fathers were,
generally, more likely to migrate and fathers who were initially farmers were less likely
to migrate. One exception is that younger white fathers were actually less likely to move
out of state than older white fathers.

   Panel B of Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the sons of these fathers by race.
In 1940, only 17% of black sons and 26% of white sons lived in their fathers' initial
county and 35% of black sons and 26% of white sons had moved out of their birth states.
Appendix Table A.4 presents a descriptive regression of the determinants of black and
white sons moving out of their father's initial county or moving out of the South. Sons
were more likely to move out of the South if their father had moved states. They were
less likely to move out of their father's initial county if they were white and born after
the boll weevil. On the other hand, black sons born after the boll weevil were less likely
to move out of the South. More years of schooling was associated with a lower propensity
to move out of their father's initial county, but a higher propensity to move out of the
South.




                                            10
4         Empirical Strategy

Our main empirical analysis relies on a comparison of sons that were born before and after
the boll weevil arrived to fathers that resided in the same county prior to the weevil's
arrival. We also want to allow for the fact that the effect of being born after the boll
weevil might differ by race. Accordingly, we estimate the following equation:


                  outcomeict = 1 [Born post boll weevilct = 1] + 2 [Blacki = 1]

                             + 3 [Born post boll weevilct = 1] × [Blacki = 1]

                             + c + t + b + e +          ict                                          (1)



        In the above equation, i indexes a son, c indexes the county that son's father was
initially living in (in 1900 or 1910), and t indexes birth year.

        outcomeict is the adult outcome of son i, whose father initially lived in county c, and
who was born in year t. We use two main outcome variables: the natural log of a sons
weekly wage and their years of schooling. Weekly wage is defined as an individual's yearly
income in 1939 divided by the number of weeks they reported working in 1939. Census
enumerators were supposed to code any individual with an annual income over $5,000 a
year as having an income of $5,000. This practice was not universally followed as there
are several individuals for whom yearly income is over $5,000. We deal with these and
other outliers in the weekly wage variable by following Acemoglu and Angrist (2000) and
censor weekly wages at the 98th percentile. Weekly wages above the 98th percentile are
replaced with 1.5 times the 98th percentile wage.4

        [Bornpostboll weevilct = 1] is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if individual
i was born after the arrival of the boll weevil in their father's initial county. We measure
treatment based on the son's birth year relative to when the boll weevil arrived in the
father's initial county.5 [Blacki = 1] is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if
    4
     For our sample, the 98th percentile of weekly wages is $72, so incomes above this level are replaced
with 1.5 times $72, or $108.
   5
     For sons whose fathers move, we do not observe the timing of the birth and the move relative to

                                                   11
individual i's reported race was black.

    The remaining controls are: county, birth year, census enumeration year, and birth
order fixed effects. c are fixed effects for father's initial county and t are birth year
fixed effects. b is a dummy variable for individual i's location in the birth order of his
family. Birth order is determined by the age of the sons who have the same father in
the censuses. Thus, it does not take into account older siblings who either moved out of
the house or died before the censuses were taken. e are census enumeration year fixed
effects. Finally, we cluster standard errors at the father's initial-county-level.




5     Black-White Inequality and the Boll Weevil

We begin by presenting results from Equation (1) where we do not include the dummy
variable for being black or the interaction term. These results are displayed in Panels
A and B of Table 2. Columns (1) and (2) use the log of weekly wage as the dependent
variable and column (3) uses years of schooling.

    In column (1) of Panel A we find that sons born after the boll weevil arrived in
their fathers' initial county had about 2% higher weekly wages. Column (1) of Panel B
shows that this increase was concentrated in high cotton acreage counties, which are the
counties that were the most impacted by the boll weevil (high cotton acreage counties are
defined as counties where the cotton acreage as a share of farm acreage is above 11%).
Column (2) repeats the specification from column (1), but controls for the number years
of schooling an individual completed (with a complete set of indicator variables), keeping
in mind that years of schooling might be affected by the boll weevil. The coefficient in
Panel A is reduced in magnitude to about 1%, while the coefficient on the interaction
term in Panel B remains large and statistically significant. Finally, in column (3) we
find that sons born after the arrival of the weevil attained about 0.15 years of additional
schooling and it appears that at least some of this effect is concentrated in high cotton
the arrival of the boll weevil. This is particularly true for fathers who move within their original state,
because we only observe a son's state of birth, not the timing of their father's move. Sons born in the
year the boll weevil first arrived are coded as being treated (i.e. [Born post boll weevilct = 1]).
                                                    12
counties. Thus, there is broad evidence that being born after the arrival of the weevil
improved both weekly wages and years of schooling.

      We next examine whether the improvements in long-run outcomes differed by race
and we find strong evidence that they did. Table 3 estimates Equation 1 and column (1)
shows that black sons born prior to the boll weevil had weekly wages that were 0.632 log
points (88%) lower than white sons born prior to the weevil.6 White sons born after the
boll weevil did not experience any significant increase in weekly wages as is shown by the
coefficient on being born after the boll weevil. However, being black and being born after
the boll weevil resulted in a significant increase in wages by about 8%. This reduced the
black-white wage gap by approximately 12% (0.0775/0.632).

      The black-white wage gap is partially attributed to differences in years of schooling.
Accordingly, in column (2) we control for a son's years of schooling, keeping in mind that
years of schooling are affected by the boll weevil. This reduces the black coefficient to
0.32 log points, but the coefficient on the interaction between being born after the boll
weevil and black remains almost unchanged. Using these coefficient values, we find that
being born after the boll weevil reduced the wage gap for blacks by 22% (0.0708/0.32).
Column (3) uses years of schooling as the dependent variable. We find that blacks born
prior to the boll weevil had about 3.5 fewer years of schooling than whites, but being born
after the boll weevil closed this gap by about 0.2 years (6% of the gap). In conclusion,
Table 3 shows that black sons differentially benefited from the arrival of the boll weevil.

      Our main empirical results presented in Table 3 rely on a comparison between black
and white sons whose fathers lived in the cotton growing region of the United States
during the 1900 or 1910 Censuses. A natural question is how the blacks in our sample
fared compared to other blacks that were not living in the cotton belt. Our analysis is not
set-up to answer this question, but we can partially address the concern by noting that
approximately 75% of blacks in the 1900 and 1910 censuses were living in counties that
were invaded by the boll weevil. Thus, there is no reason to think that northern blacks
  6
    To convert the log points into a percentage we use the formula e - 1 where  is the coefficient
estimate.


                                               13
are a more natural comparison group than southern whites. In fact, southern whites had
many characteristics in common with southern blacks, such as a high percentage working
in agriculture and a low literacy rate (see Appendix Table A.7), which were probably not
shared with northern blacks.



5.1       Event studies

We next convert our main empirical results into event studies. These event studies use
the following specification:



                               6
             outcomeict =           k 1(t - hc = k ) +   Xict + c + t + b + e +              ict         (2)
                             k=-6



       In the above equation, i indexes a son, c indexes the county that son's father was
initially living in (in 1900 or 1910), and t indexes birth year. hc is the year the boll weevil
arrived in the father's initial county. Thus, 1(t - hc = k ) are a series of dummy variables,
which take a value of one if a son was born between six years before or after the boll
weevil arrived in their father's initial county. The remaining controls are: county, birth
year, census enumeration year, and birth order fixed effects. We omit the indicator for
being born in the year the boll weevil arrived and we group sons born more than six
years before or after the boll weevil into the -6 and +6 indicators. Standard errors are
clustered at the father's initial-county-level.

       The coefficients, k , when weekly wages are the dependent variables are plotted in
Panel A of Figure 2. There is no noticeable trend in weekly wages for sons who were
born one to five years prior to the boll weevil's arrival. Sons born six or more years prior
to the boll weevil's arrival did have significantly lower wages, but recall that this is a
catch-all category that includes sons born six to 28 years prior to the weevil's arrival.7
   7
     It is possible for a son in our sample to be born 28 years prior the boll weevil's arrival. For example,
if the son was 18 years old in the 1900 Census and the weevil did not arrive in their father's initial county
until 1910 than that individual would have been born 28 years prior the weevil's arrival.


                                                     14
We do find evidence that sons born after the arrival of the boll weevil had higher weekly
wages and in some cases this is significant. Panel B of Figure 2 plots a similar graph using
years of schooling as the dependent variable. There is, again, no noticeable pre-trend for
sons who were born one to five years prior to the boll weevil's arrival. Again, sons born
six or more years before the boll weevil did have significantly lower amounts of schooling.
The increase in years of schooling appears to initially occur for sons born in the year the
weevil arrived and the upward trend continues after that. This is in contrast to weekly
wages, where the initial increase appeared to occur for sons born one to two years after
the weevil's arrival.

   In Appendix Figure A.2 we repeat the analysis in Figure 2, but now interact the event
time indicators with an indicator if the son was black. This figure, therefore, shows how
the black-white wage and schooling gap evolved relative to the boll weevil's arrival. In
Panel A it appears that the black-white wage gap was fairly constant prior the weevil
arriving. Black sons born after the arrival of the boll weevil saw increases in their wages
relative to white sons so the black-white wage gap decreased. However, these estimates
are noisy and not significant. In Panel B, we find that the black-white schooling gap was
increasing prior to the boll weevil (i.e. blacks had decreasing years of schooling relative to
whites) and this trend reversed after the weevil arrived. Again, the estimates are noisy.

   These event study figures demonstrate that there were not noticeable pre-trends in
either schooling or weekly wages prior to the boll weevil's arrival and they both show
increases after the weevil arrived.



5.2    Sensitivity of Results to Linking Procedure

We next explore the sensitivity of our main results to different linking procedures. One
major concern with our empirical results is that the effects we are identifying are simply
the result of false matches. For our results to be driven by false matches the rate of false
positives would have to be systematically related to both the race of the child and the
year that they were born relative to the boll weevil's arrival. While we believe that this

                                             15
in unlikely we, nevertheless, repeat our linking procedure using two different algorithms
that should reduce the number of false positive matches.

    First, we link both fathers and sons that match exactly on first name (not phonetically
cleaned), last name (not phonetically cleaned), birthplace, birth year, and race. We
re-estimate our baseline results (Table 3) with this sample and display the results in
Appendix Table A.5. The results using only individuals that match exactly on name and
birth year are almost identical to our main results in magnitude, although the significance
is slightly reduced. The second method links only fathers and sons whose NYSIIS cleaned
first and last names are unique within a five-year age band in both the initial census and
the 1940 Census. We, again, re-estimate Table 3 using only unique names and ages and
display the results in Appendix Table A.6. The results using this sample are, again,
similar to our main results, although the magnitude of the wage effect is slightly reduced
and the magnitude of the schooling effect is slightly larger. We conclude that our results
are likely not being driven by false matches.




6     Migration Decisions and Early Life Conditions

6.1     Fathers' Migration Decisions

In this section we explore the migration decisions of fathers around the time the boll
weevil arrived in the county they were living in, the impact of these migration decisions
on their sons, and the change in early life conditions that occurred even for families that
did not migrate.

    First, we examine the locations that fathers moved to. Panel A of Table 1 provides a
rough idea of where fathers are moving, but we are more precise about the exact locations
in Figure 3. Panel A shows the net change in black fathers in our sample residing in each
county and Panel B displays the same for white fathers.8 Fathers migrated to many
   8
     To construct these maps we calculated the total number of black or white fathers from our sample
that moved into a county between the first time they were observed (either in 1900 or 1910) and the
next time they were observed (either in 1910 or 1920). We then subtracted the total number of fathers

                                                 16
locations, including Southern cities, Northern cities, and to the West. The most common
locations for white fathers were counties a short distance to the north of the Cotton
Belt. The most common locations for black fathers were more diffuse, although some
also moved north of the Cotton Belt. Figure 4 shows the migration patterns of black and
white sons in our sample.9 Again, urban areas, both within and outside of the South,
and the West appear to be popular locations to migration to.

    Fathers that decided to migrate were, generally, positively selected in that they had
higher socioeconomic statuses and, in some cases, were more likely to be literate. Ap-
pendix Table A.7 shows a number of father characteristics broken down by migrant status
for each race. Fathers that migrated had significantly higher average initial LIDO scores,
were less likely to be a farmer and were less likely to own their home. LIDO scores are
lasso-adjusted industry, demographic, and occupation (LIDO) score from Saavedra and
Twinam (2020). These scores calculate occupational standing in industry-occupation-
state-age-race cells and we use these scores to proxy for income since income is not
available in censuses prior to 1940.10 Fathers that migrated within the same state or
within the South generally had lower literacy rates than fathers that did not migrant.
However, fathers that migrated out of the South had much higher literacy rates than
fathers that did not migrate. There is not a distinct pattern between the age of migrants
and non-migrants in our sample. For example, black fathers that migrated within the
same state were younger, but black fathers that migrated to a different state within the
South were older than non-migrants. Finally, it appears that when whites moved states
within the South or out of the South they moved at least 100 miles further than blacks.

    Did the fathers that moved experience better or worse outcomes in these new loca-
tions? We conclude this section by showing how the occupational status of fathers that
from our sample that moved out of that county to get a measure of net migration.
    9
      To construct these maps we calculated the total number of black or white sons from our sample
that moved into a county between the first time they were observed (in 1900, 1910 or 1920) and 1940.
We then subtracted the total number of sons that moved out of that county from our sample to get a
measure of net migration.
   10
      LIDO scores are similar to the commonly used occupational income score, but they produce results
that are closer to those from earnings regressions. We prefer LIDO scores to OCC scores because they
compute occupational standing in industry-occupation-state-age-race cells as opposed to just occupation
cells.

                                                  17
migrated changed. In Table 4 the dependent variable in column (1) is the change in
fathers' occupational income score (OCC score) from the first time they are observed (in
1900 or 1910) to the next time they are observed (in 1910 or 1920).11 The dependent vari-
able in the second column is the change in fathers' LIDO scores. Black fathers that did
not migrate, actually saw a slight decreases in their OCC and LIDO scores compared to
white fathers that did not migrate. There is conflicting evidence on whether fathers that
moved out of the South saw increases in their occupational status. Fathers that moved
out of the South saw decreases in their OCC scores, but increases in their LIDO scores.
Fathers that migrated from a rural area to an urban area saw large, positive, increases in
both their OCC and LIDO score. Finally, black fathers that migrated out of the South
saw differential increases in both their OCC and LIDO scores. We conclude that black
fathers that migrated out of the South generally experienced improved economic status.



6.2       The Impact of Fathers' Migration on Sons

We next show that both black and white sons benefited from their fathers moving, but
that neither race differentially benefited from these moves. To do this, we estimate
Equation 1 but now include a triple interaction term for being born after the boll weevil,
being black, and having a father that migrated. The results are displayed in Table 5.
The dependent variable in all columns is the log of sons' weekly wages in 1940 and all
columns control for dummy variables for the number of years of schooling a son attained.
In column (1) we look at fathers that moved within the same state, column (2) examines
fathers that moved to a different state within the South, and column (3) looks at the
fathers that moved out of the South. All columns control for dummy variables for the
other types of moves (e.g. column (1) controls for dummy variables, which are not
reported, for a father moving to a different state within the South and moving out of the
South).

       Similar to Table 3, we find a large black-white wage gap for black sons born prior to
  11
   OCC score is defined by IPUMS (Ruggles et al. (2020)) as the median income received by persons
employed in a particular occupation in the 1950 Census.

                                               18
the boll weevil (the coefficient on the black indicator variable) and we find no evidence
that white sons born after the boll weevil had higher weekly wages (the coefficient on the
post boll weevil indicator variable). Fathers moving, regardless of type of move, increased
all sons' weekly wages with the biggest effect coming for sons whose father moved out of
the South (coefficient on the father moved indicator variable). It appears that sons born
after the arrival of the boll weevil differentially benefited from these moves, especially if
the father moved within the same state or out of the South (the interaction term between
fathers moving and born post boll weevil). However, black sons born after the boll weevil
to a father that migrated (the triple interaction term) did not differentially benefit from
the migration. Importantly, black sons born after the boll weevil whose father did not
migrate still saw a significant decrease in the black-white wage gap, of a similar magnitude
to what was found in Table 3. This can be seen through the interaction between being
black and being born after the boll weevil. In particular, we find that sons of black fathers
that did not move still experienced a decrease in the black-white wage gap by 22% to
24%.12

       We repeat these specification, but now use sons' locations relative to the fathers'
initial county in Appendix Table A.8. Importantly, in all specifications, black sons that
did not migrate out of their fathers' initial counties still experienced a 30% reduction in
the black-white wage gap. In addition, there is no evidence that black sons born after
the boll weevil that moved out of their father's initial county differentially benefited from
these moves. To conclude this section, while we find strong evidence that sons benefited
from their fathers' migrating, we find no evidence that black sons differentially benefited
from these moves. Thus, black sons born after the boll weevil whose fathers did not
migrate still saw significant increases in their wages relative to white sons. We next
turn to potential improvements in early childhood environment that might have occurred
within the fathers' initial counties after the arrival of the boll weevil.
  12
    We have run a specification that includes triple interactions for all three types of moves (within state,
within South, and out of South) in the same regression and we find similar results. In particular, none of
the triple interactions are significant and the coefficient on the interaction between black and born post
boll weevil is 0.0778 and significant at the 1% level. The black-white wage gap for sons of black fathers
that did not migrate closed by 24% in this specification.


                                                     19
6.3       Early Life Conditions

We conclude our empirical analysis by offering evidence that early life conditions were
significantly better for sons born after the arrival of weevil, regardless of whether their
father migrated, and black sons differentially benefited from these improved early life
conditions. Clay, Schmick and Troesken (2019) argue that Southern nutrition signifi-
cantly improved after the arrival of the boll weevil because Southern farmers switched
from growing cotton, which had no nutritional value, to growing nutritionally rich foods
such as corn, peanuts, and sweet potatoes. They also provide evidence that prior the
arrival of the boll weevil many southerners were consuming imported food that was not
nutritional rich. As a result of the boll weevil, the pellagra death rate, a disease caused
by nutritionally deficiencies, significantly decreased. An improved nutrition environment
could significantly impact young children and children still in utero.13

       We begin by exploring the relationship between the arrival of the boll weevil and
nutrition. To do this we would, ideally, use the pellagra death rate to measure the nutri-
tion environment for all counties in the South. However, this data was not systemically
reported until after the boll weevil arrived in most of the South. One exception is North
Carolina, which reported county-level counts of pellagra deaths prior the the boll weevil's
invasion of the state in 1919.

       In the first two columns of Table 6 we explore the relationship between the arrival of
the boll weevil and the pellagra death rate controlling for county and year fixed effects.
Column (1) shows that counties in North Carolina saw decreases in the pellagra death
rate (i.e. improvements in the nutrition environment) after the arrival of the boll weevil.
This effect is concentrated in counties that were heavily black in the 1910 Census (column
(2)). Share black was standardized so that it has a mean of zero and a standard deviation
of one. Thus, counties with the average share black saw a decrease in the pellagra death
rate by 16%, while every standard deviation increase in the share black resulted in an
  13
    There is strong evidence that the long-run effects of nutrition on health and socioeconomic status
accrue mainly during the first three years of life. See, for example, Hoddinott et al. (2008) and Schroeder
et al. (1995)


                                                    20
additional 15% decrease in the pellagra death rate. Note that the main effect for share
black is not included because it is absorbed by the county fixed effects.

       Next, we demonstrate that men born after the arrival of the boll weevil were signifi-
cantly taller than men born prior to its arrival, and that these results are driven by black
men. To perform this analysis we use the U.S. World War II Army Enlistment Records,
1938-1946 from the National Archives and Records Administration. These records con-
tain enlistment information for over 8.5 million individuals who served in World War
II. Importantly, the records contain information on the state and county an individual
was residing in when they enlisted as well as the individual's height (in inches). We
restrict these records to men who lived in the same state they were born in, were drafted,
were born after 1915 and before 1925 (there are very few records for individuals born
after 1925), had a valid height and weight and were living in a state that had at least
one county that was invaded by the boll weevil after 1914.14 We restrict to individuals
born before 1925 because those born after 1925 might still have been growing when they
enlisted. After making these restrictions we make the assumption that individuals are
living in the same county they were born in when they enlisted. We recognize that, in
light of the information presented in this paper, this is likely not an accurate assumption.
However, any movements made within the state of birth (since we are restricting to men
who were living in their state of birth) will only introduce measurement error and bias
our coefficient estimates towards zero.

       Columns (3) and (4) of Table 6 shows results from regressions when height (in inches)
is the dependent variable. Both columns control for fixed effects for: the enlistee's county
of residence, birth year, and year of enlistment. Column (3) shows that enlistees born
after the arrival of the weevil were about 0.07 inches taller than enlistees born prior to
its arrival. Column (4) shows that this effect is almost entirely concentrated in black
enlistees.
  14
    To serve in WWII an individual had to be between 5 and 6.5 feet tall and weigh over 105 pounds.
Thus, a valid height is between 60 and 78 inches and a valid weight is 105 pounds and above. States that
had at least one county invaded by the boll weevil after 1914 are: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia,
Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia.


                                                  21
       If sons born after the arrival of the boll weevil grew up in a better nutrition envi-
ronment then we would expect to see differences in long-run outcomes between brothers
in the same household. We find evidence supportive of this idea in Table 7, which re-
estimates the results from Table 3 on the set of brothers in our sample (individuals that
have the same father) where at least one brother was born prior to the arrival of the boll
weevil and at least one brother was born after its arrival. While none of the coefficients
are significant, the magnitudes are economically meaningful and suggest an improvement
in early life conditions. In particular, black brothers born after the boll weevil had wages
that were about 3.5% higher and attained 0.22 years of additional schooling compared to
their siblings born prior to the weevil.15

       In this section, we presented evidence that demonstrated that individuals born af-
ter the arrival of the boll weevil experienced plausibly better early childhood nutrition
environments and that black children disproportionately benefited from this improved
nutrition. We showed that the pellagra death rate (a disease caused by nutritional de-
ficiencies) significantly decreased after the arrival of the boll weevil and these decreases
were concentrated in counties with high African American shares of the population. We
also showed the black WWII enlistees born after the boll weevil were significantly taller.
When comparing brothers within the same household we found that black brothers born
after the boll weevil had higher wages and years of schooling than their brothers that
were born before its arrival.




7        Conclusion

This paper studied the effects of a large exogenous and sustained negative agricultural
shock, the boll weevil, on black-white inequality in the first half of the twentieth century.
To do this we use complete count census data to generate a linked sample of fathers and
their sons and compare sons whose fathers initially resided in the same county. We find
  15
    These percentages are the linear combination of coefficients from the born post boll weevil term and
the interaction term in columns (1) and (3).


                                                  22
the shock impacted black and white sons differently. Although white sons born before
and after the boll weevil had similar wages and schooling outcomes, black sons born after
the boll weevil had significantly higher wages and years of schooling. The relative gains of
black sons born after the boll weevil narrowed the black-white wage gap by 12% without
controls for schooling and by 22% with controls for schooling. The relative gains for black
sons born after the boll weevil were widespread. Specifically, they were not driven by the
5% of black fathers who migrated out of the South. Sons of black fathers that did not
move out of the South still saw decreases in the black-white wage gap of up to 24%. The
available evidence suggests that the gains were likely driven by improvements in early life
conditions, especially early life nutrition, for black sons born after the weevil's arrival.

   This paper sheds new light on two issues of importance ­ the drivers of changes
in the black-white wage gap and the effects of a large negative agricultural shock on a
highly impoverished group. Most of the literature on the black-white wage gap focuses on
migration as a source of change. We find evidence of this as well, but also find large effects
of the boll weevil as a driver of change for black sons born after its arrival to families that
did not migrate. The boll weevil had negative short run effects on cotton production and
led to large scale migration. Strikingly, it appears that boll weevil improved early life
conditions for black sons born after its arrival. The likely mechanism is improved nutrition
and possibly less strenuous working conditions for pregnant women. Thus agricultural
disasters can lead to relative improvements for impoverished populations in the next
generation.




                                              23
References

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2019. "To the new
  world and back again: Return migrants in the age of mass migration." ILR Review,
  72(2): 300­322.

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2012. "Europe's
  tired, poor, huddled masses: Self-selection and economic outcomes in the age of mass
  migration." American Economic Review, 102(5): 1832­56.

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2014. "A nation
  of immigrants: Assimilation and economic outcomes in the age of mass migration."
  Journal of Political Economy, 122(3): 467­506.

Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Angrist. 2000. "How large are human-capital exter-
  nalities? Evidence from compulsory schooling laws." NBER macroeconomics annual,
  15: 9­59.

Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Steven Bednar, Teresa Molina, Quynh Nguyen, and
  Anant Nyshadham. 2016. "When It Rains It Pours: The Long-run Economic Im-
  pacts of Salt Iodization in the United States." Review of Economics and Statistics,
  1­45.

Ager, Philipp, Markus Brueckner, and Benedikt Herz. 2017a. "The boll weevil
  plague and its effect on the southern agricultural sector, 1889­1929." Explorations in
  Economic History, 65: 94­105.

Ager, Philipp, Markus Brueckner, and Benedikt Herz. 2017b. "Structural Change
  and the Fertility Transition in the American South."

Aizer, Anna, and Janet Currie. 2014. "The intergenerational transmission of inequal-
  ity: maternal disadvantage and health at birth." Science, 344(6186): 856­861.




                                          24
Almond, Douglas, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2011. "Health capital and the pre-
  natal environment: the effect of Ramadan observance during pregnancy." American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(4): 56­85.

Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. 2011. "Killing me softly: The fetal origins
  hypothesis." Journal of economic perspectives, 25(3): 153­72.

Almond, Douglas, Hilary W Hoynes, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach.
  2011. "Inside the war on poverty: The impact of food stamps on birth outcomes." The
  review of economics and statistics, 93(2): 387­403.

Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie, and Mariesa Herrmann. 2012. "From infant to
  mother: Early disease environment and future maternal health." Labour Economics,
  19(4): 475­483.

Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque. 2018. "Childhood circum-
  stances and adult outcomes: Act II." Journal of Economic Literature, 56(4): 1360­1446.

Baker, Richard B. 2015. "From the field to the classroom: the Boll Weevil's impact
  on education in Rural Georgia." The Journal of Economic History, 75(4): 1128­1160.

Baker, Richard B, John Blanchette, and Katherine Eriksson. 2020. "Long-run
  impacts of agricultural shocks on educational attainment: Evidence from the boll wee-
  vil." The Journal of Economic History, 80(1): 136­174.

Bhalotra, Sonia R, and Atheendar Venkataramani. 2015. "Shadows of the captain
  of the men of death: Early life health interventions, human capital investments, and
  institutions." Human Capital Investments, and Institutions (August 8, 2015).

Bloome, Deirdre, James Feigenbaum, and Christopher Muller. 2017. "Tenancy,
  Marriage, and the Boll Weevil Infestation, 1892­1930." Demography, 54(3): 1029­1049.

Boustan, Leah Platt. 2009. "Competition in the promised land: Black migration and
  racial wage convergence in the North, 1940­1970." The Journal of Economic History,
  69(3): 755­782.
                                           25
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F Katz. 2016. "The effects of
  exposure to better neighborhoods on children: New evidence from the Moving to Op-
  portunity experiment." American Economic Review, 106(4): 855­902.

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014.
  "Where is the land of opportunity? The geography of intergenerational mobility in the
  United States." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1553­1623.

Clay, Karen, Ethan Schmick, and Werner Troesken. 2019. "The rise and fall of
  pellagra in the American South." The Journal of Economic History, 79(1): 32­62.

Collins, William J, and Marianne H Wanamaker. 2014. "Selection and economic
  gains in the great migration of African Americans: new evidence from linked census
  data." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(1): 220­52.

Collins, William J, and Marianne H Wanamaker. 2015. "The great migration in
  black and white: New evidence on the selection and sorting of southern migrants." The
  journal of economic history, 75(4): 947­992.

Derenoncourt, Ellora. 2019. "Can you move to opportunity? Evidence from the Great
  Migration."

Edgar, Walter. 2012. South Carolina in the Modern Age. Univ of South Carolina Press.

Feigenbaum, James, Soumyajit Mazumder, and Cory Smith. 2019. "When Co-
  ercive Economies Fail: The Political Economy of the US South After the Boll Weevil."

Ferrie, Joseph P. 1996. "A new sample of males linked from the public use microdata
  sample of the 1850 US federal census of population to the 1860 US federal census
  manuscript schedules." Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisci-
  plinary History, 29(4): 141­156.

Hoddinott, John, John A Maluccio, Jere R Behrman, Rafael Flores, and
  Reynaldo Martorell. 2008. "Effect of a nutrition intervention during early childhood
  on economic productivity in Guatemalan adults." The lancet, 371(9610): 411­416.
                                          26
Hornbeck, Richard. 2012. "The enduring impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short-
  and long-run adjustments to environmental catastrophe." American Economic Review,
  102(4): 1477­1507.

Hornbeck, Richard, and Suresh Naidu. 2014. "When the levee breaks: black migra-
  tion and economic development in the American South." American Economic Review,
  104(3): 963­90.

Hoynes, Hilary, Doug Miller, and David Simon. 2015. "Income, the earned in-
  come tax credit, and infant health." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  7(1): 172­211.

Hunter, Walter David, and Bert Raymond Coad. 1923. The boll-weevil problem.
  US Dept. of Agriculture.

Lange, Fabian, Alan L Olmstead, and Paul W Rhode. 2009. "The impact of the
  boll weevil, 1892­1932." The Journal of Economic History, 69(3): 685­718.

Lindo, Jason M. 2011. "Parental job loss and infant health." Journal of health eco-
  nomics, 30(5): 869­879.

Linnemayr, Sebastian, and Harold Alderman. 2011. "Almost random: Evaluating
  a large-scale randomized nutrition program in the presence of crossover." Journal of
  Development Economics, 96(1): 106­114.

Long, Jason, and Joseph Ferrie. 2013. "Intergenerational occupational mobility
  in Great Britain and the United States since 1850." American Economic Review,
  103(4): 1109­37.

Margo, Robert A. 1995. "Explaining black-white wage convergence, 1940­1950." ILR
  Review, 48(3): 470­481.

Ransom, Roger L, and Richard Sutch. 2001. One kind of freedom: The economic
  consequences of emancipation. Cambridge University Press.


                                         27
Rossin, Maya. 2011. "The effects of maternity leave on children's birth and infant health
  outcomes in the United States." Journal of health Economics, 30(2): 221­239.

Saavedra, Martin, and Tate Twinam. 2020. "A machine learning approach to im-
  proving occupational income scores." Explorations in Economic History, 75: 101304.

Schroeder, Dirk G, Reynaldo Martorell, Juan A Rivera, Marie T Ruel, and
  Jean-Pierre Habicht. 1995. "Age differences in the impact of nutritional supplemen-
  tation on growth." The Journal of nutrition, 125(suppl 4): 1051S­1059S.

U.S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Agricultural Economics. 1951.
  Statistics on cotton and related data. Statistical Bulletin No. 99. GPO.




                                           28
Figures and Tables

                          Figure 1: Counties invaded by boll weevil




Notes: This map displays counties that were invaded by the boll weevil.




                                                 29
                                                                                  Figure 2: Event studies
     Difference in log(weekly wage) relative to year 0
                                                                                  Panel A: Weekly wage
     -.1        -.05         0         .05         .1




                                                           -6   -5   -4     -3      -2    -1    0      1      2   3   4    5   6
                                                                                      Years Since Boll Weevil

                                                                          Point estimate relative to year 0           95% CI


                                                                                 Panel B: Years of schooling
     Difference in years of schooling relative to year 0
          -.4        -.2        0         .2         .4




                                                           -6   -5   -4     -3      -2    -1    0      1      2   3   4    5   6
                                                                                      Years Since Boll Weevil

                                                                          Point estimate relative to year 0           95% CI

Notes: These figures show estimates of the coefficients k from Equation 2 in the text. The coefficients
for -6 and 6 years since the boll weevil are estimated using sons born 6 or more years before/after the
boll weevil.
                                                                                             30
                               Figure 3: Father Mobility by Race
                                    Panel A: Black Fathers




                                      Panel B: White Fathers




Notes: These maps shows the change in the number of black and white fathers from our sample that
are living in a county. To construct these maps we calculated the total number of black or white fathers
from our sample that moved into a county between the first time they were observed (either in 1900
or 1910) and the next time they were observed (either in 1910 or 1920). We then subtracted the total
number of fathers from our sample that moved out of the county to get a measure of net migration.
Counties shaded in blue saw an increase in the number of fathers (in-migration), while counties shaded
in red saw a decrease (out-migration). The values of the bins were chosen so that an equal number of
counties would be in each bin. Because we require that a father must be living in a county invaded by
the boll weevil when we first observe him (either in31
                                                    1900 or 1910) counties not invaded by the boll weevil
can only experience an in-migration of fathers.
                                 Figure 4: Son Mobility by Race
                                      Panel A: Black Sons




                                       Panel B: White Sons




Notes: These maps shows the change in the number of black and white sons from our sample that are
living in a county. To construct these maps we calculated the total number of black or white sons from
our sample that moved into a county between the first time they were observed (in 1900, 1910 or 1920)
and 1940. We then subtracted the total number of sons that moved out of the county from our sample
to get a measure of net migration. Counties shaded in blue saw an increase in the number of sons
(in-migration), while counties shaded in red saw a decrease (out-migration). The values of the bins were
chosen so that an equal number of counties would be in each bin.

                                                  32
                      Table 1: Summary statistics

                                                       Black    White
                                                        (1)      (2)
Panel A: Fathers

Percent living in same county                           0.37    0.46
Percent living in same state but different county       0.38    0.27
Percent living in different state in South              0.19    0.18
Percent moving out of South                             0.05    0.08
Percent moving from rural to urban                      0.15    0.12
Father's Initial LIDO score                             6.36    14.52
Change in Father's LIDO score                           0.90    0.08
  (2nd Census - 1st Census)
Father is a farmer                                      0.78     0.67
Father's age                                           37.46     38.69
Observations                                           41862    136357
Panel B: Sons

Living in father's initial county                        0.17    0.26
Moved out of father's initial county; same state         0.45     0.42
Moved out of father's initial state; stayed in South     0.19    0.20
Moved out of father's initial state; moved out of South 0.20      0.12
Moved out of birth state                                 0.35     0.26
Weekly wage                                             12.72    24.29
Years of schooling                                       4.97    8.46
Percent born post BW                                     0.09    0.11
Age in 1940                                             37.70    37.62
Observations                                            54871   194762




                                   33
                        Table 2: The boll weevil and long-run outcomes

                                                       Log(weekly wage)          Schooling
                                                        (1)        (2)              (3)
              Panel A

              Born post BW                            0.0230        0.00729       0.148
                                                     (0.00926)     (0.00813)      (0.0376)
              Years of schooling                                       X
              Observations                            154664        154664         249633
              Groups                                   656            656            656
              R-sq.                                   0.0801         0.265         0.0683
              Panel B

              Born post BW                           0.00192       -0.00976        0.100
                                                     (0.0124)      (0.0111)       (0.0531)
                                 
              Born post BW          High cotton      0.0349         0.0282         0.0783
                                                     (0.0144)       (0.0132)      (0.0574)
              Years of schooling                                        X
              Observations                            154664         154664        249633
              Groups                                   656             656           656
              R-sq.                                   0.0802          0.265        0.0683
Notes: Panel A of this table displays estimates for Equation 1 in the text, but excludes the black indicator
variable and the interaction term. Panel B provides estimates for Equation 1, but includes an interaction
if a county had a high cotton acreage as a share of total farm acreage (defined as having a cotton share
of total farm acreage above 11%). All columns control for: father's initial county fixed effects, birth
order dummies, birth year dummies, and census enumeration year dummies. Birth order is determined
by the age of the sons who have the same father in the censuses. Thus, it does not take into account
older siblings who either moved out of the house or died before the censuses were taken. Standard errors
are clustered at the fathers-initial-county level.
 = p < 0.10
 = p < 0.05
   = p < 0.01




                                                    34
                       Table 3: Differences in long-run outcomes by race

                                                  Log(weekly wage)          Schooling
                                                   (1)        (2)               (3)
                                                       
                  Black                         -0.632     -0.320           -3.542
                                                (0.00950) (0.0106)           (0.0440)

                  Born post BW                   0.00172       -0.00753      0.0639
                                                (0.00916)     (0.00826)      (0.0367)
                                    
                  Born post BW         Black    0.0775        0.0708         0.202
                                                (0.0180)      (0.0170)       (0.0678)
                  Observations                   154664        154664         249633
                  Groups                           656           656            656
                  R-sq.                           0.153         0.280          0.174
                  Years of Schooling                              X
Notes: This table displays estimates for Equation 1 in the text. All columns control for: father's initial
county fixed effects, birth order dummies, birth year dummies, and census enumeration year dummies.
Birth order is determined by the age of the sons who have the same father in the censuses. Thus, it does
not take into account older siblings who either moved out of the house or died before the censuses were
taken. Standard errors are clustered at the fathers-initial-county level.
 = p < 0.10
 = p < 0.05
   = p < 0.01




                                                   35
        Table 4: Changes in father SES from migrating out of boll weevil counties

                                               Change in OCC score          Change in LIDO score
                                                       (1)                           (2)
  Black                                              -0.0203                       -0.149
                                                    (0.0865)                      (0.0843)

  Father moves out of South                             -0.838                      3.266
                                                         (0.202)                    (0.201)
          
  Black      Father moves out of South                  1.851                       3.059
                                                        (0.325)                     (0.312)

  Father moves to urban                                 10.04                       9.559
        from rural                                      (0.166)                     (0.177)
          
  Black      Father moves urban                         -3.720                      -1.586
                                                         (0.217)                     (0.218)
  Observations                                           155414                      136677
  R-sq.                                                  0.0936                       0.166
  Mean of initial LIDO score                              17.69                       12.28
Notes: This table displays a descriptive regression where the dependent variable is the change in fathers'
OCC or LIDO scores from the first time they are observed to the second time they are observed. All
columns control for: father's initial county fixed effects, age dummies, and census enumeration year
dummies. Standard errors are clustered at the fathers-initial-county level.
 = p < 0.10
 = p < 0.05
   = p < 0.01




                                                   36
                Table 5: Differences in the returns to father migration by race

                                                                    Log(weekly wage)
        
           Father moved:                                     Within      Within     Out of
                                                              state      South      South
                                                               (1)         (2)        (3)
        Black                                               -0.330 -0.315 -0.318
                                                            (0.0119)    (0.0106)   (0.0106)

        Born post BW                                        -0.0104        -0.00325      -0.00656
                                                           (0.00890)      (0.00910)     (0.00850)
                           
        Born post BW          Black                        0.0814         0.0684        0.0693
                                                           (0.0213)       (0.0190)      (0.0172)

        Father moved                                       0.0221         0.0431         0.124
                                                           (0.00754)      (0.00773)     (0.00976)
                
        Black      Father moved                             0.0270        -0.0278       -0.0453
                                                            (0.0110)      (0.0132)      (0.0185)
                           
        Born post BW          Father moved                  0.0231       -0.000379       0.0511
                                                            (0.0128)      (0.0188)       (0.0256)
                                      
        Born post BW          Black      Father moved        -0.0315      0.00827         0.0774
                                                            (0.0343)      (0.0406)       (0.0738)
        Observations                                         154664        154664         154664
        Groups                                                 656           656            656
        R-sq.                                                 0.282         0.282          0.282
Notes: This table displays estimates for Equation 1 in the text, but includes a triple interaction for a
father migrating. All columns control for: father's initial county fixed effects, birth order dummies, birth
year dummies, census enumeration year dummies, dummies for the number of years of schooling, and a
full set of dummy variables for other possible moves (e.g. column (1) controls for dummy variables if
sons fathers moved states within the South or moved out of the South). Birth order is determined by
the age of the sons who have the same father in the censuses. Thus, it does not take into account older
siblings who either moved out of the house or died before the censuses were taken. Standard errors are
clustered at the fathers-initial-county level.
 = p < 0.10
 = p < 0.05
   = p < 0.01




                                                    37
  Table 6: The boll weevil's effect pellagra in North Carolina and the height of WWII
                                         enlistees

                                              Log(pellagra death rate)   Height (inches)
                                                 (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)
                                                                              
   Post BW                                    -0.231       -0.161      0.0683      0.0337
                                              (0.0662)     (0.0685)    (0.0191) (0.0214)

   Black                                                                                   -0.616
                                                                                           (0.0347)
              
   Post BW       Share black (or Black)                       -0.146                        0.137
                                                              (0.0641)                      (0.0381)
   Observations                                  882             882           398747        398747
   R-sq.                                        0.535           0.540          0.0293        0.0357
Notes: Columns (1) and (2) use county-level data for the 98 counties in North Carolina. In particular,
the log of the pellagra death rate is the dependent variable. We measure percent black in a county in
1910. Percent black is standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. All columns
control for: county fixed effects and year fixed effects. Accordingly, the main effect for percent black
is absorbed by the county fixed effects since there is no time variation. Standard errors are clustered
at the county. Columns (3) and (4) use individual level data for WWII enlistees. In particular, we use
the U.S. World War II Army Enlistment Records, 1938-1946 from the National Archives and Records
Administration. All columns control for fixed effects for the enlistee's county of residence, birth year,
and year of enlistment. See the text for more details on the data. Standard errors are clustered at the
county-of-residence at time of enlistment level.
 = p < 0.10
 = p < 0.05
   = p < 0.01




                                                   38
                       Table 7: Brother wage and schooling comparisons

                                                   Log(weekly wages)         Schooling
                                                      (1)      (2)              (3)
                    Born post BW                    0.0138   0.00841           0.111
                                                   (0.0363) (0.0339)          (0.110)
                                       
                    Born post BW          Black     0.0220       0.0106        0.113
                                                   (0.0477)     (0.0472)      (0.150)
                    Observations                    13760        13760         27667
                    Groups                           5963         5963         11129
                    R-sq.                            0.605        0.642        0.599
                    Years of Schooling                              X
Notes: This table displays estimates for Equation 1 in the text, but uses father fixed effect as opposed
to father's initial county fixed effects. All columns control for: father fixed effects, birth order dummies,
birth year dummies, and census enumeration year dummies. Birth order is determined by the age of the
sons who have the same father in the censuses. Thus, it does not take into account older siblings who
either moved out of the house or died before the censuses were taken. Standard errors are clustered at
the fathers-initial-county level.
 = p < 0.10
 = p < 0.05
   = p < 0.01




                                                     39
A       Appendix

                                 Table A.1: Linking results by race

                                          1900-1910        1900-1910        1910-1920        1910-1920
                                            Blacks          Whites            Blacks          Whites
                                             (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
 Fathers with at least                     181,795          362,624          383,984          647,485
  one son under 19

 Linked fathers                             40,441           109,020          82,890           191,619
 (Match rate)                                22%              30%              22%              30%

 Sons of linked fathers                     97,962           256,181          173,476         422,714

 Linked sons of linked fathers              19,188           71,367           35,683          123,395
 (Match Rate)                                20%              28%              21%             29%

 Number of fathers                          14,887           50,740           26,975           85,617

 Linked brothers                              893             7,611            3,487           15,676
 To be included in this sample a son has to be from a family with under 10 sons. The match rate we
report for linked sons of linked fathers is after we discard matches that are clearly incorrect. An incorrect
match is defined as a family where the father is initially observed in the cotton belt (in 1900 or 1910),
then observed outside the cotton belt (in 1910 or 1920), but is observed with a son who was born in
a state outside the cotton belt prior to the father being observed in the cotton belt. For example, an
incorrect match would be a father observed in North Carolina in 1910 and Pennsylvania in 1920, but in
1920 he is observed with a son who was born in 1908 in Pennsylvania.




                                                     40
                     Table A.2: Comparison of Linked and Base Samples

                                                    Black Males                  White Males
                                                 Linked Attempted             Linked Attempted
                                                           to Link                      to Link
 Panel A: Fathers
 Age                                            37.751          39.526       39.542          40.262
 Literacy                                       0.596            0.554       0.911            0.893
 In owner occupied housing                      0.230            0.220       0.523            0.503
 In urban area                                   0.114           0.117         0.162          0.162
 Farmer                                         0.759            0.752       0.642            0.636
 N                                               123331         565779        300639        1010109
 Panel B: Sons
 Age                                             8.187           8.394       8.553           8.696
 Literacy                                        0.280           0.291       0.464           0.474
 In owner occupied housing                       0.251           0.244       0.580           0.552
 In urban area                                   0.100           0.091       0.149           0.140
 Father in same county                           0.372           0.377       0.450           0.437
 Father in same state, different county           0.389          0.385       0.278           0.289
 Father in different state, in South              0.194          0.195       0.186           0.196
 Father moved out of South                        0.045          0.043       0.086           0.079
 Father moved rural to urban                      0.144          0.144       0.115           0.117
 N                                                54871         271438       194762         726822
Notes: The stars report significance from a test of equality of means. All tests were conducted relative
to the base sample that we attempted to link.
: There are a few observations for which owner occupied housing is not available. In Panel A there are
123,282 linked black father, 565,524 black sons that we attempted to link, 300,136 linked white fathers,
and 1,008,275 white sons that we attempted to link that have owner occupied housing status available.
In Panel B there are 54,846 linked black sons, 271,274 black sons that we attempted to link, 194,446
linked white sons, and 725,647 white sons that we attempted to link that have owner occupied housing
status available.
 = p < 0.10
 = p < 0.05
   = p < 0.01




                                                  41
                         Table A.3: Determinants of Fathers' Migration

                                   Black fathers          White fathers
                              Moved out Moved out Moved out Moved out
                              of county     of state of county     of state
                                  (1)          (2)       (3)          (4)
                                                             
             Father initially -0.103       -0.0243   -0.0649      -0.0631
                 farmer       (0.00959)    (0.00405)  (0.0167)    (0.00596)

             Father initial         0.147            0.0158         0.147          -0.0352
             age under 20           (0.0355)        (0.0182)        (0.0293)        (0.0131)

             Father age            0.0752          0.0243          0.0767          -0.0328
               20-29               (0.00621)       (0.00281)       (0.00433)       (0.00266)

             Father age            0.0398          0.0158          0.0426          -0.0146
               30-39               (0.00591)       (0.00264)       (0.00351)       (0.00215)

             Constant               0.674          0.0549           0.552           0.138
                                   (0.00960)       (0.00431)        (0.0164)       (0.00764)
             Observations            41862           41862           136357         136357
             R-sq.                   0.0124         0.00468         0.00757          0.0133
Notes: In columns (1) and (3) the dependent variable is an indicator that takes a value of one if they
father moved out of their initial county and a zero otherwise. In columns (2) and (4) the dependent
variable is an indicator that takes a value of one if the father moved out of the South and a zero otherwise.
The omitted age category is fathers aged 40 and over.
 = p < 0.10
 = p < 0.05
   = p < 0.01




                                                     42
          Table A.4: Determinants of Sons Moving out of Father's Original State

                                          Black sons                 White sons
                                   Moved out     Moved out    Moved out     Moved out
                                   of father's    of South    of father's    of South
                                 initial county             initial county
                                       (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)
                                                                      
      Father moved states          -0.0888        0.0426       -0.172         0.148
                                   (0.00404)      (0.00428)   (0.00463)      (0.00702)

      Born post BW                 0.0388           -0.0525           -0.0367          0.0227
                                   (0.00929)        (0.00662)         (0.00624)        (0.00515)

      Years of schooling           -0.00466          0.0321          -0.00576         0.00753
                                    (0.00102)       (0.000708)       (0.000931)       (0.000249)

      Age 20-29 in 1940             -0.0296          -0.0165            -0.0138         -0.00346
                                    (0.0124)         (0.00793)         (0.0262)        (0.00812)

      Age 30-39                    -0.0520           0.0393           -0.0428          0.0222
                                   (0.00931)         (0.00708)        (0.0212)         (0.00541)

      Age 40-49                    -0.0382           0.0561           -0.00203         0.0150
                                   (0.00740)         (0.00623)        (0.0184)         (0.00395)

      Constant                      0.245             0.00553          0.380            0.00360
                                   (0.00936)         (0.00643)         (0.0278)        (0.00472)
      Observations                   54871             54871            194762          194762
      R-sq.                          0.0157           0.0777            0.0360           0.0506
Notes: In columns (1) and (3) the dependent variable is an indicator that takes a value of one if a son
moved our of their father's initial county and a zero otherwise. In columns (2) and (4) the dependent
variable is an indicator that takes a value of one if the son moved out of the South and a zero otherwise.
The omitted age category is sons aged 50 and over.  = p < 0.10
 = p < 0.05
   = p < 0.01




                                                   43
Table A.5: Differences in long-run outcomes by race using linking with exact name and
                                         age

                                                  Log(weekly wage)         Schooling
                                                    (1)       (2)              (3)
                                                        
                   Black                         -0.680    -0.346          -3.806
                                                 (0.0165) (0.0178)          (0.0645)

                   Born post BW                  0.00789       -0.0116       0.141
                                                 (0.0194)     (0.0185)      (0.0699)
                                     
                   Born post BW         Black    0.0791       0.0733         0.232
                                                 (0.0461)     (0.0441)      (0.162)
                   Observations                   33410        33410         53920
                   Groups                          656           656          656
                   R-sq.                          0.149         0.279        0.159
                   Years of Schooling                             X
Notes: This table displays estimates for Equation 1 in the text. All columns control for: father's initial
county fixed effects, birth order dummies, birth year dummies, and census enumeration year dummies.
Birth order is determined by the age of the sons who have the same father in the censuses. Thus, it does
not take into account older siblings who either moved out of the house or died before the censuses were
taken. Standard errors are clustered at the fathers-initial-county level.
 = p < 0.10
 = p < 0.05
   = p < 0.01




                                                   44
         Table A.6: Differences in long-run outcomes by race using unique names

                                                  Log(weekly wage)         Schooling
                                                    (1)       (2)              (3)
                                                        
                   Black                         -0.651    -0.336          -3.608
                                                 (0.0122) (0.0135)          (0.0548)

                   Born post BW                   0.0174      0.00272       0.0861
                                                 (0.0127)     (0.0119)      (0.0502)
                                     
                   Born post BW         Black     0.0444      0.0461        0.301
                                                 (0.0283)     (0.0267)      (0.0990)
                   Observations                   70216        70216         115714
                   Groups                           655          655           655
                   R-sq.                          0.158         0.284         0.165
                   Years of Schooling                             X
Notes: This table displays estimates for Equation 1 in the text. All columns control for: father's initial
county fixed effects, birth order dummies, birth year dummies, and census enumeration year dummies.
Birth order is determined by the age of the sons who have the same father in the censuses. Thus, it does
not take into account older siblings who either moved out of the house or died before the censuses were
taken. Standard errors are clustered at the fathers-initial-county level.
 = p < 0.10
 = p < 0.05
   = p < 0.01




                                                   45
       Table A.7: Selection Into Migration Based on Pre-migration Characteristics

                                                    Black fathers        White fathers
                                                    Mean      N          Mean      N
           Fathers' Initial LIDO Score

           Non-migrant                              6.10      14579      14.15      58194
           Within state migrant                    6.28       14652      14.21       33988
           Within South migrant                    6.87        7290     14.68       22744
           Out of South migrant                    7.11        1799     17.37       10074
           Total                                    6.36      38320      14.52      125000
           Father Initially a Farmer

           Non-migrant                             0.833      15644  0.701          62825
           Within state migrant                   0.785       16063 0.680            37034
           Within South migrant                   0.713        8162 0.649            25001
           Out of South migrant                   0.693        1993 0.504            11497
           Total                                   0.785      41862  0.669          136357
           Fathers' Homeownership Rates

           Non-migrant                             0.285      15643  0.629          62784
           Within state migrant                   0.184       16062 0.451            36999
           Within South migrant                   0.215        8160 0.464            24949
           Out of South migrant                   0.202        1992 0.490            11464
           Total                                   0.229      41857  0.539          136196
           Fathers' Literacy Rates

           Non-migrant                             0.606      15644  0.913          62825
           Within state migrant                   0.566       16063 0.899            37034
           Within South migrant                   0.556        8162 0.899            25001
           Out of South migrant                   0.646        1993 0.930            11497
           Total                                   0.583      41862  0.908          136357
           Fathers' Initial Age

           Non-migrant                             38.44      15644  39.38          62825
           Within state migrant                   36.12       16063 37.03            37034
           Within South migrant                   38.78        8162 38.82            25001
           Out of South migrant                   35.24        1993 40.06            11497
           Total                                   37.46      41862  38.69          136357
           Distance of Move (Miles)

           Within state migrant                    96.11      15885      101.70     36338
           Within South migrant                    306.90      8101      381.76     24711
           Out of South migrant                    666.49      1980      838.76     11427
           Total                                   205.37     25966      313.40     72476
           N                                       25966                 72476
Notes: The stars report significance from a test of equality of means. All tests were conducted relative
to the non-migrant mean. We do not conduct the tests for the "Total" rows.
 = p < 0.10
 = p < 0.05                                        46
   = p < 0.01
                Table A.8: Differences in the returns to son migration by race

                                                                    Log(weekly          wage)
 
    Son location (in 1940):                           Father's Father's initial          Different       Different
                                                       initial state; different            state         state not
                                                       county      county                in South        in South
                                                         (1)         (2)                    (3)             (4)
                                                             
 Black                                               -0.394       -0.352                 -0.413          -0.472
                                                     (0.00856)    (0.0103)              (0.00939)        (0.0100)

 Born post BW                                         -0.0149          -0.0508            0.00276        -0.0167
                                                     (0.00881)         (0.00988)         (0.00892)      (0.00878)
                     
 Born post BW           Black                        0.112              0.109             0.113          0.148
                                                     (0.0163)           (0.0193)          (0.0194)       (0.0187)

 Son location (in 1940)                              -0.562            -0.363            -0.211          0.136
                                                     (0.0305)          (0.01000)         (0.00961)       (0.0103)
         
 Black      Son location                             -0.116            -0.142              0.0126        0.275
                                                     (0.0214)          (0.0122)           (0.0125)       (0.0136)
                     
 Born post BW           Son location                 -0.00693          0.0792            -0.0782          -0.0227
                                                     (0.0242)          (0.0128)           (0.0149)       (0.0181)
                                
 Black      Born post BW           Son location       0.0749             0.0253            0.0268        -0.0730
                                                     (0.0470)           (0.0274)          (0.0357)       (0.0356)
 Observations                                         154664             154664            154664         154664
 Groups                                                 656                656               656            656
 R-sq.                                                 0.323              0.324             0.323          0.325
Notes: This table displays estimates for Equation 1 in the text, but includes a triple interaction for a
son's location relative to their father's initial county. All columns control for: father's initial county fixed
effects, birth order dummies, birth year dummies, census enumeration year dummies, and dummies for
the number of years of schooling. Birth order is determined by the age of the sons who have the same
father in the censuses. Thus, it does not take into account older siblings who either moved out of the
house or died before the censuses were taken. Standard errors are clustered at the fathers-initial-county
level. All columns control for a set of dummy variables for other possible locations relative to fathers'
initial county. In columns (1)-(3) the omitted dummy is for sons that moved out of the South. In column
(4) the omitted dummy is sons that migrated to a different state within the South.
 = p < 0.10
 = p < 0.05
   = p < 0.01




                                                      47
     Figure A.1: Multi-step linking procedure




48
                                                                          Figure A.2: Event studies
                                                                           Panel A: Weekly wage
                             .2
     Difference in log(weekly wage) by race
            -.1         0    -.2  .1




                                                      -6   -5   -4   -3      -2    -1    0      1      2   3   4    5   6
                                                                               Years Since Boll Weevil

                                                                          Black relative to white          95% CI


                                                                          Panel B: Years of schooling
                                                 .6
        Difference in years of schooling by race
     -.4       -.2      0       .2       .4




                                                      -6   -5   -4   -3      -2    -1    0      1      2   3   4    5   6
                                                                               Years Since Boll Weevil

                                                                          Black relative to white          95% CI

Notes: These figures show estimates of the coefficients k from Equation 2 in the text, but we interact
the dummy variables for year of birth relative to the boll weevil with another dummy variable if an
individual is black. The coefficients for -6 and 6 years since the boll weevil are estimated using sons born
6 or more years before/after the boll weevil.        49
