                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE VARIANCE RISK PREMIUM IN EQUILIBRIUM MODELS

                                        Geert Bekaert
                                        Eric Engstrom
                                       Andrey Ermolov

                                      Working Paper 27108
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27108


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




The views expressed in this document do not necessarily reflect those of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, its staff, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Geert Bekaert, Eric Engstrom, and Andrey Ermolov. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Variance Risk Premium in Equilibrium Models
Geert Bekaert, Eric Engstrom, and Andrey Ermolov
NBER Working Paper No. 27108
May 2020
JEL No. E44,G12,G13

                                         ABSTRACT

The equity variance risk premium is the expected compensation earned for selling variance risk in
equity markets. The variance risk premium is positive and shows moderate persistence. High
variance risk premiums coincide with the left tail of the consumption growth distribution shifting
down. These facts, together with a positive, yet moderate, difference between the risk-neutral
entropy and variance of the aggregate market return, refute the bulk of the extant consumption-
based asset pricing models. We introduce a tractable habit model that does fit the data. In the
model, the variance risk premium depends positively (negatively) on "bad" ("good")
consumption growth uncertainty.

Geert Bekaert                                   Andrey Ermolov
Graduate School of Business                     Fordham University
Columbia University                             45 Columbus Avenue (Martino Hall) room 623A
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall                    New York, NY 10023
New York, NY 10027                              aermolov1@fordham.edu
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu

Eric Engstrom
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Washington DC 20551
eric.engstrom@frb.gov
1     Introduction
    Consumption-based asset pricing models are typically confronted with a set of salient
features regarding the first and second moments of interest rates, equity returns, and
in some cases, bond returns including a low risk free rate, a high equity premium and
high stock market volatility. At this point, the main paradigms, Campbell and Cochrane
(1999)'s habit model, Bansal and Yaron (2004)'s long run risk model and Rietz (1988)'s
disaster risk model can all match these stylized facts. A small subset of the vast literature
on consumption-based asset pricing has started to explore equity option prices to disci-
pline models and uncover what mechanisms best fit the data. These articles include, inter
alia, Du (2011) and Bekaert and Engstrom (2017) for habit models; Bollerslev, Tauchen
and Zhou (2009) and Drechsler and Yaron (2011) for long run risk models; Gabaix (2012)
and Wachter and Seo (2019) for disaster risk models. Option prices are powerful financial
instruments for this purpose, because they reflect at each point in time the conditional
expectation of market participants on the equity return distribution, combining their
preferences and views on the physical distribution of the underlying returns.

    In this article, we explore how these models fit salient facts regarding the variance risk
premium and where they fail. The variance risk premium is the expected compensation
earned for selling volatility in equity markets. While it can be measured from variance
swaps, it can also be measured as the difference between the famous VIX index and an
estimate of the conditional variance of equity returns, which is the approach we follow
here. Well-known as a "fear index" for asset markets (Whaley, 2000), the VIX uses a
weighted average of option prices to approximate the risk neutral variance and is usually
higher than the "physical" expected stock market variance. Essentially, this premium
reflects out of the money options being more expensive than near the money option
prices (Britten-Jones and Neuberger, 2000; Bakshi, Kapadia, and Madan, 2003; Martin
2017). The variance premium also varies considerably through time. In periods of stress,
out-of-the money put options that insure against market downturns become relatively
more expensive than call options; protection against increases in variance become more
expensive as well and the VIX and the variance risk premium both increase.

    We confront representative models in the literature with three sets of stylized facts
regarding the variance risk premium. The first set comprises time series properties of
the variance risk premium. While many models are presumably calibrated to fit these

                                                1




                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
features, the relative fit is still quite different across models. Moreover, the mere fact
that the variance risk premium is positive refutes all models that employ only Gaussian
shocks to key state variables. Such a result has surfaced in the literature before, but
we provide an alternative proof and an alternative result showing that when returns and
the pricing kernel are jointly conditionally log-normally distributed, the variance risk
premium can only be positive if the equity premium is negative. This result is useful
as the standard habit model (Campbell and Cochrane, 1999) and long-run risk model
(Bansal and Yaron, 2004, when solved using the typical first order approximation), are
conditionally Gaussian.

   Our second stylized fact regards the relation between tails in the variance risk pre-
mium and consumption growth distributions. For consumption-based asset pricing mod-
els to have any chance of explaining options data, there must be correlation between the
variance risk premium and consumption growth. However, mimicking the general lack
of correlation between asset returns and consumption growth, the correlation between
the variance risk premium and consumption growth is negligible using real consump-
tion growth of non-durables and services (1990:M1-2017:M12) to measure consumption
growth. The correlation with the variance premium at time t is -0.13 using "future" con-
sumption growth between time t and t + 1; and -0.05 using consumption growth between
time t - 1 and t correlated with the variance risk premium at time t.

   However, there is a strong correlation in the tails of the distribution. When the
variance risk premium is relatively high, the consumption growth distribution becomes
more negatively skewed, and the quantile shifts for the consumption growth distribution
when conditioning on low versus high variance risk premiums are statistically significant
for the left tail. These empirical facts pose a challenge for most of the models we examine.

   Finally, as our third stylized fact, we rely on Martin (2017) who raises several issues
regarding the measurement of risk neutral variances and shows that the difference between
the risk-neutral entropy and the risk-neutral variance of returns provides a challenging
data moment for various models in the literature. The moderately positive difference
between the risk-neutral entropy and variance of returns is an economically important
moment, because it tells us that the left tail of the risk-neutral aggregate equity return
distribution is heavier than the right tail, but the difference is not large. We examine
a wider set of models than Martin (2017) does, taking the opportunity to clarify the


                                               2




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
empirical and theoretical differences between various concepts of option-implied variances
proposed in the literature.

    We find that all models are rejected by these stylized facts. Therefore, we introduce
a tractable version of the "Bad Environment Good Environment" (BEGE henceforth)
framework of Bekaert and Engstrom (2017), which can actually fit the data. We estimate
two versions of the model. In the main version, all risk premiums are driven by "good"
(positively skewed) and "bad" (negatively skewed) consumption growth volatility state
variables, which also drive the variation in stochastic risk aversion ("habit"). In this
model the risk-neutral variance and thus the variance risk premium, loads much more
heavily on "bad" volatility, than does the physical variance, generating a sizable variance
risk premium. The simplest version of the model, as do all other models, does fail to fit the
persistence of the variance risk premium, which is surprisingly low (less than 60%). Most
asset prices require highly persistent state variables to generate sufficiently variable equity
returns and price dividend ratios. While different parameter configurations of our base
model can fit the variance risk premium persistence, the fit wit respect to other moments
then deteriorates slightly. The model can fit the variance risk premium persistence well,
when when we allow for a small pure sentiment shock.

    The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 establishes the stylized
facts in the data. Section 3 outlines the various existing consumption based models we
examine and how they fit the stylized facts. Section 4 describes our new model and its fit
with the data. To provide more over-identification, section 5 investigates how the various
models fit the correlation between volatility and equity premiums. Section 6 concludes.


2     The Variance Risk Premium in the Data
2.1    The Variance Risk Premium
    The variance risk premium is usually defined as the difference between the risk neutral
and physical conditional variance of stock returns. The risk-neutral variance can be
computed using option prices or variance swaps (see Bakshi and Madan, 2000; Martin
2017, and Ait-Sahalia, Karaman, and Mancini, 2018). For now, we simply use the square
of the well-known VIX index, published by the CBOE, the implied option volatility of the




                                               3




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
S&P500 index for contracts with a maturity of one month.1 The risk-adjusted measure
shifts probability mass to states with higher marginal utility (bad states) and this implies
that in many realistic economic settings, the variance risk premium is increasing in the
economy's risk aversion. Our data start on January 02, 1990 (the start of the model-free
VIX series)2 and covers the period until the end of 2017.

       We collect high-frequency (5 minute) returns on the S&P500 index to compute the
monthly physical conditional variance, Vt , as:

                     (22)
         Vt = Et [RVt+1 ].                                                                           (1)

            (22)
Here RVt+1 is the S&P500 realized variance measured as the sum of squared 5 minute
returns and close-to-open overnight returns over the next month (22 trading days).3 The
common approach to estimate the conditional variance in (1) uses empirical projections
of the realized variance on variables in the information set. Hence, the problem is reduced
to one of variance forecasting. Building on Corsi (2009) and Bekaert and Hoerova (2014),
we use the one period lagged realized monthly variance, realized variances of the last
and last 5 trading days (computed using high-frequency data) and the squared VIX, as
predictors. While Bekaert and Hoerova (2014) show that alternative, more complicated
models sometimes provide a slightly better fit, this model always provides a very good fit.
For robustness, we also consider an AR(1) model for realized variances and fit a simple
GJR-GARCH(1,1) model (Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle, 1993) on stock returns to
extract the conditional variance, with no meaningful differences in results.

       We graph the annualized end-of-month variance risk premium in the top panel of
Figure 1. The variance risk premium is counter-cyclical peaking in all three recessions
but also in 1998 and 2011. The variance risk premium as defined above has unintuitive
economic units: for instance, the annualized mean is 0.0196. In some of our empirical
work, we therefore employ the "volatility risk premium", the conditional risk neutral
   1
      Jiang and Tian (2005) show that the actual computation of the VIX index also introduces errors
relative to the theoretical concept.
    2
      The CBOE changed the methodology for calculating the VIX, initially measuring implied volatility
for the S&P100 index, to be measured in a model-free manner from a panel of option prices (see Bakshi,
Madan and Kapadia, 2003, for details) only in September 2003. It then backdated the new model-free
index to 1990 using historical option prices.
    3
      We use actual simple returns in these computations, whereas some articles suggest using logarithmic
returns. However, we find that realized variances using either method are indistinguishable from each
other, which is not surprising given the high frequency nature of the returns.

                                                   4




                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
                                                             1
minus physical conditional volatility, that is V IXt - Vt 2 . These numbers, in annualized
percent, are easy to interpret. For example, for our sample, the unconditional stock
market volatility is 14.64%, the average conditional volatility is 14.42%, and the average
volatility premium is 5.36%. The volatility of the volatility premium is 4.02%. We graph
the end-of-month volatility risk premium in the bottom panel of Figure 1. To avoid any
                                                                                          1
confusion, we always refer to V IXt2 - Vt as the variance risk premium and to V IXt - Vt 2
as the volatility risk premium.

2.2    Consumption Growth and the Variance Risk Premium
   To link the variance risk premium to consumption growth, we obtain U.S. monthly
consumption growth for non-durables and services from NIPA from 1990:M1 to 2017:M12.
Our goal is to verify the shape of the consumption distribution as a function of variance
risk premium realizations. The data paucity necessitates us to contrast just two condi-
tional distributions, depending on either "low" or "high" variance risk premiums.

   In Table 1, we show the 10th and 90th percentiles of the consumption growth distri-
bution together with the median, conditional on observing either a high or low variance
risk premium. We define a high (low) variance premium as one above (below) the 80th
(20th ) unconditional percentile in the data over the sample period. Conditioning on more
extreme tails is impossible given the scant number of monthly observations we have.
Strikingly, the distribution of consumption growth is nearly identical at the median and
90th percentile, but the lower tail is 0.21% lower (2.4 percent lower at an annual rate) in
periods of high variance risk premiums. This difference is statistically significant at the
1% level, where the significance is based on a block-bootstrap with the block length of
60 months using 10,000 replications of historical length.

   Figure 2 presents a graphical illustration of what is essentially a quantile shift of the
negative tail of the consumption growth distribution. It shows that the entire distribution
below the median shifts down going from low to high variance risk premiums. The shift
at the 20th percentile is also significant (at the 10% level). This downward quantile shift
reveals a tantalizing link between the real economy and option prices. It also immediately
reveals that the data generating process for consumption growth must accommodate a
shift in its distribution over time. Because this empirical fact is an important ingredient
in our analysis, we provide some robustness checks in Table 2. In Panels A and B, we
show robustness of the result to an alternative choice of the lower/upper percentile, using
                                               5




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
the 75/25th and 85/15th percentiles. In Panel C, we use the conditional variance of a
GARCH model to compute the variance risk premium and in Panel D the VIX itself.4
The quantile shift happens in both cases, but is now only statistically significant at the 5%
level. Thus, the general result is that in times of great financial uncertainty, as measured
by the option implied variance of stock returns or its difference with physical variance,
consumption growth appears more left skewed. In the context of a consumption-based
asset pricing model, this means that financial uncertainty as priced into options may well
reflect real consumption risks.

      As a last robustness check, we verify whether the result holds up for a much longer
sample by obtaining annual real per capita consumption growth of non-durables and ser-
vices for the 1929-2017 period. This period has fewer time series observations than our
monthly sample, but witnessed multiple, often severe, recessions. The variance risk pre-
mium is only directly observable for the 1990-2017 period. In order to obtain estimates of
the variance risk premium for the 1929-1989 period, we regress the variance risk premium
during 1990-2017 on the sum of squared realized daily returns excluding dividends for
the past week, month, and quarter and the price-to-earnings ratio (as the price-dividend
ratio exhibits a pronounced time trend during the sample). Note that here we are not
able to use the high-frequency realized returns, because they are not available in the early
sample. We use realized returns excluding dividends, because it implies a slightly higher
explanatory power for the variance risk premium. It does not affect our consumption
growth shift results. We save the regression coefficients and standard deviation of the
residuals. We then conduct a block-bootstrap analysis, as follows:

      1. We block-bootstrap the annual 1929-2017 data using a block length of 5 years.

      2. Inside the bootstrap, for observations falling in between 1929 and 1989, we input
the variance risk premium using the independent variables at that point of time with
the OLS coefficient, previously estimated, plus a randomly sampled Gaussian shock with
zero-mean and the standard deviation equal to the standard deviation of the regression
residuals above.

      3. For the block-bootstrapped data, we compute percentiles of the consumption
growth distribution conditional on a high variance risk premium realization, defined as
above the 80th percentile of the sampled variance risk premium distribution, and the low
  4
      Bekaert and Engstrom (2017) report a similar result for the VIX.

                                                   6




                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
variance risk premium, defined as below the 20th percentile of the sampled variance risk
premium distribution.

   The point estimates for the conditional consumption growth percentiles are medians
across 10,000 block-bootstrap runs. The statistical significance of the difference between
consumption growth percentiles conditional on high and low variance risk premium values
is computed as the percentage of block-bootstrap runs where the difference is below/above
0. Figure 3 shows the results. The downward shift of the consumption growth distribution
when the variance risk premium is high is very similar to what we observe for the most
recent monthly data. The shifts are statistically significant at the 5% level for the 10th
and 20th percentiles. The 10th percentile shifts from slightly positive consumption growth
when the variance premium is low to -4% when the variance premium is high. Generally,
the shift is a bit more extreme than with monthly data and starts to be already visible
around the 60th percentile.

2.3    Martin's (2017) "bound"
   The VIX is actually a weighted average of call and put option prices. Because
the weights are proportional to the inverse of the squared strike price (see Bakshi and
Madan, 2000, and Britten-Jones and Neuberger, 2000), out of the money put prices re-
ceive relatively more weight. Martin (2017) shows that the V IX 2 can be interpreted
as twice the risk-neutral entropy of the simple return (the entropy for a variable X is
2 · (ln[E (X )] - E [ln(X )])), and then shows that the risk neutral variance can be approx-
imated using equally weighted call and option prices. He denotes the square root of the
risk-neutral variance the "SVIX". While empirically SVIX and VIX are typically close to
one another, the VIX is always higher than SVIX. Economically, the difference between
VIX and SVIX is an informative moment, because it indicates that the left tail of the
risk-neutral distribution of the aggregate equity return is only moderately heavier than
the right tail. Martin (2017) then shows that this difference is very difficult to fit by
existing consumption-based models. While Martin's article is mostly about using the
SVIX index as a lower bound for the equity premium, we use the empirical difference
between the VIX and SVIX as a powerful statistic to help refute existing consumption
based asset pricing models.




                                               7




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
3         The Variance Risk Premium and the Consumption-
          based Asset Pricing Literature
        The previous section has uncovered three sets of stylized facts involving the volatility
premium and option implied volatility, which we will demonstrate to be very challenging
for existing consumption-based asset pricing models to fit. Here, we survey the various
models and the mechanism they use to generate a meaningful volatility premium, and
then verify whether they actually fit the stylized facts. We start with a theoretical result
showing that log-normal models cannot possibly fit the facts, which is powerful as it
immediately refutes the original formulation of the habit and long-run risk models as
suitable candidates.

3.1        The Variance Risk Premium under Log-Normality
        Campbell and Cochrane's (1999) habit model and the first-order approximation to
Bansal and Yaron's (2004) long-run risk model are conditionally Gaussian.5 Various
results in the extant literature (see e.g. Bakshi and Madan, 2006, and Bekaert and
Hoerova, 2014) suggest non-Gaussianities in the data generating process for returns are
necessary to produce a positive variance risk premium. Drechsler and Yaron (2011) and
Martin (2017) prove a more general result, indicating that when returns and the pricing
kernel are jointly log-normally distributed, the variance risk premium is exactly zero. In
Internet Appendix I, we provide an alternative proof of this theorem, making use of a
risk neutral moment generating function.

        Another result that can be derived rather straightforwardly and offers useful economic
intuition about the variance risk premium is that log-normal models in general cannot
generate simultaneously a positive variance risk premium and a positive equity premium.
The result is rather intuitive: for the risk neutral variance (which apart from pure physical
volatility also reflects covariation of returns with the pricing kernel) to be consistently
above the physical volatility, the covariance between returns and the kernel must be
positive. However, if equity returns tend to offer high returns in bad times (states with
    5
    In the long-run risk literature, it is customary to assume that endogenous variables are linear func-
tions of the state variables. Pohl, Schmedders and Wilms (2018) show that this approximation is actually
rather poor in many settings, but there are almost no published long-run risk papers that use more ac-
curate solution techniques. The solution method for the habit model in Campbell and Cochrane (1999)
was shown to be inaccurate by Wachter (2005). In the Campbell and Cochrane-type of models below,
we use Wachter's more accurate solution method to solve the model.
                                                   8




                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
high marginal utility), the equity premium must be negative. We defer a formal proof to
Internet Appendix I.

3.2       Extant Models of the Variance Risk Premium
   We reconsider how four different models fit the stylized facts outlined in Section II.
The first model is the "vol of vol" model of Bollerslev, Tauchen and Zhou (2009). It is
important to mention that this paper is one of the first to show that the variance risk pre-
mium predicts stock returns, and the theoretical part of the paper was perhaps not likely
meant as the key contribution. They consider a representative agent with Epstein-Zin
(1989) preferences and consumption (and dividend) growth featuring stochastic volatility.
A second state variable drives time-variation in the volatility of the volatility shocks ("vol
of vol"). The second model, Drechsler and Yaron (2011), is a straightforward extension of
the long-run risk model meant to fit variance risk premium features. Drechsler and Yaron
(2011) add several components to the long-run model including a slow moving compo-
nent of the volatility and importantly jumps to the long-run risk variable (the conditional
mean of consumption growth ) and to volatility. We use the model in Wachter (2013) as
the representative of the disaster risk paradigm. The model features Epstein-Zin prefer-
ences, and (disaster) jumps to the consumption and dividend shocks. While the model
was not designed to fit options data, Wachter and Seo (2019) show that this particular
specification fits option prices rather well. Finally, we consider the habit model of Bekaert
and Engstrom (2017). They add a "bad environment-good environment" structure for
consumption growth to Campbell and Cochrane's set up. In this model, consumption
growth features "bad" and "good" volatility, with shocks to bad (good) volatility decreas-
ing (increasing) skewness in consumption growth. We now briefly discuss the models in
detail.

3.2.1     Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009)

   The utility function is:
                       1-                 1
                                       - 
        Ut = (1 -  )Ct  
                            +  (Et Ut1
                                     +1 ) ,                                                (2)

where Ct is consumption at time t, 0 <  < 1 reflects the agent's time preferences,  is
                                                1-
the coefficient of relative risk-aversion,  =   1- 1   and  is the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution.
                                                9




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
   The dynamics for log consumption and dividend growth, gt+1 and dt+1 , respectively,
are:

         gt+1 = dt+1 = µg + g,t zg,t+1 ,
           2               2  
         g,t +1 = a +  g,t +     qt z,t+1 ,
                                                                                        (3)
         qt+1 = aq + q qt + q qt zq,t+1 ,
         zg,t+1  N (0, 1), z,t+1  N (0, 1), zq,t+1  N (0, 1),

                                         2
where µg is the consumption growth mean, g,t the conditional variance of the consump-
tion growth, and qt is the conditional variance of the consumption growth variance. It's
the latter variable that drives variance risk premium variation in this article.

   The model is calibrated monthly to fit reasonable unconditional levels of the equity
premium and risk-free rate and the slope coefficient from regressing excess equity returns
on the variance of the risk premium. However, for this calibration exercise the authors
do not refer to any particular time period. The parameters are reported in Internet
Appendix II.

3.2.2       Drechsler and Yaron (2011)

   The utility function is:
                          1-                   1
                                          - 
         Ut = (1 -  )Ct    
                               +  (Et Ut1
                                        +1 ) .                                          (4)


   There are 5 macroeconomic variables, which dynamics follow:
                                                              
            gt+1g0   0 1 0     0                            0  gt
                                                              
         xt+1  x0  0 x   0     0                            0  xt 
                                                               
                  
          2   2 
          ¯  =  ¯  + 0 0 ¯2    0
                                                               2
                                                            0                 ~t+1 ,
                                                               ¯  + Gt zt+1 + J         (5)
          t+1   0                                             t
          2   2  0 0 (1 -  2 )  2                           0  2
          t+1   0                                             t 
          dt+1  d0   0   0     0                            0  dt

where gt is logarithmic consumption growth, xt is the persistent component of consump-
tion growth and dt denotes dividend growth. The volatility dynamics is governed by two
         2                                            2
factors: t represents the conditional volatility and ¯t is the long-run mean component
   2
of t .

                                                    10




                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
       The vector zt+1 represents Gaussian innovations with Gt capturing time-variation in
volatility:

         zt+1  N (05×1 , I5×5 ),                                             (6)
                                                                             2
         Gt Gt = diag ( · 1 -  )  diag ( · 1 -  ) + diag ( ·  )  diag ( ·  ) t ,
                                                       
                g              g            1 0 0 0 cd
                                                       
               x            x               0 1 0 0 0 
                                                       
          =           ,  =            ,  =  0  0 1 0 0 ,
                                                       
                 ¯ 2             ¯
                                   2       
                                                       
               2            2               0 0 0 1 0 
                                                       
                d              d            cd 0 0 0 1

where diag is the vector-to-diagonal matrix operator and · is the element-wise multipli-
cation operator.
       ~t+1 is a 5 × 1 vector of demeaned jump shocks: J
       J                                               ~t+1 = Jt+1 - Et Jt+1 . Jt+1 is a
                                                                    Nt i
5 × 1 vector of compound-Poisson jumps: Jt+1,i =                    j =1
                                                                        +1
                                                                             ij , where Nti+1 is the Poisson
counting process for the ith jump component and ij is the size of the jump that occurs
upon the j th increment of Nti+1 . The intensity process for Nt+1 is l1 t
                                                                        2
                                                                          , where l1 =
 0 l1,x 0 l1,2 0 : there are only jumps in the variance and the persistent component
of consumption growth.6 The persistent component of the expected consumption growth
jump size follows an i.i.d. demeaned Gamma distribution multiplied by -1 (that is,
the distribution is negatively skewed with limited right and unlimited left tails): x 
-(x , µ
      x
       x
         ) + µx . The variance jump size follows an i.i.d. Gamma distribution: 2 
          µ 2                                 µi
(2 ,       2
              ).   Here, i is the shape and   i
                                                 ,   (i = x,  2 ) are the scale parameters, respectively.
These jump variables deliver the potential non-Gaussianities driving variation in the
variance risk premium. However, consumption growth itself is conditionally Gaussian in
this model.

       The model is calibrated monthly to match a wide set of unconditional macroeconomic
and financial moments of quarterly US data 1930-2006. The parameters are in Internet
Appendix II.
   6
       There are no jumps in the long-run mean of the volatility.




                                                        11




                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
3.2.3        Wachter (2013)

   Wachter's model is formulated in continuous time. The utility function is:
                            
                                                     1
        Ut = Et                 (1 -  )Us (lnCs -      ln((1 -  )Us )ds.                      (7)
                       t                            1-

   Consumption (Ct ) and dividends (Dt ) follow:

        dCt = µCt- dt + Ct- dBt + (eZ - 1)Ct- dNt ,
                     1                                                                        (8)
        dDt = (µ + ( - 1) 2 )Dt- dt + Dt- dBt + (eZ - 1)Dt- dNt ,
                     2

where Bt is a Brownian motion and Nt is a Poisson process with a time-varying intensity
                          
t : dt = (   ¯ - t )dt +  t dB,t with B,t also a Brownian motion. Bt , B,t , and
Nt are independent. Z is a time-invariant distribution independent of Bt , B,t , and Nt
which determines the jump (disaster) size. All processes are assumed to be right contin-
uous with left limits. For process x, xt- denotes limst xs (intuitively, this corresponds
to approaching from s < t), and xt denotes limst xs (intuitively, this corresponds to
approaching from s > t).

   Parameters are chosen through a combination of estimation and calibration. First,
the distribution of jumps in consumption (eZ - 1) is estimated from a set of 17 OECD
and 5 non-OECD countries between 1870 and 2006. The unconditional jump (disaster)
probability, ¯ , is taken from Barro and Ursua (2008). Second, the remaining parameters
are calibrated to match a set of unconditional macroeconomic and financial moments of
quarterly US data for the 1947-2010 period. Importantly, the moments are matched for
the sample conditional on no disasters, since there have been no consumption disasters in
1947-2010 US data. For this purpose, the model is Euler-discretized and sampled at the
monthly frequency and months with no disasters are picked to compute model-implied
moments. The parameters are reported in Internet Appendix II.

3.2.4        Bekaert and Engstrom (2017)

   The utility function falls into the external habit class:
              
                            (Cj - Hj )1- - 1
        Et           j -t                    ,                                                (9)
             j =t
                                 1-

                                                          12




                            Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
where Cj is consumption and Hj is the habit stock with Cj > Hj .

   Log-consumption and dividend growth (gt+1 and dt+1 , respectively) follow:

             ¯ + cp p,t+1 - cn n,t+1 ,
      gt+1 = g
             ¯ + dp p,t+1 - dn n,t+1 ,
      dt+1 = g
      p,t+1  (¯
              p, 1) - p
                      ¯,                                                                     (10)
      n,t+1  (nt , 1) - nt ,
             ¯ + n (nt - n
      nt+1 = n           ¯ ) + nn n,t+1 ,

where (x, y ) is a gamma distribution with shape parameter x and scale parameter y .
                                                           Ct -Ht
   Following Campbell and Cochrane (1999), St =              Ct
                                                                  ,   which can be interpreted as
the consumption surplus ratio, is modeled in logs as an autoregressive process:

             ¯ + (st - s
      st+1 = s         ¯) + t (gt+1 - g
                                      ¯),
           
            1 1 - 2(st - s ¯) - 1, if st < st,max
      t = st                                      ,
           0,                        otherwise
                                                                                             (11)
                   1     ¯2 ),
      st,max    ¯ + (1 - S
               =s         t
                   2
      ¯t =       2 p    2 n )
                                  
      S         (cp ¯ + cn t        b
                                      .
                                1-- 


   Note that the surplus ratio shock is perfectly correlated with consumption growth.
The modeling of the price of risk variable, t , is analogous to the specification in Campbell
and Cochrane (1999), adjusted for the presence of consumption heteroskedasticity.

   The model is estimated in 3 steps. First, the consumption growth parameters (¯
                                                                                g , cp ,
cn , p
     ¯, n
        ¯ , n , and nn ) are estimated via classical minimum distance to match uncondi-
tional moments of quarterly US consumption growth for the 1958-2013 period. Second,
dividend growth parameters (dp and dn ) are estimated to match unconditional dividend
growth volatility and the correlation between consumption and dividend growth. Third,
the preference parameters ( ,  , s
                                 ¯, , and b) are estimated to minimize the distance
between the model-implied and 1958-2013 US unconditional asset pricing moments. The
parameters are reported in Internet Appendix II.


                                                13




                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
3.3    General Asset Return Properties
   We start by showing how the various models fit the standard salient asset features in
Table 3. All the moments shown are annualized monthly values. For the data moments,
we show two samples, 1990 to 2017 to correspond to the available data we have for the
variance risk premium; and a longer sample extending to 1969. The real risk-free rate
is measured as the difference between the monthly nominal risk-free rate from Ibbotson
Associates and the monthly counterpart to the Survey of Professional Forecasters ex-
pected inflation for the corresponding quarter; specifically, with  the quarterly inflation
                         1
forecast, we use (1 +  ) 3 . The risk-free rate is lower in the short sample (0.64%) than
in the longer sample (1.35%) and has a variability of around 2%. For the stock market,
we use logarithmic returns on the S&P500 index in excess of the risk-free rate. The eq-
uity premium is 4.92% over the short sample and 6.15% over the longer sample with the
volatility at about 15%. We also report the mean and variance of the price dividend ratio,
noting that this variable has been subject to trending behavior due to tax policy changes
in the U.S. (Boudoukh et al., 2007). The standard errors in parentheses are obtained
by block-bootstrapping 10,000 times series of historical length using a block length of 60
months, to accommodate persistence in the levels and volatilities of the variables.

   Because we use the calibrations/estimations provided in the various original papers,
we do not expect the various models to fit all these moments exactly. The fit of the BTZ
model is particularly poor, because their calibration focused on the unconditional equity
premium and risk-free levels. However, their calibration also implies very unrealistic
values for other important moments. These values are not reported in the article but
can be directly computed from the formulas in the paper. For instance, the average
annualized physical variance of the equity return obtained by plugging the values into
equation (12) in the paper is 5.70%, which is about one third of the data counterpart.
As another example, plugging the numbers into equation (6) in the paper results in an
average annual price dividend ratio of 2.04. A more serious problem with the model
part in Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009) is that the model parameters imply that
                                 2
the consumption growth variance (g,t ) and the variance of consumption growth variance
(qt ) both hit the zero-lower bound in more than 10% of the simulations. This results in
significant deviations of simulated asset prices from their theoretical counterparts. For
instance, theoretically the unconditional equity premium in Table 3 is 7.79%, but the
population mean from sampling 100,000 observations is 14.12%. The population value is
                                               14




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
much higher, because the equity premium is increasing in consumption growth volatility
and the volatility of volatility variables, and simulated values for these volatilities are
higher than implied by the theoretical model, because the left tails of their distributions
are cut due to the zero-lower bound. Analogously, sampling 100,000 observations to infer
the population mean for the interest rate delivers an average risk-free rate of -2.95%
compared to the theoretical value of 0.69% in Table 3. The population value is much lower
for the same reason as before, but now the risk-free rate is decreasing in the consumption
growth volatility and the volatility of volatility variable. Apparently, the theoretical asset
pricing formulas are unreliable when zero-lower bounds are violated so frequently.

   The DY model generally does well with respect to the risk-free rate and equity return
moments generating values for the means of both variables within a two standard devia-
tion band around the data moments. It slightly overshoots equity return volatility, but it
also underestimates the variability of the price-dividend ratio by an order of magnitude.

   The asset pricing statistics for Wachter's model are computed for the population
including disasters. Asset pricing statistics for the sample excluding disasters (which
Wachter argues to be the best comparison for the post-war US data) are not very different
(for instance, the average equity premium is slightly higher and less volatile), because the
intensity of the disaster (t ) and shocks to it, not the disaster realization itself, are the
key variables driving return dynamics. The sample including realized disasters, unlike
the sample excluding disasters, implies rather extreme consumption and dividend growth
statistics: for instance, the annualized consumption growth volatility in the sample with
disasters is 6.22% versus 2.00% in the sample without disasters. However, a consumption
growth model without disasters would have no chance to fit the link between consumption
growth and variance risk premiums. Table 3 reports the "true" (default-free) risk-free rate
in Wachter (2013), whereas Wachter (2013) defines a government bond rate assuming the
bond defaults with a probability of 40% when a consumption disaster occurs. This results
in a substantially higher "risk-free" rate of 1.00% versus 0.47% in Table 3. Wachter's
model generally fits the salient asset return features well, producing average risk free rates
and an equity premium close to the data moments. It does generate excessive risk-free
rate and equity return volatility, and also overshoots both the mean and volatility of the
price-dividend ratio.

   The BEGE model fits the risk-free rate and equity return moments, with the exception


                                               15




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
of generating interest rate volatility that is slightly too low. While doing better than the
BTZ and DY models, it still undershoots the mean and the variability of the price-
dividend ratio. Overall, while statistically all models are strongly rejected by the data,
we argue that DY, Wachter (2013), and BEGE fit general asset prices reasonably well.

3.4    Variance Risk Premium Fit
   Table 4 focuses on variance risk premium statistics. As indicated before, the variance
risk premium is measured by the difference between V IX 2 and the expected physical re-
turn variance. The physical variance is obtained by linearly projecting realized monthly
variances computed using high-frequency data onto their one month lagged values, V IX 2 ,
and squared S&P500 daily returns for the previous trading day and previous 5 trading
days. This model is one of the better models in Bekaert and Hoerova (2014)'s out-of-
sample horse race for forecasting physical realized variances. It simply adds the squared
VIX to the well-known "HAR-RV" forecasting model of Corsi (2009). The variance pre-
mium is only available in the shorter sample and has a mean of 0.0195 and a volatility
of 0.0225, with these moments rather precisely estimated. For ease of economic interpre-
tation, Panel B of Table 4 also reports the volatility premium fit, which simply replaces
the variances by volatilities.

   To compute the variance risk premium in the models, our first set of statistics use the
risk-neutral minus physical annualized variance of the aggregate stock market log-return.
Following most of the structural literature, we report the statistics for log instead of
gross returns, but the differences between the two concepts are economically small. As
discussed in Martin (2017), the V IX 2 actually represents the risk-neutral entropy and
always exceeds the risk neutral variance in the data. We return to this issue separately
in the next subsection.

   Table 4 reveals that the variance risk premium is identically equal to zero in the BTZ
model, as it is a log-normal model (see section 3.1). Both the DY and BEGE models
generate meaningful variance risk premiums, but they are still too small relative to the
data. The Wachter's model generates a much too high volatility risk premium of 15%. It
also overshoots the variability of the volatility risk premium, whereas the DY and BEGE
models undershoot it.

   Our definition of the variance risk premium is different than the way it is defined
in the original BTZ and DY articles. To illustrate the difference, let rt+1 be the ag-
                                               16




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
gregate equity log-return between time t and t + 1 while rt+2 is the aggregate equity
log-return between time t + 1 and t + 2. BTZ define the variance risk premium as the
difference between the risk neutral and physical variance skipping one period (month):
    Q                                         Q
V art (rt+2 ) - V art (rt+2 ), instead of V art (rt+1 ) - V art (rt+1 ). This allows them to gener-
ate a positive variance risk premium instead of the zero value under log-normality, which
we report, because returns skipping one period are not log-normal in their model. DY
define the variance risk premium as the sum of the difference between the next month's
                                        Q
risk-neutral and physical variance, V art (rt+1 ) - V art (rt+1 ) (which they call the "level
difference"), and the difference between the risk-neutral and physical variance skipping
               Q
one month, V art (rt+2 ) - V art (rt+2 ) (which they call the "drift difference"). This addi-
tional "drift difference" component allows DY to generate a much higher average variance
risk premium: 12.62% instead of 2.35% in Table 4 (which only takes into the account the
                            Q
"level difference", the V art (rt+1 ) - V art (rt+1 ) term). However, both the BTZ and DY
definitions of the variance risk premium are inconsistent with the real-world specification
of the VIX and variance swaps.

       Finally, we report the autocorrelation of the variance risk premium. The premium's
autocorrelation is only 0.52 in the data. This low value may reflect measurement error,
because we require an empirical model to measure the physical variance, which surely
introduces some noise. For instance, Figure 1 illustrates that the variance risk premium is
particularly volatile during the Great Recession when financial markets were in turmoil,
potentially leading to imprecise measurement. However, even during the period pre-Great
Recession (January 1990-November 2007), the variance risk premium autocorrelation was
only 0.49. Furthermore, the value of around 0.50 is robust to alternative models of the
conditional physical variance.

       Nevertheless, all the models generate very persistent autocorrelation. The main reason
for this is that the model's state variables, which determine all asset prices, including
the variance risk premium, are all very persistent. This persistence is required, so that
realistically small shocks to the state variables generate realistically large asset pricing
implications.7
   7
    Another potentially interesting moment is the skewness of the variance or volatility risk premium.
However, we find that the skewness of the variance risk premium is not a robust moment, varying between
sharply negative and sharply positive depending on how the physical variance is computed, while it is
close to zero using our baseline methodology.



                                                  17




                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
3.5    Martin (2017) bounds
   In Table 5, we report the average VIX and SVIX, computed as proposed by Martin
(2017), and the average difference for the 1996-2012 sample, the sample period used
in Martin's (2017) article. The difference is 1.41% on average. None of the models
can actually fit the Martin's bounds. In line with Result 4 in Martin (2017), BTZ
counterfactually implies a negative difference between VIX and SVIX as it is a log-
normal model. The rare disasters model of Wachter (2013) substantially overstates the
differnce (6.48% versus 1.41% in the data). The BEGE and DY models do generate
smallish positive SVIX-VIX differences, with the BEGE model slightly better than the
DY model (0.18% versus 0.08%), although the difference is not substantial. Both models
still dramatically underfit the VIX-SVIX difference.

   The economic intuition behind this result is explained in Section VII of Martin (2017).
The V IX 2 can be viewed as a risk-neutral return entropy while SV IX 2 is a measure of
the risk-neutral return variance; viewed as a portfolio of options, the VIX weights option
prices by the inverse of squared strike prices, whereas the SVIX uses equal weighting.
Therefore, the V IX 2 is more sensitive to left-tail events (relative to SV IX 2 ), while
SV IX 2 is more sensitive to right tail events (relative to V IX 2 ). Thus, the disaster
model generating a V IX much higher than the SV IX indicates that left-tail return
outcomes are too severe compared to right-tail outcomes in the model, compared to the
data. Similarly, the other models fail to generate a large enough V IX compared to the
SV IX , indicating that the left-tail return outcomes are not severe enough compared to
right-tail outcomes in these models compared to the data. Overall, fitting options data
requires that the left side of the risk-neutral return distribution is somewhat, but not too
much, heavier than the right side of the distribution.

   No model that we examined produces the tail behavior implied by the Martin (2017)
bounds. Note that BTZ is not able to produce such a behavior even theoretically, as it
is log-normal (see section 3.1), whereas the disaster risk model in Wachter (2013) cannot
produce this behavior without altering its basic asset pricing fit, because a heavy left-tail
of consumption growth is required to reproduce all key asset pricing moments, including
the equity premium and low risk-free rate. This heavy left-tail then implies that risk-
neutral entropy of the aggregate return is much higher than its risk-neutral variance,
because the risk-neutral return distribution is strongly left-skewed. Of the four models

                                               18




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
we consider, only DY and BEGE are potentially able to reproduce the observed tail
behavior, albeit under alternative parameterizations than in the original papers.

3.6    Consumption Growth Quantile Shifts and the Variance Pre-
       mium
   The essence of a consumption-based asset pricing model is to link actual consumption
data to asset returns. In Section 2, we showed that there is a significant link between the
downward shifts in the left tail of consumption growth and the incidence of high variance
risk premiums. Here we examine which of the existing models can fit this data pattern.
We collect the results in Table 6, reporting the results replicating the data results of
Table 1 for samples of 1,000,000 months simulated from the various models. We show
the 10th , 50th and 90th percentile of the consumption growth distribution, conditioning
on either the variance premium being above its 80th unconditional percentile or below its
20th percentile. We also report the difference in the furthermost right column.

   Panel A of Table 6 indicates that BTZ model is not able to replicate the downward shift
in the left percentiles of consumption growth following the high variance risk premium.
Instead, in the model a high variance risk premium signals a low conditional variance
of consumption growth. The underlying mechanism owes to the fact that a positive
variance risk premium and equity risk premium cannot coexist in conditionally log-normal
models (see Internet Appendix I) because the former (latter) is increasing (decreasing)
in the covariance between returns and the stochastic discount factor. Let's denote this
covariance as mr,t . Note that mr,t = mr,t m,t r,t , where  is the correlation coefficient
and m/r represent standard deviations. In the BTZ calibration, mr,t is negative, as
it is a necessary condition to achieve a positive equity premium. At the same time,
m,t and r,t are increasing in the conditional consumption growth volatility, because,
in the BTZ model, dividend growth is assumed to equal consumption growth, and with
Epstein-Zin preferences the pricing kernel encompasses both consumption growth and
the aggregate wealth return. Thus, in BTZ a higher conditional consumption growth
volatility decreases mr,t , which then decreases the variance risk premium. Note that the
conditional consumption growth volatility in the BTZ model is unrealistically high for
both the high variance risk premium and, especially, for the low variance risk premium
realizations. This is because the simulated consumption growth volatility is much higher
than the consumption growth volatility implied by theory (which is realistic), due to the
                                               19




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
volatility often hitting the zero-lower bound as discussed in Section 3.3.

   Panel B of Table 6 shows that the model of Drechsler and Yaron (2011) also cannot
match the asymmetric percentile shifts documented before. Instead, the higher variance
risk premium is associated with a higher "symmetric" volatility of consumption growth
next period: that is left-tail percentiles shift to the left and right-tail percentiles shift
to the right by the same amount. This occurs because in the model the variance risk
                                    2
premium is linearly proportional to t (the consumption growth volatility) and to the
intensity of jumps in long-run consumption growth xt and volatility (see equation (22)
in Drechsler and Yaron, 2011). Economically, the variance risk premium is high when
2                  2
t is high, because t is the intensity of future jumps in long-run consumption growth
xt and the volatility of consumption growth, and an Epstein-Zin agent is averse to un-
certainty about these jumps. Note from equation (4) in Drechsler and Yaron (2011)
that possible jumps in xt only affect consumption growth between time t + 1 and t + 2;
however, consumption growth between t and t + 1 is conditionally Gaussian and, thus,
symmetric at time t, making asymmetric percentile shifts impossible. Theoretically, the
model of Drechsler and Yaron (2011) could generate the percentile shift in the left tail
of consumption growth distribution by skipping one month (that is, for consumption
growth between t + 1 and t + 2) through the higher probability of a left-skewed jump
in long-run consumption growth xt . However, Panel C of Table 6 documents that this
is not the case: while the shift happens, it is economically negligible. The magnitude
is small because in long-run risk models, variation in xt (where the jump happens and
which represents predictable consumption growth) contributes little to the total variation
in consumption growth. An alternative specification with normally (instead of gamma)
distributed jumps in xt considered by Drechsler and Yaron (2011), cannot generate even
the minor shift shown in Panel C of Table 6, because Gaussian jumps are symmetric.

   Panel D of Table 6 shows that Wachter's model generates a minuscule shift in the left
conditional percentiles of the consumption growth distribution. The shift is much smaller
than the one observed in the data. This is because the disasters are very extreme and,
thus, affect percentiles of the distribution that are more extreme than the 10th percentile
on which we condition. This mismatch between the assumptions regarding consumption
data in disaster risk models and option prices is reminiscent of but different than the
evidence in Backus, Chernov, and Martin (2011), who show that options data imply
less extreme disasters than those implied by disaster consumption models. Panel E of
                                               20




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 6 shows that the BEGE model replicates the left-tail percentile shifts conditioned
on the high variance risk premium reasonably well, although the shifts are of somewhat
smaller magnitude than observed in the data. BEGE is able to replicate these shifts,
                                  s
through the bad environment shock n,t . A large bad environment shock increases the
shape parameter of the bad consumption shock, shifting the left-tail percentiles of con-
ditional consumption growth distribution down. Simultaneously, the shock decreases the
surplus ratio increasing risk-aversion. These increases in the shape parameter of the bad
consumption shock together with the increasing risk aversion then increase the variance
risk premium (see Figure 8 in Bekaert and Engstrom, 2017). Note that the BEGE model
also generates a small increase in the right-tail percentiles of the conditional consumption
growth distribution following a high variance risk premium. This occurs because increas-
ing the "bad" shape parameter also increases the magnitude of the right tail realizations
from the bad environment component, although the magnitude is not nearly as strong as
for the left tail because the right tail of the bad environment distribution component is
finite (see Figure 3 in Bekaert and Engstrom, 2017). The evidence for such a right-tail
shift in the data is mixed however (see Table 2).

    To summarize, the DY and BTZ models are not able to reproduce the link between the
downward shifts in the left tail of consumption growth and the incidence of high variance
risk premiums even theoretically, because these models feature conditionally Gaussian one
period ahead consumption growth (although DY model features non-Gaussian jumps in
the variance of the future consumption growth and expected consumption growth). The
Wachter (2013) model is not able to replicate the link, because the model requires negative
consumption growth realizations which are too severe to fit key asset pricing moments.
However, Bekaert and Engstrom's BEGE model does fit the conditional quantile shifts
in consumption growth.


4     A New Model
    Given that extant models cannot fully fit the empirical facts, we develop an alterna-
tive model here. We have established that BTZ is not able to generate a positive variance
risk premium, because it is conditionally Gaussian. DY, while featuring a conditionally
non-Gaussian stochastic discount factor, is not able to replicate conditional consumption
growth quantile shifts, because consumption growth in the model is conditionally Gaus-
sian. The rare disaster model implies that the risk-neutral entropy is too high compared
                                               21




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
to the risk-neutral variance due to the heavy left-tail of the consumption growth neces-
sary to fit standard asset pricing moments. While Bekaert and Engstrom's (2017) BEGE
model fits the variance risk premium moments poorly at the parameters used in the arti-
cle, it is the only model featuring the economic mechanisms that can match the stylized
facts under an alternative parameterization. However, the evaluation of the BEGE model
requires a time-consuming numerical solution procedure, greatly decreasing its practical
appeal. Thus, we propose a considerably more tractable version of the BEGE model,
which allows for quasi closed-form asset pricing solutions, to study if the model is able
to fit the stylized facts. In Section 4.1, we outline the model and derive expressions for
the risk-neutral and physical variances and the variance risk premium. In Section 4.2, we
provide estimation results for the model parameters and consider its fit with the data.
Section 4.3 considers a slightly different model, focused on fitting the persistence of the
variance risk premium. In Section 4.4, we consider a model incorporating a preference
shock.

4.1      A Tractable BEGE-habit Model
   The utility function is standard and given by:
           
                          (Cj - Hj )1- - 1
      Et           j -t                    ,                                                (12)
           j =t
                               1-

where  is the discount rate, Cj is consumption and Hj is the habit stock with Cj > Hj .
Log-consumption growth, gt+1 , has a constant conditional mean but BEGE shocks:

             ¯ + cp p,t+1 - cn n,t+1 ,
      gt+1 = g                                                                              (13)

where cp > 0 and cn > 0 and

      p,t+1  (pt , 1) - pt ,
                                                                                            (14)
      n,t+1  (nt , 1) - nt ,

where (x, y ) is a gamma distribution with shape parameter x and scale parameter y .
Given that the mean value of a (x, y )-distributed variable is x · y , p,t+1 and n,t+1 are
zero-mean.

   The top plot of Figure 4 Panel A illustrates that the probability density function of
                                                        22




                          Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
p,t+1 , the "good" component, is bounded from the left and has a long right tail. Similarly,
the middle plot of Figure 4 Panel A shows that the probability density function of -n,t+1
(the "bad" component) is bounded from the right and has a long left tail. Finally, the
bottom plot of Figure 4 Panel A plots the component model which has both tails.

   We assume that the shape parameters follow autoregressive processes with the same
shocks as the shocks driving consumption growth (see also Gourieroux and Jasiak, 2006):



             ¯ + p (pt - p
      pt+1 = p           ¯) + pp p,t+1 ,
                                                                                       (15)
             ¯ + n (nt - n
      nt+1 = n           ¯ ) + nn n,t+1 .

   Panel B of Figure 4 illustrates possible conditional distributions of consumption
growth shocks which could arise as a result of the time variation in the shape parameters
in (15). In particular, the probability density function at the top plot of Figure 4 Panel
B characterizes the situation where pt is relatively large and the component distribution
has a pronounced right tail, while the probability density function at the bottom plot of
Figure 4 corresponds to the case where nt is relatively large and the component distri-
bution exhibits a pronounced left tail. Consequently, pt (nt ) acts as good (bad) variance
that is associated with positive (negative) skewness in consumption growth.

   Analogously to Bekaert, Engstrom, and Grenadier (2010) and Bekaert, Engstrom, and
                                Ct
Xu (2019), we model Qt =      Ct -Ht
                                     ,   which can be interpreted as an inverse consumption
surplus ratio. Denoting qt = ln(Qt ), we assume:

            ¯ + q (qt - q
     qt+1 = q           ¯) + qp p,t+1 + qn n,t+1 .                                     (16)

The qt -process drives time-variation in the effective risk aversion of the representative
agent. While we assume the process to be an AR(1), the shocks depend on the same
shocks as consumption growth does. Economically, we expect qn > 0 and qp < 0.
Unlike the models in Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Bekaert and Engstrom (2017),
consumption growth and risk aversion are not perfectly correlated.

   We assume the following model for log-dividend growth, dt+1 :

            ¯ + g (cp p,t+1 - cn n,t+1 )
     dt+1 = g                                                                          (17)

                                                23




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
       We use g = 3.0762 to match the dividend growth variance, where the monthly
dividend growth is computed as the monthly growth of real unsmoothed annual S&P500
dividends.8 Modelling dividends as levered consumption is popular in the literature with
Bollerslev, Tauchen and Zhou (2009) using g = 1, and Drechsler and Yaron (2011) and
Wachter (2013) using g = 3.

       The log-pricing kernel, mt+1 , for this model can be written as:

         mt+1 = m0 + mq qt + m,p p,t+1 + m,n n,t+1 ,                                              (18)

where:

         m0 = ln  -  g   ¯(1 - q ),
                     ¯ + q
         mq = - (1 - q ),
                                                                                                  (19)
         m,p =  (qp - cp ),
         m,n =  (qn + cn ).

In all our estimations we find m,p < 0 and m,n > 0, that is, good environment shocks
decrease marginal utility and bad environment shocks increase marginal utility.

       The key formula to derive most of the results is that for a demeaned gamma random
variable X  (k, ) - k, where k is the shape and  is the scale parameter, E (eX ) =
e-g()k , where the function g (x) is defined as g (x) = x + ln(1 - x). Note that g (·) is always
negative. This requires  < 1. Note that while our fundamental shocks p,t+1 and n,t+1
in (14) formally have  = 1, in the model they are always premultiplied by  -coefficients
which are less than 1, making the effective scale of these shocks less than 1, because the
scale of a gamma distributed variable with unit scale multiplied by  is  .

       The risk-free rate

       The continuously compounded log-risk-free rate, rf,t , can be determined the usual
way as the negative of the logarithm of the conditional expectation of the exponentiated
pricing kernel in (18):

         rf,t = f0 + fq qt + fp pt + fn nt ,                                                      (20)
   8
    An asset pricing fit similar to the one reported below can be obtained with any values of g between
1 and 6.


                                                    24




                      Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
where:

      f0 = - ln  +  g
                    ¯ - q
                        ¯(1 - q ),
      fq =  (1 - q ),
                                                                                       (21)
      fp = g (m,p ),
      fn = g (m,n ).

   Here qt represents an intertemporal smoothing effect and is positively associated with
the short rate (fq > 0), whereas pt and nt represent precautionary savings effects and
are negatively associated with the short rate (fn < 0 and fp < 0). Note that in our
estimation fn nt is usually much larger than fp pt in magnitude, and therefore the short
rate's dependence on nt is more pronounced than its dependence on pt .

   Equity pricing

   The price-dividend ratio can be computed as:
                    
      Pt                      i
                                     mt+j +dt+j
         = Et             e   j =1                .                                    (22)
      Dt            i=1


By recursively plugging the dividend dynamics from (17) and the stochastic discount
factor from (18) into (22), we obtain an expression for the price-dividend ratio of the
following form:
              
      Pt
         =          eAi +Bi pt +Ci nt +Di qt ,                                         (23)
      Dt      i=1


where the A, B , C , and D coefficients follow difference equations described in Internet
                             Pt
Appendix III. With pdt = ln( D t
                                 ), we log-linearize equation (23) using a Taylor series
approximation to find:

           1    1        1       1
     pdt  K0 + Kp pt + K n nt + Kq qt ,                                                (24)

where we again relegate the actual expressions for the K 1 -coefficients to Internet Ap-
pendix III.




                                                      25




                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
   The aggregate market return is defined as:

                                            Pt+1
                Pt+1 + Dt+1   Dt+1 1 + Dt+1
      Rt+1    =             =         Pt
                                            ,                                                 (25)
                     Pt        Dt     Dt


yielding the log-return, rt+1 :

                              Pt+1
      rt+1 = dt+1 + ln(1 +         ) - pdt .                                                  (26)
                              Dt+1

                                                   Pt+1
Analogously to pdt , we can linearize ln(1 +       Dt+1
                                                        )   via a Taylor series approximation as:

               Pt+1     2    2         2         2
      ln(1 +        )  K0 + Kp pt+1 + Kn nt+1 + Kq qt+1 ,                                     (27)
               Dt+1

where the K 2 coefficients are reported in Internet Appendix III.

   By plugging (17), (24), and (27) into (26) we obtain the following expression for the
log-return:

      rt+1  r0 + rp pt + rn nt + rq qt + r,p p,t+1 + r,n n,t+1 ,                              (28)

where the exact expressions for the coefficients r0 , rp , rn , r,p , and r,n are once again
in Internet Appendix III. In all our estimations we find r,p > 0 and r,n < 0, that is,
good environment shock realizations increase equity returns and bad environment shock
realizations decrease them.

   Combining (20) and (28), we get the following expression for the equity premium:

      Et (rt+1 - rf,t )  (r0 - f0 ) + (rp - fp )pt + (rn - fn )nt + (rq - fq )qt ,            (29)

where in all our estimations (rp - fp ) > 0 and (rn - fn ) > 0. This makes economic
sense, because both p,t+1 (which conditional variance is pt ) and n,t+1 (which conditional
variance is nt ) move the pricing kernel in (18) and the aggregate equity return in (28) in
opposite directions. In contrast, (rq - fq ) is 0 up to approximation error, as qt does not
affect the moments of shocks to the pricing kernel.

   The variance risk premium

   Following most of the extant literature, we first define the variance risk premium
                                                   26




                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
in the model as the difference between risk-neutral and physical variances of log-returns.
From (28) it follows that the conditional physical variance of the aggregate market return
is:

                         2        2
        V art (rt+1 ) = r,p pt + r,n nt .                                                 (30)


      The risk-neutral (Q-measure) variance of the log-return can be computed by eval-
uating the first and second derivative of the risk-neutral moment-generating function:


                     d Et emt+1 +rt+1
        EtQ (rt+1 ) =                              ,
                    d     Et emt+1            =0
                                                                                          (31)
         Q 2         d2 Et emt+1 +rt+1
        Et (rt+1 ) = 2                                 .
                    d      Et emt+1            =0


Plugging mt+1 from (18) and rt+1 from (28) into (31) results in:

            Q                 r,p               r,n
        V art (rt+1 ) = (           )2 pt + (         )2 nt .                             (32)
                            1 - m,p           1 - m,n

      Bringing (30) and (32) together, we obtain the expression for the variance risk pre-
mium:

          Q                            2         1                2       1
      V art (rt+1 ) - V art (rt+1 ) = r,p             2
                                                        - 1 pt + r,n             - 1 nt . (33)
                                            (1 - m,p )               (1 - m,n )2

The premium in (33) is affected by both bad and good uncertainty. However, as we argued
before, good environment shocks decrease the pricing kernel (marginal utility), that is
mp < 0. Therefore, the coefficient on pt is negative. Analogously, bad environment
shocks increase the pricing kernel (marginal utility), that is mn > 0. Therefore, bad
uncertainty has a larger effect on the risk neutral than on the physical volatility and the
reverse is true for good uncertainty, consistent with the intuition that risk neutral pricing
shifts mass to high marginal utility states. As a result, bad (good) uncertainty shocks
increase (decrease) the variance risk premium.

      V IX 2 and SV IX 2 studied by Martin (2017) are, in fact, also available in closed form



                                                           27




                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
in the model. Relegating the derivation to Internet Appendix III, we find:

                    Q      Rt+1
      SV IXt2 = V art (         ) = exp(m0 + 2r0 - f0 + [mq + 2rq - fq ]qt +
                           Rf,t                                                                  (34)
      [2rp - g (m,p + 2r,p ) - fp ]pt + [2rn - g (m,n + 2r,n ) - fn ]nt ) - 1.

While the expression looks quite different from (32), we show below that the actual values
are very close in our estimation. Next we compute V IX 2 as the risk neutral entropy:

                             Rt+1              Rt+1
      V IX 2 = 2 · [ln EtQ (       ) - EtQ (ln       )] = 2 · [ln EtQ (Rt+1 ) - EtQ (ln Rt+1 )] =
                             Rf,t              Rf,t                                               (35)
      2 · [rf,t - Rf,t Et (Mt+1 ln Rt+1 )] = 2 · [rf,t - exp(rf,t )Et (exp(mt+1 )rt+1 )].

Obtaining a closed-form expression for (35), requires computing the expectation of X ·
exp(X ), where X  (k, ) with k being the shape and  the scale parameters, re-
spectively. Assuming that  < 1, which is always satisfied in our estimation, Internet
Appendix III demonstrates that:

                               k
      E [X · exp(X )] =              ,                                                           (36)
                           (1 - )k+1

which, as Internet Appendix III shows, leads to:

      V IXt2 =
      2 · [rf,t - erf,t +m0 +mq qt · {e-g(m,p )pt -g(m,n )nt · (r0 + rp pt + rn nt + rq qt )+
                                                                 pt                              (37)
      e-g(m,n )nt r,p · (-pt e-g(m,p )pt + e-m,p pt                       )+
                                                        (1 - m,p )pt +1
                                                                  nt
      e-g(m,p )pt r,n · (-nt e-g(m,n )nt + e-m,n nt                        )}].
                                                         (1 - m,n )nt +1

The last part of the expression looks reminiscent of (32).

4.2    Estimation and Empirical Fit
   The model is estimated using the classical minimum distance methodology (Wooldridge,
2002). We match unconditional moments of monthly US real consumption growth of non-
durables and services and the financial series used before for the 1990-2017 period. The
following unconditional moments are used in the classical minimum distance estimation:
consumption growth mean, consumption growth standard deviation, consumption growth
                                                   28




                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
skewness (scaled), consumption growth excess kurtosis (scaled), real risk-free rate mean,
real risk-free rate standard deviation, the first lag autocorrelation of the real risk-free
rate, the average equity premium, physical standard deviation of equity returns, the log-
price-dividend ratio mean, standard deviation of the log-price-dividend ratio, the first lag
autocorrelation of the log-price-dividend ratio, the mean of the variance risk premium
(defined as the risk-neutral variance minus the physical variance of the log-return in the
model and V IX 2 minus the physical variance from a Corsi (2009)-type model described
above in the data), the standard deviation of the variance risk premium, the difference
between the risk-neutral entropy (V IX 2 ) and the risk-neutral variance (SV IX 2 ). To
simplify the estimation, we set  = 1.00 and pt = p
                                                 ¯. We also set q
                                                                ¯ = 1, as it is not iden-
tified due to always entering asset pricing equations multiplied by  . We use a diagonal
weighting matrix to avoid collinearity issues and achieve a more balanced moment fit.
The weighting matrix is the diagonal of the inverse of the covariance matrix estimated
from re-sampling 10,000 time series of the historical length with a block length of 60
months.

   The first column of Table 7 shows the parameter estimates. In terms of preferences,
 is close to 2.0, but of course this coefficient no longer represents risk aversion. The qt
process is very persistent, as is typical in habit models; q is the main determinant of the
risk-free rate and price-dividend ratio autocorrelation. As expected, p,t shocks decrease
risk aversion, that is qp < 0, whereas n,t shocks increase risk aversion, that is qn > 0.
The latter coefficient is of a much larger magnitude than the former. Unconditionally,
the bad environment process only accounts for 12.3% of the consumption growth variance
       2
( 2  cn n
        ¯
    ¯+ 2 n
    p     ¯
            ), but, because pt is constant, nt drives all of its time variation. Therefore, this
  cp       cn

ratio increases substantially during recessions. Given that p
                                                            ¯, the unconditional shape
parameter of the good environment shock, is greater than 10, it follows from the properties
of the gamma distribution that good environment shocks are essentially Gaussian. On
the contrary, as n
                 ¯ is less than 1, it follows from the properties of the gamma distribution
that bad environment shocks are very skewed and non-Gaussian. The nt process is highly
persistent.

   Table 8 shows how the model fits the data moments. On the right hand side, we
show the data moments and the corresponding standard errors. While the 2 test for the
overall fit rejects the model at the 5% significance level, the overall fit is good. In fact, the
model moments are always within a two standard error band around the data moments.
                                                29




                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
The moments driving the statistical rejection, such as the mean consumption growth of
0.17% in the model versus 0.20% in the data, have arguably economically sensible values
in the model.

   Taking a closer look at the various moments, the model does generate an equity
premium that is economically smaller than the one observed in the data (but falls within
one standard error around it). This is mainly driven by the large data standard error
associated with the equity premium, which results in a relatively low weight for this
moment in the estimation. Importantly, the model fits the both the mean the variance of
the variance risk premium. It also fits the Martin's (2017) bound. The model provides the
fit while being entirely consistent with the consumption growth moments. These moments
include a small positive unconditional skewness coefficient and excess kurtosis of around
2.0. Recall that the nt process is very skewed and leptokurtic but unconditionally this
process only accounts for a modest fraction of the total consumption variance and helps
fit the data during recessions, especially the Great Recession.

   To further test the model, we consider two moments not used in the estimation:
consumption growth percentile shifts conditional on the variance risk premium and the
autocorrelation of the variance risk premium. Table 9 shows the consumption growth
percentile shifts conditional on the variance risk premium. The model generates the
downward shift in the 10th percentile when the variance risk premium is high, while
showing no other shifts, as is true in the data. However, the shift in the 10th percentile
is smaller than its data counterpart, although still falling inside two standard deviations
from it.

   Table 10 shows that the model implied persistence of the variance risk premium is
much higher than in the data. The difference is both statistically and economically large.

   Tables 7-10 also report the estimation of a model (the "full" model) with a more
intricate consumption and dividend growth process:

             ¯ + g (nt - n
      gt+1 = g           ¯ ) + cp p,t+1 - cn n,t+1 ,
                                                                                      (38)
             ¯ + d (nt - n
      dt+1 = g           ¯ ) + g (cp p,t+1 - cn n,t+1 , ) + n (-cn n,t+1 ).

First, the conditional means of consumption and dividend growth now vary with nt , as in
Segal, Shaliastovich, and Yaron (2015)'s application of the BEGE model of Bekaert and
Engstrom (2017) and Bekaert, Engstrom, and Ermolov (2015) to a long-run risk model.
                                               30




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Second, apart from the usual leverage term, the dividend growth shock has separate
exposure to n,t+1 , so that it can have different loadings on good and bad consumption
growth shocks. We use the dividend growth standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis
as additional moments in the CMD estimation to aid the identification of g and n .

   Table 7 shows that the overlapping parameters in the base and full models are almost
identical. The conditional means of dividend and consumption growth depend negatively
on nt , in line with the evidence in Segal, Shaliastovich, and Yaron (2015), but only the
consumption growth dependence is statistically significant. In contrast, n is borderline
significantly negative, so that dividend shocks load heavily on n,t making cash flows
riskier than in the base model. The usual leverage coefficient (g ) is close to 3.00, as it
was in the base model.

   Table 8 shows that the fit with the data moments is again very good. With one
exception (the standard deviation of equity returns), all moments are within one standard
error of their data counterparts. The model generates slight negative skewness for both
consumption and dividend growth. Not surprisingly, the test of the over-identifying
restrictions now does not reject the model at the 10% level. The equity premium is now
8 basis points higher (almost 1% annualized) than in the base model.

   Table 9 reveals that the full model perfectly fits the downward shift in the 10th con-
sumption growth percentile going from low to high variance risk premiums. However, the
full model also generates downward shifts at the 50th and 90th percentiles even though
these are smaller than the negative tail shift, and still within two standard errors of the
shifts observed in the data. This shift is a direct consequence of the dependence of the
mean of consumption growth on nt . Table 10 shows that the full model does not resolve
the failure to fit the variance risk premium persistence.

4.3    Fitting the Variance Risk Premium Persistence
   The model's failure in fitting the low persistence of the variance risk premium is
easily understood. Both state variables driving asset price dynamics (nt and qt ) are
highly persistent. The variance risk premium computed using log returns in (33) in fact
only depends on nt and thus inherits its persistence.

   We now investigate if the model is flexible enough to match this moment by explicitly
including it into the classical minimum distance estimation. To conserve space, we rele-

                                               31




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
gate all the empirical results to Internet Appendix IV, offering a brief discussion of the
results here. The parameters are largely the same as before, except for the autoregressive
coefficient for nt , which drops from over 0.99 to less than 0.6, and its innovation standard
deviation, which doubles.

   Both the base and full models now replicate the low persistence of the variance risk
premium, delivering an autocorrelation of about 0.58 versus 0.52 in the data. While
the models overall are statistically rejected at the 1% significance level, economically the
overall fit is rather adequate. For example, while the standard deviation of the log-price-
dividend ratio in the model is above 2 standard deviations of the data counterpart, the
model implied value of about 0.42 would be consistent with the data if the payout would
be computed as in Boudoukh et al. (2007) and would be lower than the data if the payout
would be computed as in Longstaff and Piazzesi (2004). Overall, of the 16 (19) moments
used in the estimation for the base (full) model, only four moments are outside a two
standard error band around the data moments.

   Economically, the most serious violation is that the model-implied variance of the
variance risk premium is very low compared to the data (0.0004 in the model versus 0.0019
in the data). Because the variance risk premium is a linear function of nt , the variance
and persistence of the variance risk premium is increasing in the variance and persistence
                                                                     2 n
                                                                    nn ¯
of nt . Note from (15) that the unconditional variance of nt is     1-2
                                                                         .   Decreasing n , which
                                                                       n

is required to decrease the persistence of the variance risk premium, also decreases the
unconditional variance of nt and consequently the variance of the variance risk premium.
This decrease cannot be offset by changes in other parameters, which are tied to the
consumption growth and asset pricing moments.

   The model again matches the left tail consumption growth percentile shifts conditional
on the variance risk premium observed in the data, although these moments are not used
in the estimation. In fact, the quantile shifts generated by the new models are very
similar to the ones generated under the previous model specifications.

4.4    Model with a Preference Shock
   Given that the macroeconomic model in the previous subsection is, despite an ad-
equate economic fit, strongly statistically rejected, we now introduce a pure preference
shock into the model in order to fit the variance risk premium persistence. There are
at least two requirements for the preference shock. First, it needs to be non-Gaussian,
                                               32




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
because, as we have shown, a Gaussian shock does not affect the variance risk premium.
Second, the preference shock variance should vary through time and have relatively low
persistence, because the variance risk premium persistence is low in the data. This fol-
lows from the variance risk premium being a linear function of model's shocks variances
(see equations (30) and (32)). Fortunately, such rapidly mean reverting risk aversion
is consistent with direct and indirect evidence in the recent asset pricing literature (see
Martin, 2017; Bekaert, Engstrom, and Xu, 2019).

       We keep the macroeconomic dynamics as in equation (13) and introduce a new pref-
erence shock, q,t+1 , into the log-inverse consumption surplus ratio equation (16):

                ¯ + q (qt - q
         qt+1 = q           ¯) + qp p,t+1 + qn n,t+1 + qq q,t+1 .                                   (39)

In line with the rest of our model, q,t+1 follows a demeaned gamma distribution:

         q,t+1  (st , 1) - st ,
                                                                                                    (40)
                ¯ + s (st - s
         st+1 = s           ¯) + sq q,t+1 .

       The model is solved in closed form exactly as before except that there is one more state
variable, st . We again estimate the model, using the more intricate fundamentals process
of the full model, via the classical minimum distance methodology, but also explicitly
include the variance risk premium autocorrelation at lag 1 as a moment to match.9

       Table 11 shows the estimated model parameters. The pure preference shock is strongly
non-Gaussian (¯
              s is clearly less than 1), which is required for the shock to have a notable
impact on the variance risk premium. Its persistence is low (s = 0.5912), which helps to
fit the low variance risk premium persistence. The parameters imply that unconditionally
15.83% of the qt process, which also measures stochastic risk aversion, is driven by a
"sentiment" shock not correlated with fundamentals. While many of the other parameters
are similar to the ones obtained for the full model before (e.g. qt and nt are still highly
persistent), there are also some distinct changes. For example, the qt process loads less
heavily on n,t , but the nt process is now estimated to be less non-Gaussian with much
higher innovation variances. The dependence of the consumption process on nt (pt ) has
   9
    We did experiment with a model where qt is also the shape parameter of the q,t+1 shock, limiting
the number of state variables to 2. However, in such estimations qt invariably hits its lower boundary of
zero.

                                                   33




                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
also decreased (increased). This is logical given that the preference shock now helps
account partly for asset price variation. However, the dividend growth process now loads
more heavily on nt than before, making cash flows more exposed to downside risk.

    Table 12 shows that, while the model is statistically rejected at the 1% significance
level, it fits the various moments rather well: the vast majority of the model-implied
moments is within one standard deviation of the data counterparts. There is not a single
moment outside a two standard deviation band around the data counterpart.

    Table 13 indicates that the model matches the left tail consumption growth percentile
shifts conditional on the variance risk premium observed in the data, although these
moments are once again not used in the estimation. The model-implied shift is now
slightly larger than the value observed in the data, which was not the case before. Note
that the model also generates a slight negative shift in right tail consumption growth
percentiles following a large variance risk premium, although the shift is much smaller
than for the left tail consumption growth percentiles. While the data do not generate
such a shift, the model shift is within one standard error of what is observed empirically.
In sum, the model with a preference shock fits all the salient features of the data.


5     Excess Return Predictability
    It is well-known that the variance risk premium predicts stock returns (see Bollerslev,
Tauchen, and Zhou, 2009, for the seminal work in this area). In this section, we verify
whether the various models can replicate the real world predictability. We do so using a
simple univariate regression of future excess stock returns on the variance risk premium.
We also go one step further, and test whether the models can match the evidence uncov-
ered in Bekaert and Hoerova (2014). They regress stock returns onto the variance risk
premium and the conditional (physical) variance of stock returns. They find that the
variance risk premium predicts stock returns with a positive sign, but the stock market
variance predicts returns with a negative sign. Significant predictability is present at the
one month and three month horizons. This result will be challenging to replicate in many
of the models as they lack on obvious channel for uncertainty to negatively predict stock
returns. Moreover, it implies that volatility dynamics in the model must be driven by at
least two lowly correlated state variables.

    Table 14 shows the empirical result for our particular sample for one- and three-month

                                               34




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
forecasting horizons. The variance risk premium predicts returns more strongly both
economically and statistically at the three-month horizon, but the regression coefficient
is still significant at the 10% level at the one-month horizon. The evidence regarding
conditional physical uncertainty is weaker in this sample. The coefficient is negative at
both horizons but not statistically significant.10 The addition of the uncertainty variable
does not alter the variance risk premium coefficient or its significance.

       Table 14 also shows the regression coefficients produced by various models. The
BTZ model produces the wrong sign both for the variance risk premium and physical
uncertainty. This occurs, because as shown in Internet Appendix I, in log-normal models
the variables which increase the variance risk premium decrease the equity premium.
The DY model moderately and Bekaert and Engstrom (2017) model strongly overshoot
the predictive power of the variance premium for stock returns. Note that in the DY
model physical and risk-neutral variances are perfectly correlated, as both are linear in
2
t , rendering the multivariate regression undefined. The same is true for our base and
full models, as the variance risk premium is linear in nt and thus they generate perfect
correlation between the variance risk premium and the conditional variance of stock
returns. The preference shock model has two state variables, so that it can potentially
replicate the bivariate evidence. The new BEGE models generate regression coefficients
that are within a two standard error band of the data values for all coefficients considered
but cannot generate a negative value for the physical conditional variance coefficient. The
rare disaster model does generate such negative coefficients and also generates coefficients
within a two standard error band around all data coefficients. It tends to overshoot
(undershoot) the conditional variance (variance risk premium) coefficient.

       In sum, the predictability evidence is not favorable to the extant models, except for the
disaster models. The new BEGE model introduced in this article can match the evidence
in a statistical fashion. However, as most equilibrium models do, it implies a positive
risk-return trade-off with physical risk, whereas this trade-off in the data is weak and
maybe even negative. Lochstoer and Muir (2019) explain such evidence using a model
where the representative agent underreacts (and ultimately overreacts) to volatility news.
The predictability mechanism in our model is consistent with the empirical evidence in
  10
    The t-statistics are higher in absolute magnitude for some alternative measurements of the condi-
tional variance, but it appears that the significance is weakened by the addition of more data after 2010,
the end of the Bekaert-Hoerova sample.


                                                   35




                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Kilic and Shaliastovich (2019), as the predictability is driven by the "bad" uncertainty
state variable.


6     Conclusion
    In this article, we use properties of the variance risk premium, the premium for selling
variance risk in the equity market, to discipline and refute existing consumption-based
asset pricing models. The main result from our exercise is that extant models have a
hard time matching simultaneously even simple features of asset returns such as the
equity premium with features of options prices as reflected in the properties of the vari-
ance risk premium, and, importantly, the link between consumption growth and option
prices. We therefore introduce a new and tractable model that does fit these facts. The
model features a "BEGE" structure with "good" and "bad" volatility driving consump-
tion growth and risk aversion shocks, with bad (good) volatility decreasing (increasing)
unscaled skewness of these shocks. The model fits the data even better when a small
sentiment shock is allowed.

    Bollerslev, Tauchen and Zhou (2009) show that the equity premium and variance
premium are correlated. As an "out-of-sample" experiment, we verify how the various
models match the evidence on the predictability of the variance risk premium for stock
returns. The new BEGE model and Wachter's (2013) model are the only models that
can fully match the predictability evidence.

    While we examine models representing the various main asset paradigms, research
is continually evolving and alternative models may likewise be successful. For instance,
Schreindorfer (2019) combines a non-linear data-generating process for consumption growth
(a special case of the BEGE fundamentals), with generalized disappointment aversion
preferences as in Routledge and Zin (2010) and is able to match several of the data
features we consider. However, Drechsler (2018) shows that disappointment aversion
preferences imply counterfactual option price dynamics once the disappointment thresh-
old is passed. Our model is not subject to this critique. Schreindorfer (2019) also matches
a decomposition of the equity premium in components driven by tail risks and normal
risks stressed by Bollerslev and Todorov (2011). Beason and Schreindorfer (2019) show
that extant representative agent models fare poorly in matching this evidence but the
published BEGE paper by Bekaert and Engstrom (2017) at least matches part of it. We
plan to verify how our new BEGE model fares with respect to this evidence in future
                                                36




                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
work.

   There are alternative empirical approaches to discipline and refute models that may
prove useful for further testing of the new BEGE model. For example, Zviadadze (2018)
shows that the term structure of risk in expected returns and cash flow growth is challeng-
ing to a number of standard equilibrium models (including disaster risk and long-run risk
models). She assigns a large role to the dynamics of consumption variances in matching
stock return dynamics. Because time-varying consumption variances play a large role in
the BEGE model we introduce, even in the variant with preference shocks, it has potential
to be consistent with her findings.




                                               37




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
References
   Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, Karaman, Mustafa, and Loriano Mancini, 2018, The Term Structure of Variance
Swaps and Risk Premia, Working paper.
   Backus, David, Chernov, Mikhail, and Ian Martin, 2011, Disasters Implied by Equity Index Options,
Journal of Finance, 66, pp. 1969-2012.
   Bakshi, Gurdip, Kapadia, Nikunj, and Dilip Madan, 2003, Stock Return Characteristics, Skew Laws,
and the Differential Pricing of Individual Equity Options, Review of Financial Studies, 16, pp. 101-143.
   Bakshi, Gurdip, and Dilip Madan, 2000, Spanning and Derivative-security Valuation, Journal of
Financial Economics, 55, pp. 205-238.
    Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of Asset
Pricing Puzzles, Journal of Finance, 59, pp. 1481-1509.
   Barro, Robert, and Jose Ursua, 2008, Consumption Disasters in the Twentieth Century, American
Economic Review, 98, pp. 58-63.
   Beason, Tyler, and David Schreindorfer, 2019, On Sources of Risk Premia in Representative Agent
Models, Working paper.
    Bekaert, Geert, Engstrom, Eric, and Steven Grenadier, 2010, Stock and Bond Returns with Moody
Investors, Journal of Empirical Finance, 17, pp. 867-894.
   Bekaert, Geert, and Eric Engstrom, 2017, Asset Return Dynamics under Habits and Bad Environment-
Good Environment Fundamentals, Journal of Political Economy, 125, pp. 713-760.
   Bekaert, Geert, Engstrom, Eric, and Andrey Ermolov, 2015, Bad Environments, Good Environments:
A Non-Gaussian Asymmetric Volatility Model, Journal of Econometrics, 186, pp. 258-275.
   Bekaert, Geert, Engstrom, Eric, and Nancy Xu, 2019, The Time Variation in Risk Appetite and
Uncertainty, Working paper.
     Bekaert, Geert, and Marie Hoerova, 2014, The VIX, the Variance Premium and Stock Market Volatil-
ity, Journal of Econometrics 183, pp. 181-192.
   Bollerslev, Tim, Tauchen, George, and Hao Zhou, 2009, Expected Stock Returns and Variance Risk
Premia, Review of Financial Studies, 22, pp. 4463-4492.
    Bollerslev,Tim, and Viktor Todorov, 2011, Tails, Fears, and Risk Premia, Journal of Finance, 66,
pp. 2165-2211.
    Boudoukh, Jacob, Michaely, Robert, Richardson, Matthew, and Michael Roberts, 2007, On the
Importance of Measuring Payout Yield: Implications for Empirical Asset Pricing, Journal of Finance,
62, pp. 877-915.
    Britten-Jones, Mark, and Anthony Neuberger, 2000, Option Prices, Implied Price Processes, and
Stochastic Volatility, Journal of Finance, 55, pp. 839-866.
    Campbell, John, and John Cochrane, 1999, By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Explanation
of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior, Journal of Political Economy, 107, pp. 205-221.
    Cheng, Ing-Haw, 2019, The VIX Premium, Review of Financial Studies, 32, pp. 180-227.
   Corsi, Fulvio, 2009, A Simple Approximate Long-Memory Model of Realized Volatility, Journal of
Financial Econometrics, 7, pp. 174-196.
    Drechsler, Itamar, and Amir Yaron, 2011, What's Vol Got to Do with It, Review of Financial Studies,
24, pp. 1-45.

                                                  38




                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
    Drechsler, Itamar, 2018, Discussion of Macroeconomic Tail Risks and Asset Prices by David Schrein-
dorfer, Society of Financial Studies Cavalcade, available at https://sites.google.com/site/idrechsl/.
   Du, Du, 2011, General Equilibrium Pricing of Options with Habit Formation and Event Risks,
Journal of Financial Economics, 99, pp. 400-426.
   Epstein, Larry, and Stanley Zin, 1989,Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of
Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework, Econometrica, 57, pp. 937-969.
   Gabaix, Xavier, 2012, Variable Rare Disasters: An Exactly Solved Framework for Ten Puzzles in
Macro-Finance, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, pp. 645-700.
    Glosten, Lawrence, Jagannathan, Ravi, and David Runkle, 1993, On the Relation between the
Expected Value and the Volatility of the Nominal Excess Return on Stocks, Journal of Finance, 48, pp.
1779-1801.
    Jiang, George, and Yisong Tian, 2005, The Model-Free Implied Volatility and Its Information Con-
tent, Review of Financial Studies, 18, pp. 1305-1342.
   Kilic, Mete, and Ivan Shaliastovich, 2019, Good and Bad Variance Premia and Expected Returns,
Management Science, 65, pp. 2445-2945.
    Lochstoer, Lars, and Tyler, Muir, 2019, Volatility Expectations and Returns, Working paper.
    Longstaff, Francis, and Monika Piazzesi, 2004, Corporate Earnings and the Equity Premium, Journal
of Financial Economics, 74, pp. 401-421.
    Martin, Ian, 2017, What is the Expected Return on the Market?, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
132, pp. 367-433.
    Pohl, Walter, Schmedders, Karl, and Ole Wilms, 2018, Higher Order Effects in Asset Pricing Models
with Long-Run Risks, Journal of Finance, 73, pp. 1061-1111.
    Rietz, Thomas, 1988, The Equity Risk Premium A Solution, Journal of Monetary Economics, 22,
pp. 117-131.
   Routledge, Bryan, and Stanley Zin, 2010, Generalized Disappointment Aversion and Asset Prices,
Journal of Finance, 65, pp. 1303-1332.
    Schreindorfer, David, 2019, Macroeconomic Tail Risks and Asset Pricies, Review of Financial Studies,
forthcoming.
    Wachter, Jessica, 2005, Solving Models with External Habit, Finance Research Letters, 2, pp. 210-
226.
    Wachter, Jessica, 2013, Can Time-varying Risk of Rare Disasters Explain Aggregate Stock Market
Volatility?, Journal of Finance, 68, pp. 987-1035.
    Wachter, Jessica, and Sang Byung Seo, 2019, Option Prices in a Model With Stochastic Disaster
Risk, Management Science, 65, pp. 3449-3469.
    Whaley, Robert, 2000, The Investor Fear Gauge, The Journal of Portfolio Management, 26, pp.
12-17.
    Wooldridge, 2002, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT Press, pp. 445-446.
    Zviadadze, Irina, 2018, Term Structure of Risk in Expected Returns, Working paper.




                                                  39




                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Figure 1 ­ Variance and Volatility Risk Premia. Data is monthly from January 1990 to
December 2017. The variance risk premium is the difference between annualized V IX 2
and expected physical variance of the S &P 500 return from Corsi (2009)-type model. The
volatility risk premium is the difference between annualized VIX and expected physical
standard deviation of the S &P 500 return from Corsi (2009)-type model. NBER recessions
are shaded.




                                              40




                Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Figure 2 ­ Percentiles of Next Month Consumption Growth Conditional on the Current
Variance Risk Premium in the US data. Data is monthly from January 1990 to December
2017. Green up-pointing triangles correspond to quantiles conditional on the low variance
risk premium, and red down-pointing triangles correspond to quantiles conditional on
the high variance risk premium. The variance risk premium is the difference between
V IX 2 and expected physical variance of the market return obtained from a Corsi (2009)-
type model. High variance risk premium is defined as the variance risk premium above
80th unconditional percentile in the data and low variance risk premium as the variance
risk premium below 20th unconditional percentile in the data. *** and * correspond to
statistical significance at the 1% and 10% levels, respectively. Statistical significance is
determined based on block-bootstrap standard errors computed by re-sampling 10,000
time series of historical length with the block length of 60 months.




                                               41




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Figure 3 ­ Percentiles of Next Year Consumption Growth Conditional on the Current
Variance Risk Premium in the US data. Data is annually from 1929 to 2017. Green up-
pointing triangles correspond to quantiles conditional on the low variance risk premium,
and red down-pointing triangles correspond to quantiles conditional on the high variance
risk premium. High variance risk premium is defined as the variance risk premium above
80th unconditional percentile in the data and low variance risk premium as the variance
risk premium below 20th unconditional percentile in the data. ** corresponds to statistical
significance at the 5% level, respectively. Statistical significance is determined based on
block-bootstrap computed by re-sampling 10,000 time series of historical length with the
block length of 5 years.




                                               42




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Figure 4 ­ Bad Environment - Good Environment Distribution. Graphs are probability
density functions.

                                             43




               Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 1 ­ Percentiles of Next Month Consumption Growth Conditional on the Current
Variance Risk Premium in US data. Data is monthly from January 1990 to December
2017. The variance risk premium is the difference between V IX 2 and expected physical
variance of the market return obtained from a Corsi (2009)-type model. High variance
risk premium is defined as the variance risk premium above 80th unconditional percentile
in the data and low variance risk premium as the variance risk premium below 20th
unconditional percentile in the data. Standard errors in parentheses are block-bootstrap
standard errors computed from 10,000 re-samples of historical length with a block length
of 60 months. *** corresponds to statistical significance at the 1% level.

                   High variance risk premium        Low variance risk premium      High-Low Difference
   th
 10     percentile            -0.23%                           -0.02%                   -0.21%***
                             (0.07%)                          (0.03%)                     (0.07%)
 50th   percentile            0.18%                             0.20%                      -0.02%
                             (0.06%)                          (0.03%)                     (0.05%)
 90th   percentile            0.50%                             0.50%                       0.00%
                             (0.07%)                          (0.03%)                     (0.07%)




                                                44




                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 2 ­       Percentiles of Next Month Consumption Growth Conditional on the Current Variance Risk Premium in
US data: Alternative Specifications. Data is monthly from January 1990 to December 2017. In Panels A and B the
variance risk premium is the difference between V IX 2 and expected physical variance from a Corsi (2009)-type model. In
Panel C the variance risk premium is computed using conditional physical variance from GJR-GARCH model of Glosten,
Jagannathan and Runkle (1993). In Panel C, high variance risk premium is defined as the variance risk premium above 80th
unconditional percentile in the data and low variance risk premium as the variance risk premium below 20th unconditional
percentile in the data. Standard errors in parentheses are block-bootstrap standard errors computed from 10,000 re-samples
of historical length with a block length of 60 months. *** and ** correspond to statistical significance at the 1% and 5%
levels, respectively.

     Panel A: High and low variance risk premia are defined as 75th and 25th unconditional percentiles, respectively
                      High variance risk premium Low variance risk premium              High-Low Difference
     10th percentile             -0.25%                         -0.04%                       -0.20%***
                                (0.06%)                        (0.03%)                         (0.06%)
     50th percentile              0.18%                         0.20%                           -0.02%
                                (0.05%)                        (0.02%)                         (0.05%)
     90th percentile              0.51%                         0.50%                           0.00%
                                (0.06%)                        (0.02%)                         (0.06%)
     Panel B: High and low variance risk premia are defined as 85th and 15th unconditional percentiles, respectively
                      High variance risk premium Low variance risk premium              High-Low Difference
     10th percentile             -0.26%                         -0.01%                       -0.24%***
                                (0.07%)                        (0.03%)                         (0.08%)
     50th percentile              0.15%                         0.21%                           -0.06%
                                (0.07%)                        (0.04%)                         (0.06%)
     90th percentile              0.45%                         0.50%                           -0.05%
                                (0.09%)                        (0.04%)                         (0.08%)
                  Panel C: Variance risk premium is defined as VIX-GJR-GARCH conditional variance
                      High variance risk premium Low variance risk premium              High-Low Difference
     10th percentile             -0.22%                         -0.04%                        -0.18%**
                                (0.07%)                        (0.05%)                         (0.09%)
     50th percentile              0.19%                         0.20%                           -0.01%
                                (0.08%)                        (0.03%)                         (0.09%)
     90th percentile              0.51%                         0.50%                           0.01%
                                (0.09%)                        (0.04%)                         (0.10%)
                               Panel D: Consumption growth conditional on VIX2 alone
                               High VIX2                     Low VIX2                   High-Low Difference
       th
     10 percentile               -0.25%                         -0.05%                        -0.20%**
                                (0.07%)                        (0.04%)                         (0.08%)
     50th percentile              0.17%                         0.21%                           -0.04%
                                (0.08%)                        (0.03%)                         (0.08%)
     90th percentile              0.49%                         0.50%                           -0.01%
                                (0.09%)                        (0.04%)                         (0.09%)




                                                           45




                       Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 3 ­ General Asset Pricing Fit. Values are unconditional moments. Moments are an-
nualized monthly values. In data, the aggregate stock market is approximated by S&P500
index. Real risk-free rate is approximated as the difference between monthly nominal risk-
free rate from Ibbotson Associates and the monthly counterpart of Survey of Professional
Forecasters expected inflation for the corresponding quarter. Block-bootstrap standard
errors in parentheses are obtained by re-sampling 10,000 time series of the historical length
with a block length of 60 months. ** and *** correspond to the rejection of the model at
the 5% and 1% significance levels, respectively. BTZ refers to Bollerslev, Tauchen, and
Zhou (2009), DY to Drechsler and Yaron (2011), Wachter to Wachter (2013), and BEGE
to Bekaert and Engstrom (2017).

                                            BTZ     DY      Wachter     BEGE      US: 1990-2017   US: 1969-2017
 E (rf,t )                                 0.69%   0.95%     0.47%      1.24%         0.64%           1.35%
                                                                                    (0.60%)         (0.52%)
 Std(rf,t )                                9.86%   2.12%     2.73%      1.46%         1.92%           2.30%
                                                                                    (0.18%)         (0.21%)
 E (rt - rf,t )                            7.79%   6.04%     4.92%      6.15%         4.92%           6.15%
                                                                                    (2.69%)         (2.02%)
 Std(rt )                                  5.70%   18.10%    21.31%     16.81%       14.64%          15.64%
                                                                                    (1.33%)         (0.86%)
    Pt
 E( D t
        )                                  2.04    19.96      93.77      19.53        51.95           40.74
                                                                                      (4.69)          (4.94)
      Pt
 Std( Dt
         )                                 0.09     2.96      26.72      5.35         14.30           17.25
                                                                                      (2.61)          (2.86)
 2 -test     (1990-2017)                   3468    190       130        144
 2 -test     (1990-2017): no   P
                               D   stats   2645     12        43         20
 2 -test     (1969-2017)                   1647     83       177        123
 2 -test     (1969-2017): no   P
                               D   stats   1611     15        64         21




                                                   46




                     Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 4 ­ Variance and Volatility Risk Premium Moments Fit. Values are computed
from monthly data and annualized. The model variance risk premium is defined as the
difference between the conditional risk-neutral and physical variances of the next month's
log-market return. The model volatility risk premium is defined as the difference between
the conditional risk-neutral and physical standard deviations of the next month's log-
market return. In data the risk-neutral log-return variance is proxied by V IX 2 and
physical log-return variance by the value implied by a Corsi (2009)-type model using
high-frequency data. In data the risk-neutral log-return volatility is proxied by V IX
and physical log-return standard deviation by the value implied by a Corsi (2009)-type
model using high-frequency data. The block-bootstrap standard error in parentheses are
obtained by re-sampling 10,000 time series of the historical length with a block length of
60 months. BTZ refers to Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009), DY to Drechsler and
Yaron (2011), Wachter to Wachter (2013), and BEGE to Bekaert and Engstrom (2017).

                   Panel A: Variance Risk Premium Moments Fit
                              BTZ       DY    Wachter BEGE US: 1990-2017
      Mean                   0.0000 0.0093 0.1208 0.0064         0.0195
                                                                (0.0026)
      Standard deviation     0.0000 0.0199 0.1025 0.0023         0.0225
                                                                (0.0051)
      Lag 1 autocorrelation 1.00       0.90     0.99   0.95       0.52
                                                                 (0.09)
                   Panel B: Volatility Risk Premium Moments Fit
                              BTZ       DY    Wachter BEGE US: 1990-2017
      Mean                   0.00% 2.35% 15.08% 1.87%            5.36%
                                                                (0.58%)
      Standard deviation     0.00% 1.94%       9.52%  0.39%      4.02%
                                                                (0.33%)
      Lag 1 autocorrelation 1.00       0.89     0.99   0.97       0.45
                                                                 (0.10)




                                               47




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 5 ­ Martin (2017) Bound Fit. Standard errors in parentheses are computed via
bootstrapping the historical time series 10,000 times. VIX and SVIX are defined as in
Martin (2017). Model values are obtained by simulating 100,000 monthly observations
for each model. BTZ refers to Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009), DY to Drechsler and
Yaron (2011), Wachter to Wachter (2013), and BEGE to Bekaert and Engstrom (2017).

                           BTZ         DY   Wachter         BEGE       US: 1996-2012
        V IX              19.58%     16.70% 38.79%          17.94%        22.32%
        Standard error                                                   (0.59%)
        SV IX             19.61%     16.62%        32.31%   17.76%        20.91%
        Standard error                                                   (0.53%)
        V IX - SV IX      -0.03%      0.07%        6.48%     0.18%         1.41%
        Standard error                                                   (0.06%)




                                              48




                Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 6 ­ Percentiles of Next Month Consumption Growth Conditional on the Current
Variance Risk Premium Fit. In models the variance risk premium is defined as the differ-
ence between the conditional risk-neutral and physical variances of log-market returns.
In data the risk-neutral log-return variance is proxied by V IX 2 and physical log-return
variance by the value implied by a Corsi (2009)-type model using high-frequency data.
High variance risk premium is defined as the variance risk premium above 80th uncondi-
tional percentile and low variance risk premium as the variance risk premium below 20th
unconditional percentile. Values are computed numerically by simulating time series of
1,000,000 months under each model. BTZ refers to Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009),
DY to Drechsler and Yaron (2011), Wachter to Wachter (2013), and BEGE to Bekaert
and Engstrom (2017). For the High-Low Difference, *** indicates that the model value
is more than 2.58 standard deviations away from the data counterpart.

                                           Panel A: BTZ
                   High variance risk premium Low variance risk premium              High-Low Difference
 10th percentile             -1.62%                      -11.91%                          10.29%
 50th percentile              0.15%                        0.15%                            0.00%
 90th percentile              1.92%                       12.21%                         -10.29%
                                            Panel B: DY
                   High variance risk premium Low variance risk premium              High-Low Difference
 10th percentile             -1.06%                       -0.47%                         -0.59%
 50th percentile              0.16%                        0.16%                           0.00%
 90th percentile              1.38%                        0.79%                          0.59%
                             Panel C: DY skipping forward one month
                   High variance risk premium Low variance risk premium              High-Low Difference
 10th percentile             -1.03%                       -0.47%                         -0.56%
 50th percentile              0.16%                        0.16%                           0.00%
 90th percentile              1.34%                        0.79%                          0.55%
                                         Panel D: Wachter
                   High variance risk premium Low variance risk premium              High-Low Difference
 10th percentile             -0.55%                       -0.53%                         -0.02%
 50th percentile              0.20%                        0.21%                           -0.01%
 90th percentile              0.94%                        0.94%                           0.00%
                                          Panel E: BEGE
                   High variance risk premium Low variance risk premium              High-Low Difference
 10th percentile             -0.31%                       -0.20%                           -0.11%
 50th percentile              0.17%                        0.16%                           0.01%
 90th percentile              0.56%                        0.51%                           0.05%
                                       Panel F: US 1990-2017
                   High variance risk premium Low variance risk premium              High-Low Difference
 10th percentile             -0.23%                       -0.02%                           -0.21%
 50th percentile              0.18%                        0.20%                           -0.02%
 90th percentile              0.50%                        0.50%                           0.00%



                                                 49




                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 7 ­ Classical Minimum Distance Parameter Estimates. Values are monthly. The
weighting matrix is the inverse of the covariance matrix estimated from re-sampling 10,000
time series of the historical length with the block length of 60 months. A diagonal
weighting matrix is used. Standard errors are in parentheses.

                                    Base model Full model
                                         Preferences
                                      1.0000           1.0000
                                      (fixed)         (fixed)
                                      1.9870           2.0593
                                     (0.5972)        (0.6480)
                             q
                             ¯        1.0000           1.0000
                                      (fixed)         (fixed)
                             q        0.9904           0.9873
                                     (0.0121)        (0.0147)
                             qp     -2.64 · 10-5 -2.39 · 10-5
                                     (0.0011)        (0.0009)
                             qn       0.1140           0.1203
                                     (0.0327)        (0.0330)
                                    Consumption growth
                             g
                             ¯        0.0017           0.0019
                                     (0.0002)        (0.0002)
                             cp       0.0007           0.0006
                                     (0.0002)        (0.0002)
                             cn       0.0035           0.0033
                                     (0.0005)        (0.0005)
                             p
                             ¯        11.0848        16.6721
                                     (4.8705)        (6.1193)
                             n
                             ¯        0.0621           0.0822
                                     (0.0211)        (0.0223)
                             n        0.9954           0.9915
                                     (0.0164)        (0.0205)
                             nn       0.0327           0.0394
                                     (0.0159)        (0.0168)
                             g                        -0.0056
                                                     (0.0023)
                                     Dividend growth
                             d                        -0.0007
                                                     (0.0019)
                             g                        2.9255
                                                     (0.3628)
                             n                        0.7336
                                                     (0.3930)

                                               50




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 8 ­ Classical Minimum Distance Moments Fit. Values are monthly. The weighting
matrix is the inverse of the covariance matrix estimated from re-sampling 10,000 time
series of the historical length with the block length of 60 months. The diagonal weighting
matrix is used. In data the risk-neutral log-return variance is proxied by V IX 2 and
physical log-return variance by the value implied by a Corsi (2009)-type model using high-
frequency data. ** and *** correspond to the rejection at the 5% and 1% significance
levels, respectively.

 Moment                             Base model Full model           Data     Data standard error
                                      Consumption growth
 E (gt )                               0.0017         0.0019       0.0020          0.0002
 Std(gt )                              0.0024         0.0024       0.0024          0.0002
 Skw(gt )                              0.1170        -0.0100       0.1163          0.3141
 ExKur(gt )                            2.0166         1.8513       2.0186          0.7741
                                          Risk-free rate
 E (rf,t )                             0.0013         0.0007       0.0005          0.0004
 Std(rf,t )                            0.0016         0.0016       0.0016          0.0001
 Corr(rf,t , rf,t+1 )                  0.9858         0.9791       0.9735          0.0093
                                        Dividend growth
 Std(dt )                                             0.0074      0.0075           0.0015
 Skw(dt )                                            -0.3444      -0.9717          0.6496
 ExKur(dt )                                           3.5383      3.0077           1.4094
                                             Equity
 E (rt - rf,t )                        0.0020         0.0028       0.0041          0.0023
 Std(rt )                              0.0462         0.0455       0.0426          0.0039
 E (pdt )                              6.4515         6.4326       6.3969          0.0644
 Std(pdt )                             0.3002         0.2384       0.2796          0.0377
 Corr(pdt , pdt+1 )                    0.9897         0.9846       0.9917          0.0079
                                             Options
      Q
 V ar (rt ) - V ar(rt )                0.0015         0.0016       0.0016          0.0003
            Q
 Std(V art (rt+1 ) - V art (rt+1 ))    0.0020         0.0017       0.0019          0.0003
 V IX 2 - SV IX 2                      0.0007         0.0007       0.0006          0.0001
  2
  -statistic                         12.5042**        6.2485
 p-value                               1.49%         10.10%




                                               51




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 9 ­ Percentiles of Next Month Consumption Growth Conditional on the Current
Variance Risk Premium: Model Implications. The model variance risk premium is de-
fined as the difference between the conditional risk-neutral and physical variances of the
next month's log-market return. In data the risk-neutral log-return variance is proxied
by V IX 2 and physical log-return variance by the value implied by a Corsi (2009)-type
model using high-frequency data. High variance risk premium is defined as the vari-
ance risk premium above 80th unconditional percentile and low variance risk premium
as the variance risk premium below 20th unconditional percentile. Values are computed
numerically by simulating time series of 100,000 months under each model. Data block-
bootstrap standard errors in parentheses are obtained by re-sampling 10,000 time series
of the historical length with a block length of 60 months. *** indicates the statistical
significance of the data value at the 1% level.

                                 Panel A: US data 1990M1-2017M2
                   High variance risk premium Low variance risk premium              High-Low difference
 10th   percentile           -0.23%                     -0.02%                           -0.21%***
                                                                                          (0.07%)
 50th percentile                0.18%                              0.20%                   -0.02%
                                                                                          (0.05%)
 90th percentile                0.50%                              0.50%                    0.00%
                                                                                          (0.07%)
                                            Panel B: Base model
                   High variance risk     premium Low variance risk premium          High-Low difference
   th
 10     percentile           -0.17%                           -0.10%                       -0.07%
 50th   percentile           0.16%                             0.15%                        0.01%
 90th   percentile           0.50%                             0.48%                        0.02%
                                            Panel C: Full model
                   High variance risk     premium Low variance risk premium          High-Low difference
   th
 10     percentile           -0.24%                           -0.04%                       -0.20%
 50th   percentile           0.11%                             0.21%                       -0.10%
 90th   percentile           0.44%                             0.52%                       -0.08%




                                                 52




                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 10 ­ Variance Risk Premium Monthly Autocorrelation. The data values are for
the difference between the V IX 2 and the conditional physical variance estimate from a
Corsi (2009) model. Data standard errors in parentheses are obtained by re-sampling
10,000 time series of the historical length with a block length of 60 months. The model
estimates are for the difference between the conditional risk-neutral and physical variances
of log-returns.

                           Model           US data 1990M1-2017M12
                       Base    Full        Estimate Standard error
                       0.9954 0.9915        0.5197      0.0943




                                               53




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 11 ­ Classical Minimum Distance Parameter Estimates for the Model with a Pref-
erence Shock. Values are monthly. The weighting matrix is the inverse of the covariance
matrix estimated from re-sampling 10,000 time series of the historical length with the
block length of 60 months. A diagonal weighting matrix is used. Standard errors are in
parentheses.
                                         Preferences
                                                1.0000
                                               (fixed)
                                                2.1432
                                              (0.6441)
                                     q
                                     ¯          1.0000
                                               (fixed)
                                     q          0.9926
                                              (0.0211)
                                     qp      -2 · 10-5
                                              (0.0010)
                                     qn         0.0204
                                              (0.0096)
                                     qq         0.2085
                                              (0.0584)
                                     s
                                     ¯          0.0037
                                              (0.0018)
                                     s          0.5912
                                              (0.0179)
                                     sq         0.0554
                                              (0.0272)
                                     Consumption growth
                                     g
                                     ¯          0.0018
                                              (0.0002)
                                     cp         0.0017
                                              (0.0003)
                                     cn         0.0012
                                              (0.0004)
                                     p
                                     ¯          0.9003
                                              (0.3710)
                                     n
                                     ¯          2.1432
                                              (0.8499)
                                     n          0.9938
                                              (0.0295)
                                     nn         0.1705
                                              (0.0514)
                                     n         -0.0002
                                              (0.0001)
                                       Dividend growth
                                     d         -0.0001
                                              (0.0002)
                                     g          0.9570
                                              (0.4158)
                                     n          3.5825
                                              (1.0001)

                                              54




                Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 12 ­ Classical Minimum Distance Moments Fit for the Model with a Preference
Shock. Values are monthly. The weighting matrix is the inverse of the covariance matrix
estimated from re-sampling 10,000 time series of the historical length with the block
length of 60 months. A diagonal weighting matrix is used. In the data the risk-neutral
log-return variance is proxied by V IX 2 and the physical log-return variance by the value
implied by a Corsi (2009)-type model using high-frequency data. *** corresponds to the
rejection at the 1% significance level.

       Moment                                     Model        Data Data standard error
                                        Consumption growth
       E (gt )                                    0.0018     0.0020       0.0002
       Std(gt )                                   0.0024      0.0024      0.0002
       Skw(gt )                                   0.1097      0.1163      0.3141
       ExKur(gt )                                 2.0303      2.0186      0.7741
                                              Risk-free rate
       E (rf,t )                                  0.0009      0.0005      0.0004
       Std(rf,t )                                 0.0018      0.0016      0.0001
       Corr(rf,t , rf,t+1 )                       0.9686      0.9735      0.0093
                                           Dividend growth
       Std(dt )                                   0.0081      0.0075      0.0015
       Skw(dt )                                  -1.2818     -0.9717      0.6496
       ExKur(dt )                                 2.6162     3.0077       1.4094
                                                 Equity
       E (rt - rf,t )                             0.0025      0.0041      0.0023
       Std(rt )                                   0.0419     0.0426       0.0039
       E (pdt )                                   6.4555      6.3969      0.0644
       Std(pdt )                                  0.2791     0.2796       0.0377
       Corr(pdt , pdt+1 )                         0.9919      0.9917      0.0079
                                                 Options
            Q
       V ar (rt ) - V ar(rt )                     0.0015     0.0016       0.0003
                  Q
       Std(V art    (rt+1 ) - V art (rt+1 ))      0.0015     0.0019       0.0003
                   Q
       AC1 (V art    (rt+1 ) - V art (rt+1 ))     0.5939      0.5197      0.0943
              2            2
       V IX - SV IX                               0.0007     0.0006       0.0001
        2
        -statistic                              8.6043***
       p-value                                    0.37%




                                               55




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Table 13 ­ Percentiles of Next Month Consumption Growth Conditional on the Cur-
rent Variance Risk Premium: Model with a Preference Shock. The model variance risk
premium is defined as the difference between the conditional risk-neutral and physical
variances of the next month's log-market return. In data the risk-neutral log-return vari-
ance is proxied by V IX 2 and physical log-return variance by the value implied by a Corsi
(2009)-type model using high-frequency data. High variance risk premium is defined as
the variance risk premium above 80th unconditional percentile and low variance risk pre-
mium as the variance risk premium below 20th unconditional percentile. Model values are
computed numerically by simulating time series of 100,000 months. Data block-bootstrap
standard errors in parentheses are obtained by re-sampling 10,000 time series of the his-
torical length with a block length of 60 months. *** indicates the statistical significance
of the data value at the 1% level.

                              Panel A: Model with a preference shock
                   High variance risk premium Low variance risk premium              High-Low difference
 10th   percentile           -0.25%                        0.08%                           -0.34%
 50th   percentile           0.11%                         0.19%                           -0.08%
 90th   percentile           0.44%                         0.48%                           -0.05%
                                 Panel B: US data 1990M1-2017M2
                   High variance risk premium Low variance risk premium              High-Low difference
   th
 10     percentile           -0.23%                       -0.02%                         -0.21%***
                                                                                          (0.07%)
 50th percentile                0.18%                              0.20%                   -0.02%
                                                                                          (0.05%)
 90th percentile                0.50%                              0.50%                    0.00%
                                                                                          (0.07%)




                                                 56




                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
                                                                       Table 14 ­ Variance Risk Premium and Excess Equity Return Predictability. The values are slope coefficients from monthly
                                                                       regressions. The data values are from regressing log aggregate excess equity returns on the variance risk premium, V Pt , and
                                                                       the conditional physical variance estimate from a Corsi (2009)-type model using high-frequency data, CVt . Data standard
                                                                       errors in parentheses are obtained by re-sampling 10,000 time series of the historical length with a block length of 60 months.
                                                                       The model estimates are from regressing log aggregate equity excess returns on the difference between the variance risk
                                                                       premium of log-market returns, V Pt , and conditional physical variance of log-returns, CVt . The model values are obtained
                                                                       by simulating 100,000 monthly samples. BTZ refers to Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009), DY to Drechsler and Yaron
                                                                       (2011), Wachter to Wachter (2013), and BEGE to Bekaert and Engstrom (2017). * and *** correspond to the statistical
                                                                       significance at the 10% and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                                                          Specification 1: rt+1 month - rf,t = 0 + V P · V Pt + t+1
                                                                                          Extant models                                 New Model                                    Data
                                                                                              BTZ           DY     Wachter BEGE              base      full    preference shock
                                                                                   V P       -0.0639      0.0579    0.0047     0.1024       0.0131   0.0166         0.0119         0.0378*
                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.0217)
                                                                                                     Specification 2: rt+1 month - rf,t = 0 + V P · V Pt + CV · CVt + t+1
                                                                                          Extant models                                   New Model                                  Data




                                                                  57
                                                                                              BTZ            DY      Wachter BEGE            base        full  preference shock
                                                                                   V P       -0.0002          -       0.0100     0.0996       -           -         0.0137         0.0374*
                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.0206)
                                                                                   CV         0.0181         -      -0.0300   0.0006         -           -          0.0018          -0.0156
                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.0148)
                                                                                                          Specification 3: rt+3 months - rf,t = 0 + V P · V Pt + t+1
                                                                                          Extant models                                  New Model                                   Data
                                                                                              BTZ           DY     Wachter BEGE               base      full    preference shock
                                                                                   V P       -0.1853      0.1582     0.0146    0.2890       0.0395    0.0519         0.0234        0.0842***
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.0309)




Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
                                                                                                    Specification 4: rt+3 months - rf,t = 0 + V P · V Pt + CV · CVt + t+1
                                                                                          Extant models                                   New Model                                  Data
                                                                                              BTZ           DY      Wachter BEGE            base         full  preference shock
                                                                                   V P       -0.0072          -      0.0270     0.3044        -           -         0.0279         0.0838***
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.0303)
                                                                                   CV         0.0507         -      -0.0734   -0.0033        -           -          0.0135           -0.0170
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.0315)
Internet Appendix I: The Variance Risk Premium un-
der Log-Normality
   Denote by Mt+1 the gross pricing kernel at time t + 1, and Rt+1 the gross equity
return at time t + 1. In no arbitrage economies, the usual pricing condition implies
Et [Mt+1 Rt+1 ] = 1. We use lowercase letters to indicate the natural logarithms of upper
case variables.

   Proposition 1. If Mt+1 and Rt+1 are conditionally log-normal, then the variance
risk premium for log-returns is 0, that is, the physical variance of log-returns is equal to
their risk-neutral variance.

   Proof. Suppose that mt+1 and rt+1 both have linear dependence on a multivariate
conditionally Gaussian state vector, Xt+1 :

      Xt+1  N (0, t ),
      mt+1 = m
             ¯ t + m Xt+1 ,                                                            (41)
      rt+1 = r
             ¯t + r Xt+1 .

   Note that the moment-generating function for returns under the physical measure is
defined as:

      mgftP (rt+1 ;  ) =Et [exp(rt+1 )] = Et [exp( r
                                                   ¯t + r Xt+1 )]
                                      1                                                (42)
                        = exp( r¯t +  2 r t r ).
                                      2

   Calculating the first derivative of mgftP (rt+1 ;  ) with respect to  and evaluating at
 = 0 yields the conditional mean of returns:

      Et [rt+1 ] = r
                   ¯t .                                                                (43)


   Calculating the second derivative of mgftP (rt+1 ;  ) with respect to  and evaluating
                                                  2
at  = 0 yields the uncentered second moment, Et [rt +1 ]. Using the definition of variance,
this leads to the expected expression for variance under the physical measure:

                           2             2    2
      V art [rt+1 ] = Et [rt +1 ] - Et [rt+1 ] = r t r .                               (44)
                                                  58




                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
   Next, to calculate risk-neutral conditional moments, we need to evaluate the risk-
neutral moment-generating function, which is defined as:

                           Et [exp(mt+1 + rt+1 )]
      mgftQ (rt+1 ;  ) =                          .                                        (45)
                                Et [exp(mt+1 )]

   This simplifies to:

       Et [exp(mt+1 + rt+1 )]
                              = Et [exp(m      ¯t + (m + r )Xt+1 ]
                                         ¯ t + r
            Et [exp(mt+1 )]                                                                (46)
                                             1         1           1
                              = exp( r¯t +  2 r t r + m t r + r t m ).
                                             2         2           2

We proceed, again, by evaluating successive derivatives of mgftQ (rt+1 ;  ) with respect to
 and evaluating at  = 0. Eventually, we arrive at:

          Q
      V art [rt+1 ] = r t r ,                                                              (47)

            Q               P
so that V art [rt+1 ] = V art [rt+1 ].

   Proposition 2. If Mt+1 and Rt+1 are conditionally log-normal, then the conditional
equity premium and the conditional variance risk premium can not simultaneously be
positive.

   P roof: Given that Mt+1 and Rt+1 are conditionally log-normal:

                                    2
        mt+1               m
                           ¯t       m,t    mr,t
                  N(            ,          2
                                                  ),
         rt+1              r
                           ¯t       mr,t   r,t

the physical return variance can be computed as:

                           2                  2   2¯     2
                                                   rt +2r,t          2           2   2
      V art (Rt+1 ) = Et (Rt +1 ) - Et (Rt+1 ) = e          - e2¯
                                                                rt +r,t
                                                                        = e2¯
                                                                            rt +r,t r,t
                                                                                   (e - 1). (48)


   The risk-neutral expectation is:

                      Et (Mt+1 Rt+1 )
      EtQ (Rt+1 ) =                   .
                        Et (Mt+1 )




                                                  59




                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
   The risk-neutral variance can now be computed as:

                                             2
      Et (Mt+1 ) = Et (emt+1 ) = em
                                  ¯ t +0.5m,t
                                              ,
                                                           2        2
      Et (Mt+1 Rt+1 ) = Et (emt+1 +rt+1 ) = em
                                             ¯ t +¯
                                                  rt +0.5m,t +0.5r,t +mr,t
                                                                           ,
                              2
      EtQ (Rt+1 ) = er
                     ¯t +0.5r,t +mr,t
                                      ,
                2              mt+1 +2rt+1                     2            2
      Et (Mt+1 Rt +1 ) = Et (e             ) = em
                                                ¯ t +2¯
                                                      rt +0.5m,t +2mr,t +2r,t
                                                                              ,             (49)
                                   2
      EtQ (Rt
            2
              +1 ) = e
                      2¯
                       rt +2mr,t +2r,t
                                         ,
          Q                                                             2         2
      V art (Rt+1 ) = EtQ (Rt
                            2         Q        2
                              +1 ) - Et (Rt+1 ) = e
                                                     rt +2mr,t +2r,t
                                                    2¯                   rt +r,t +2mr,t
                                                                     - e2¯              =
            2             2
      e2¯
        rt +r,t +2mr,t r,t
                      (e - 1).


   Comparing the final line of (49) to the final line of (48), we can see that in order for
                                              Q
the variance risk premium to be positive (V art (Rt+1 ) > V art (Rt+1 )) as in the data, it
must be the case that mr,t > 0.

   However, note that mr,t > 0 implies (counterfactually) a negative equity premium.
This can be seen from the typical Euler equation using properties of the log-normal
distribution:

      Et (Mt+1 Rt+1 ) = 1,
                  2       2
      em
       ¯ t +¯
            rt +0.5r,t +0.5m,t +mr,t
                                     = 1,
                  2       2
      em
       ¯ t +¯
            rt +0.5r,t +0.5m,t
                               = e-mr,t ,                                                   (50)
      Et (Rt+1 )Et (Mt+1 ) = e-mr,t ,
       ln Et (Rt+1 ) - rf,t = -mr,t ,

where rf,t is the log-risk-free rate.




                                                   60




                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Internet Appendix II: Parameterization of Existing
Models
Model Parameters. The notation follows original articles. Parameterizations are monthly
except for the annual parameterization in Wachter (2013). For Bollerslev, Tauchen, and
Zhou (2009) 1 is the constant in Campbell and Shiller (1988) log-linearization of the
aggregate market return: rt+1 = 0 + 1 t+1 - t + dt+1 .
                              Panel A: Bollerslev, Tauchen, and Zhou (2009)
 Preferences                                                               1
                  0.997       10                     1.5                  0.9
 gt                 µg
                 0.0015
 2
 g,t                a         
               1.34 · 10-6   0.978
 qt                 aq         q                      q
                2 · 10-7      0.8                   0.0010
                                    Panel B: Drechsler and Yaron (2011)
 Preferences                                           
                  0.999        9.5                    2.0
 gt                 g0          c                     c
                 0.0016      0.0066                   0.5
 xt                x0           x                     x                    x           l1,x     µx     x
                    0         0.976                 0.0002                  1        0.0667   0.0008   1
  2                  2
 ¯t
                    ¯0           ¯2                    ¯2                    ¯2
                  0.015       0.985                   0.1                   0
 2                   2
 t                 0            2                    2                      2         l1,2     µ2      2
                    0          0.87                  0.35                   1        0.0667    2.55    1
 dt                 d0                                d                    d           cd
                 0.0016        2.5                  0.0376                0.125        0.2
                                          Panel C: Wachter (2013)
 Preferences                    
                  0.012          3
 Ct                 µ                                  Z
                 0.0252       0.02    Table 8 in Barro and Ursua (2008)
 Dt                 
                   2.6
 t                  ¯
                                                       
                 0.0355       0.08                   0.067
                                    Panel D: Bekaert and Engstrom (2017)
 Preferences                                            s
                                                        ¯                               b
                0.9999        11.43                 -1.5585              0.9963      0.0099
 gt                g
                   ¯           cp                      cn                   p
                                                                            ¯           n
                                                                                        ¯       n      nn
                0.0014       0.0007                  0.0019              11.43        1.56     0.91    0.32
 dt               dp           dn
                -0.0055      0.0217



                                                 61




                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Internet Appendix III: Model Solution
 The price-dividend ratio is:
           
    Pt
       =         eAi +Bi pt +Ci nt +Di qt ,
    Dt     i=1

   A1 = ln  + (1 -  )¯
                     g +  (1 - q )¯
                                  q,
   B1 = -g (m,p + cp ),
   C1 = -g (m,n - cn ),
                                                                                    (51)
   D1 = - (1 - q ),
                         ¯(1 - p ) + Cn-1 n
   An = An-1 + A1 + Bn-1 p                ¯ (1 - n ) + Dn-1 q
                                                            ¯(1 - q ),
   Bn = Bn-1 p - g (m,p + cp + Bn-1 pp + Dn-1 qp ),
   Cn = Cn-1 n - g (m,n - cn + Cn-1 nn + Dn-1 qn ),
   Dn = Dn-1 q + D1 .


 The Taylor series log-linearization of (51) is:

         1    1        1        1
   pdt  K0 + Kp p t + Kn nt + K q qt ,
              
    1         i=1 Bi exp(Ai + Bi p¯ + Ci n
                                         ¯ + Di q
                                                ¯)
   Kp =                                            ,
                i=1 exp(Ai + Bi p
                                ¯ + Ci n
                                       ¯ + Di q
                                              ¯)
              
    1         i=1 Ci exp(Ai + Bi p¯ + Ci n
                                         ¯ + Di q
                                                ¯)
   Kn =                                            ,
                i=1 exp(Ai + Bi p
                                ¯ + Ci n
                                       ¯ + Di q
                                              ¯)                                    (52)
              
    1         i=1 Di exp(Ai + Bi p¯ + Ci n
                                         ¯ + Di q
                                                ¯)
   Kq =                                            ,
                i=1 exp(Ai + Bi p
                                ¯ + Ci n
                                       ¯ + Di q
                                              ¯)
               
    1                                                1      1      1
   K0 = ln[                     ¯ + Ci n
                    exp(Ai + Bi p             ¯)] - Kp
                                       ¯ + Di q        ¯ - Kn
                                                       p      ¯ - Kq
                                                              n      q
                                                                     ¯.
              i=1




                                                62




                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
                                                 Pt+1
  The Taylor series linearization of ln(1 +      Dt+1
                                                      )   is:

           Pt+1        2    2          2            2
      ln(1 +     )  K0   + Kp pt+1 + Kn  nt+1 + Kq    qt+1 ,
           Dt+1
             
      2      i=1 Bi exp(Ai + Bi p
                                ¯ + Ci n
                                       ¯ + Di q
                                              ¯)
     Kp =                                         ,
          1 + i=1 exp(Ai + Bi p  ¯ + Ci n
                                        ¯ + Di q
                                               ¯)
             
      2      i=1 Ci exp(Ai + Bi p
                                ¯ + Ci n
                                       ¯ + Di q
                                              ¯)
     Kn =                                         ,                                            (53)
          1 + i=1 exp(Ai + Bi p  ¯ + Ci n
                                        ¯ + Di q
                                               ¯)
             
      2      i=1 Di exp(Ai + Bi p
                                ¯ + Ci n
                                       ¯ + Di q
                                              ¯)
     Kq =                                         ,
          1 + i=1 exp(Ai + Bi p  ¯ + Ci n
                                        ¯ + Di q
                                               ¯)
                     
      0                                                     2      2      2
     K2   = ln[1 +                     ¯ + Ci n
                           exp(Ai + Bi p             ¯)] - Kp
                                              ¯ + Di q        ¯ - Kn
                                                              p      ¯ - Kq
                                                                     n      q
                                                                            ¯.
                     i=1


  The expression for the log-return is:

     rt+1  r0 + rp pt + rn nt + rq qt + r,p p,t+1 + r,n n,t+1 ,
               2    1    2              2               2
     r0 = g
          ¯ + K0 - K0 + Kp ¯(1 - p ) + Kn
                           p              ¯ (1 - n ) + Kq
                                          n               ¯(1 - q ),
                                                          q
            2       1
     rp = K p  p - Kp ,
            2      1
     rn = K n n - Kn ,                                                                         (54)
            2       1
     rq = K q  q - Kq ,
                 2       2
     r,p = cp + Kp pp + Kq qp ,
                  2       2
     r,n = -cn + Kn nn + Kq qn .


  SV IX 2 can be computed as:

                 Rt+1         1 2                 1
SV IX 2 = Q,t
          2
              (         ) = 2 Q,t     (Rt+1 ) = 2 (EtQ (Rt  2           Q     2
                                                             +1 ) - (Et Rt+1 ) ) =
                  Rf,t       Rf,t               Rf,t
 1                   2                              2     1                   2         2
 2
     (Rf,t Et (Mt+1 Rt +1 ) - (Rf,t Et (Mt+1 Rt+1 )) ) =  2
                                                              (Rf,t Et (Mt+1 Rt +1 ) - Rf,t ) = (55)
Rf,t                                                     Rf,t
          2
Et (Mt+1 Rt +1 )
                 - 1 = Et [exp(mt+1 + 2rt+1 - rf,t )] - 1.
     Rf,t




                                                63




                  Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
   By plugging (18), (20) and (28) into (55) we obtain:

       SV IXt2 = exp(m0 + 2r0 - f0 + [mq + 2rq - fq ]qt +
                                                                                                                              (56)
       [2rp - g (m,p + 2r,p ) - fp ]pt + [2rn - g (m,n + 2r,n ) - fn ]nt ) - 1.


   Computation of E [X · exp(X )], where X  (k, ) with k being the shape and  the
scale parameters, respectively:
                                                                                                        x
                       1              x             1                                              -    
 E [X · exp(X )] =       k
                              xk-1 e-  xex dx =                                x   (k+1)-1
                                                                                               e       1-    dx =
                   (k ) 0                        (k )k                 0
                                                                                                          x
    1                     k+1                1                                         (k+1)-1
                                                                                                     -    

       k
         · (k + 1) · (     )   ·                  k+1
                                                       ·                           x             e       1-     dx        =
 (k )                  1-           (k + 1) · ( 1-  )                      0
                                                                                                                              (57)
                                                                                                                      
                                       =1, as pdf of gamma distribution with shape k + 1 and scale                   1-
                k+1
  (k + 1) · ( 1- 
                  )       k
              k
                    =           ,
      (k )            (1 - )k+1

where the last step uses the property of the gamma function that (k + 1) = k · (k )
                                                                                                                 x
                                                                                                            -    
                                                               1                             (k+1)-1
and the second line requires  < 1 in order for                    
                                                         (k+1)·( 1-  )k+1
                                                                               ·   0
                                                                                         x               e      1-   dx to be a
                                                                    
proper probability density function. This condition is always satisfied in our estimation.
Now V IXt2 can be computed by plugging (18), (20), and (28) into (35):

V IXt2 = 2 · [rf,t - erf,t ·
Et {em0 +mq qt +m,p p,t+1 +m,n n,t+1 · (r0 + rp pt + rn nt + rq qt + r,p p,t+1 + r,n n,t+1 )}] =
2 · [rf,t - erf,t +m0 +mq qt · Et {em,p p,t+1 +m,n n,t+1 · (r0 + rp pt + rn nt + rq qt )+
em,p p,t+1 +m,n n,t+1 · (r,p p,t+1 + r,n n,t+1 )}] = 2 · [rf,t - erf,t +m0 +mq qt ·
{e-g(m,p )pt -g(m,n )nt · (r0 + rp pt + rn nt + rq qt ) + Et [em,p p,t+1 em,n n,t+1 r,p p,t+1 ]+
Et [em,p p,t+1 em,n n,t+1 r,n n,t+1 ]}] = 2 · [rf,t - erf,t +m0 +mq qt · {e-g(m,p )pt -g(m,n )nt ·
(r0 + rp pt + rn nt + rq qt ) + e-g(m,n )nt r,p Et [eM,p p,t+1 p,t+1 ] + e-g(m,p )pt r,n Et [eM,n n,t+1 n,t+1 ]}] =
2 · [rf,t - erf,t +m0 +mq qt · {e-g(m,p )pt -g(m,n )nt · (r0 + rp pt + rn nt + rq qt )+
                                                           pt
e-g(m,n )nt r,p · (-pt e-g(m,p )pt + e-m,p pt                       )+
                                                  (1 - m,p )pt +1
                                                            nt
e-g(m,p )pt r,n · (-nt e-g(m,n )nt + e-m,n nt                        )}],
                                                   (1 - m,n )nt +1
                                                                                                                              (58)


                                                    64




                    Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
where the last step follows from (57).


Internet Appendix IV: Macroeconomic Models Fit-
ting the Variance Risk Premium Persistence
   The estimated models are as in section 4.1, but the variance risk premium persistence
is now explicitly included as a moment into the classical minimum distance estimation.

Classical Minimum Distance Parameter Estimates. Values are monthly. The weighting
matrix is the inverse of the covariance matrix estimated from re-sampling 10,000 time
series of the historical length with the block length of 60 months. A diagonal weighting
matrix is used. Standard errors are in parentheses.
                                       Base model Full model
                                          Preferences
                                         1.0000        1.0000
                                         (fixed)       (fixed)
                                         2.1853        2.1694
                                        (0.5118)      (0.5760)
                                 q
                                 ¯       1.0000        1.0000
                                         (fixed)       (fixed)
                                 q       0.9971        0.9873
                                        (0.0106)      (0.0124)
                                 qp      -0.0005       -0.0003
                                        (0.0010)      (0.0011)
                                 qn      0.1150        0.1153
                                        (0.0296)      (0.0307)
                                      Consumption growth
                                 g
                                 ¯       0.0016        0.0016
                                        (0.0002)      (0.0002)
                                 cp      0.0006        0.0004
                                        (0.0002)      (0.0002)
                                 cn      0.0042        0.0040
                                        (0.0005)      (0.0005)
                                 p
                                 ¯      14.1687       27.7271
                                        (4.3602)      (6.7220)
                                 n
                                 ¯       0.0446        0.0459
                                        (0.0180)      (0.0198)
                                 n       0.5796        0.5812
                                        (0.0062)      (0.0086)
                                 nn      0.0637        0.0646
                                        (0.0121)      (0.0145)
                                 g                     -0.0003
                                                      (0.0018)
                                       Dividend growth
                                 d                     -0.0005
                                                      (0.0019)
                                 g                      3.5660
                                                      (0.4050)
                                 n                      0.9339
                                                      (0.4107)




                                              65




                Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Classical Minimum Distance Moments Fit. Values are monthly. The weighting matrix is
the inverse of the covariance matrix estimated from re-sampling 10,000 time series of the
historical length with the block length of 60 months. The diagonal weighting matrix is
used. In data the risk-neutral log-return variance is proxied by V IX 2 and physical log-
return variance by the value implied by a Corsi (2009)-type model using high-frequency
data. *** corresponds to the rejection at the 1% significance level, respectively.

 Moment                              Base model Full model          Data     Data standard error
                                      Consumption growth
 E (gt )                               0.0016         0.0016       0.0020          0.0002
 Std(gt )                              0.0025         0.0025       0.0024          0.0002
 Skw(gt )                              0.0283        -0.0536       0.1163          0.3141
 ExKur(gt )                            2.3589         1.9518       2.0186          0.7741
                                          Risk-free rate
 E (rf,t )                             0.0015         0.0015       0.0005          0.0004
 Std(rf,t )                            0.0021         0.0020       0.0016          0.0001
 Corr(rf,t , rf,t+1 )                  0.9713        0.9708        0.9735          0.0093
                                        Dividend growth
 Std(dt )                                             0.0091       0.0075          0.0015
 Skw(gt )                                            -0.3866       -0.9717         0.6496
 ExKur(gt )                                           4.1096       3.0077          1.4094
                                             Equity
 E (rt - rf,t )                        0.0016         0.0016       0.0041          0.0023
 Std(rt )                              0.0360         0.0371       0.0426          0.0039
 E (pdt )                              6.4325         6.4286       6.3969          0.0644
 Std(pdt )                             0.4230        0.4218        0.2796          0.0377
 Corr(pdt , pdt+1 )                    0.9971         0.9971       0.9917          0.0079
                                             Options
 V arQ (rt ) - V ar(rt )               0.0010         0.0011       0.0016          0.0003
            Q
 Std(V art (rt+1 ) - V art (rt+1 ))    0.0004         0.0005       0.0019          0.0003
             Q
 AC1 (V art (rt+1 ) - V art (rt+1 ))   0.5796         0.5812       0.5197          0.0943
 V IX 2 - SV IX 2                      0.0005         0.0005       0.0006          0.0001
 2 -statistic                        74.9966*** 74.0332***
 p-value                               0.00%          0.00%




                                              66




                Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Percentiles of Next Month Consumption Growth Conditional on the Current Variance
Risk Premium: Model Implications. The model variance risk premium is defined as the
difference between the conditional risk-neutral and physical variances of the next month's
log-market return. In data the risk-neutral log-return variance is proxied by V IX 2 and
physical log-return variance by the value implied by a Corsi (2009)-type model using high-
frequency data. High variance risk premium is defined as the variance risk premium above
80th unconditional percentile and low variance risk premium as the variance risk premium
below 20th unconditional percentile. Values are computed numerically by simulating time
series of 100,000 months under each model. Data block-bootstrap standard errors in
parentheses are obtained by re-sampling 10,000 time series of the historical length with
a block length of 60 months. *** indicates the statistical significance of the data value
at the 1% level.

                                 Panel A: US data 1990M1-2017M2
                   High variance risk premium Low variance risk premium              High-Low difference
 10th   percentile           -0.23%                     -0.02%                           -0.21%***
                                                                                          (0.07%)
 50th percentile                0.18%                              0.20%                   -0.02%
                                                                                          (0.05%)
 90th percentile                0.50%                              0.50%                    0.00%
                                                                                          (0.07%)
                                            Panel B: Base model
                   High variance risk     premium Low variance risk premium          High-Low difference
   th
 10     percentile           -0.23%                           -0.12%                       -0.11%
 50th   percentile           0.10%                             0.15%                       -0.05%
 90th   percentile           0.45%                             0.48%                       -0.03%
                                            Panel C: Full model
                   High variance risk     premium Low variance risk premium          High-Low difference
   th
 10     percentile           -0.24%                           -0.12%                       -0.12%
 50th   percentile           0.11%                             0.15%                       -0.04%
 90th   percentile           0.45%                             0.48%                       -0.03%




                                                 67




                   Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
Variance Risk Premium and Excess Equity Return Predictability. The values are slope
coefficients from monthly regressions. The data values are from regressing log aggregate
excess equity returns on the variance risk premium, V Pt . Data standard errors in paren-
theses are obtained by re-sampling 10,000 time series of the historical length with a block
length of 60 months. The model estimates are from regressing log aggregate equity excess
returns on the difference between the variance risk premium of log-market returns. The
model values are obtained by simulating 100,000 monthly samples. * and *** correspond
to the statistical significance at the 10% and 1% levels, respectively.

                Specification 1: rt+1 month - rf,t = 0 + V P · V Pt +        t+1
                       Base model Full model                 Data
                V P      0.0127         0.0173             0.0378*
                                                           (0.0217)
                Specification 2: rt+3 months - rf,t = 0 + V P · V Pt +       t+1
                          Base           Full                Data
                V P      0.0314         0.0359            0.0842***
                                                           (0.0309)




                                               68




                 Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3553547
