                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE FISCAL THEORY OF PRICE LEVEL WITH A BUBBLE

                                    Markus K. Brunnermeier
                                     Sebastian A. Merkel
                                       Yuliy Sannikov

                                       Working Paper 27116
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27116


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We thank Mark Aguiar, John Cochrane, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Zhengyang Jiang, Alexandr
Kopytov, Eric Leeper, Moritz Lenel, Dirk Niepelt, Jonathan Payne, Ricardo Reis, Chris Sims,
and seminar participants at Princeton University and UC Berkeley for comments and suggestions
and Torsten Slok for sharing data on Japanese primary surpluses. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27116.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Markus K. Brunnermeier, Sebastian A. Merkel, and Yuliy Sannikov. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Fiscal Theory of Price Level with a Bubble
Markus K. Brunnermeier, Sebastian A. Merkel, and Yuliy Sannikov
NBER Working Paper No. 27116
May 2020
JEL No. E44,E52,E63

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper incorporates a bubble term in the standard FTPL equation to explain why countries
with persistently negative primary surpluses can have a positively valued currency and low
inflation. It also provides an example with closed-form solutions in which idiosyncratic risk on
capital returns depresses the interest rate on government bonds below the economy's growth rate.


Markus K. Brunnermeier                         Yuliy Sannikov
Princeton University                           Stanford GSB
Department of Economics                        Stanford University
Bendheim Center for Finance                    Palo Alto, CA
Princeton, NJ 08544                            sannikov@gmail.com
and CEPR
and also NBER
markus@princeton.edu

Sebastian A. Merkel
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton University
JRR-Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
smerkel@princeton.edu
            The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level with a Bubble
                    Markus Brunnermeier, Sebastian Merkel, Yuliy Sannikov§
                                                  May 1, 2020


                                                     Abstract
          This paper incorporates a bubble term in the standard FTPL equation to explain why countries
      with persistently negative primary surpluses can have a positively valued currency and low inflation.
      It also provides an example with closed-form solutions in which idiosyncratic risk on capital returns
      depresses the interest rate on government bonds below the economy's growth rate.

JEL: E44, E52, E63


1     Introduction
Different monetary theories emphasize different roles of money and different equilibrium equations to
determine the price level. The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level (FTPL) stresses the role of money as
a store of value and argues that the real value of all outstanding government debt, i.e., the nominal
debt level divided by the price level, is given by the discounted stream of future primary government
surpluses. Primary surpluses are the difference between government revenue and expenditures excluding
interest payments. Absent government default, an increase in primary deficits leads to an increase in the
price level, i.e., inflation, by devaluing outstanding debt.
    Critics of the FTPL often point to Japan. Even though Japan has mostly run primary deficits since
the 1960s (see Figure 1) and with no primary surpluses in sight, the price level has not risen much.
Indeed, inflation levels are depressed even though the government and central banks leave no stone
unturned to boost inflation closer to 2%.
    In this paper, we revisit the key FTPL equation and argue that including the typically ignored bubble
term allows us to reconcile the FTPL with Japan's experience. Indeed, we show that the transversal-
ity condition is often insufficient to rule out a bubble on the aggregate economy, refuting the usual
justification to simply dismiss the bubble term. While the FTPL literature puts a lot of emphasis on
distinguishing between monetary and fiscal dominance, the bubble term cannot be ignored under any
policy regime.
   We thank Mark Aguiar, John Cochrane, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Zhengyang Jiang, Alexandr Kopytov, Eric Leeper,

Moritz Lenel, Dirk Niepelt, Jonathan Payne, Ricardo Reis, Chris Sims, and seminar participants at Princeton University
and UC Berkeley for comments and suggestions and Torsten Slok for sharing data on Japanese primary surpluses.
    Princeton University, markus@princeton.edu
    Princeton University, smerkel@princeton.edu
   § Stanford University, sannikov@gmail.com




                                                          1
                            Figure 1: Japanese primary surplus 1960­2017


   A bubble term emerges whenever the real rate paid on government debt is persistently below the
growth rate of the economy, i.e., whenever r  g . It is well known that this can be the case in overlap-
ping generations models (Samuelson 1958), models of perpetual youth (Blanchard 1985), and incomplete
market models `  a la Bewley (1980). In this paper we provide another simple example based on Brun-
nermeier and Sannikov (2016a,b) in which the r  g outcome arises naturally and agents can invest in
both physical capital and government bonds. Physical capital is subject to uninsurable idiosyncratic
return risk. Hence, the expected return on capital exceeds the growth rate g since agents require a risk
premium. Government bonds are the safe asset in the economy and allow agents to indirectly share
part of their idiosyncratic risk. High idiosyncratic risk makes the government bond more attractive and
depresses r below g .
   By "printing" bonds at a faster rate, the government imposes an inflation tax that reduces the return
on the bonds further. Since government bonds are a bubble, the government in a sense "mines a bubble"
to generate seigniorage revenue. The resulting seigniorage revenue can be used to finance government
expenditures without ever having to raise extra taxes.
   For example, if the primary surpluses are always negative, then their discounted stream is also
negative, and only the positive value of the bubble can ensure a positive price level. The size of the
bubble, and hence the price level, is determined by wealth effects and goods market clearing. A larger
bubble raises agents' wealth and hence their demand for output. To ensure goods market clearing, the
bubble has to take on a certain size, which together with the FTPL equation determines the price level.
   The price level is uniquely determined if the fiscal authority backs the bubble to rule out equilibria
that lead to hyperinflation. Such fiscal backing is only required off-equilibrium.




                                                   2
Literature. Classic references for the FTPL are Leeper (1991), Sims (1994), and Woodford (1995).
For more compehensive treatments see Leeper and Leith (2016) and a recent book draft by Cochrane
(2019). All of these references do not discuss the existence of bubbles. An exception is Bassetto and
Cui (2018)'s dynamically inefficient OLG setting in which the price level, in contrast to our setting, is
not unique. There is an extensive literature on rational bubbles. Survey papers include Miao (2014)
and Martin and Ventura (2018). More recently, Jiang, Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Xiaolan (2019)
provide convincing empirical evidence that U.S. government debt has a bubble component.


2     The FTPL Equation with a Bubble
In this section, we derive the key equation of the fiscal theory of the price level in a generic partial
equilibrium setting. We subsequently discuss when there may be a bubble term in this equation that
has previously been ignored in the literature and briefly conclude what the general fiscal theory equation
tells us about sources of seigniorage. In the following section, we elaborate more on these points in the
context of a specific example in general equilibrium.

2.1    Revisiting the Derivation of the FTPL Equation
The derivation of the fiscal theory equation starts with the government flow budget constraint. In discrete
time, this constraint is given by

                     Bt + Mt + Pt Tt = (1 + it-1 ) Bt-1 + 1 + im
                                                               t-1 Mt-1 + Pt Gt ,

where Bt is the nominal face value of outstanding government bonds, Mt is the nominal quantity of
money in circulation, Pt is the price level, Tt are (real) taxes, Gt is (real) government spending, and
it , im                                                                          m
      t are the nominal interest rates paid on bonds and money, respectively. it can be smaller than it
if money provides transaction services. If t is a real SDF process that prices government bonds, then
1 = Et [t+1 /t · Pt /Pt+1 (1 + it )]. Using this property, dividing the government budget constraint by Pt
and rearranging yields
                                                  it-1 :=
        Bt-1 + Mt-1                                     Mt-1      t+1           Bt + Mt
                    (1 + it-1 ) = Tt - Gt + it-1 - im
                                                    t-1      + Et     (1 + it )         .
             Pt                                          Pt       t               Pt+1

Iterating this forward until period T implies
                                   T                         T
    Bt-1 + Mt-1                          s                         s      Ms-1      T BT + MT
                (1 + it-1 ) = Et           (Ts - Gs ) + Et           is-1      + Et           .
         Pt                        s=t
                                         t                   s=t
                                                                   t       Ps       t    PT

Up to this point, we have merely rearranged and iterated the government budget constraint and assumed
that there is some SDF process t that prices government bonds in equilibrium. To derive the fiscal theory
equation, the literature now typically proceeds by invoking a private-sector transversality condition to
eliminate a terminal value of government debt when passing to the limit T  . In this paper, we focus
on environments where the transversality condition does not eliminate the terminal value in the limit.




                                                     3
When taking the limit T  , we therefore arrive at the more general equation1
                                                                      
Bt-1 + Mt-1                                 s                              s      Ms-1                      T BT + MT
            (1 + it-1 ) = Et                  (Ts - Gs ) + Et                is-1                + lim Et             .
     Pt                               s=t
                                            t                        s=t
                                                                           t       Ps             T         t    PT
                                   PV of primary surpluses   PV of future transaction services              bubble


  From now on, we switch to continuous time in order to make our formal arguments more elegant.
The continuous-time version of the last equation is given by2
                                                                  
        Bt + Mt                    s                                 s    Ms             T B T + M T
                = Et                 (Ts - Gs ) ds + Et                is    ds + lim Et             .                  (1)
           Pt               t      t                          t      t    Ps     T       t     PT
This equation for the real value of government debt holds in any monetary model. While most conven-
tional monetary models treat this equation as an intertemporal government budget constraint that holds
on- and off-equilibrium, in the FTPL it is an equilibrium condition that determines the price level.

2.2     When Can a Bubble Exist?
Equation (1) differs from the standard fiscal theory only by the presence of an additional bubble term.
When can this bubble term be nonzero? Well-known examples are bubbles in OLG (Samuelson 1958)
and perpetual youth (Blanchard 1985) models. In Section 3 we present another example with incomplete
idiosyncratic risk sharing. Here, we make some generic points that apply to all example models. For
tractability, let us focus on environments with a stationary debt-to-GDP ratio and no risk. In this case,
the real value of government debt BT P+MT
                                        T
                                            is Bt +
                                                  Pt
                                                    Mt g (T -t)
                                                      e         , where g is the growth rate of the economy,
                    f
and T /t = e-r (T -t) with rf denoting the real risk-free rate. By substituting these expressions into
equation (1), we see that the bubble term does not vanish in the limit if rf  g . More generally, the
correct risk-adjusted discount rate compensating for the real risk inherent in BT P
                                                                                  +MT
                                                                                   T
                                                                                        must be used in
the comparison instead of the risk-free rate to determine whether a bubble is possible.
    For any agent with recursive isoelastic utility (which includes CRRA utility) that is marginal in
the market for government debt, the risk-free rate is (for environments with non-stochastic investment
opportunities)
                                                      1 +  -1
                                  rf =  +  -1 µc -                c 2 ,                              (2)
                                                          2
where  > 0 is the agent's time preference rate,  is the relative risk aversion coefficient,  is the EIS,
µc is the growth rate of agent-specific consumption, and  c is a vector or relative risk exposures of
agent-specific consumption to Brownian risk factors.3 · denotes the standard Euclidian norm. This
equation is linked to the growth rate of the economy through individual consumption growth µc ­ e.g.,
in a representative agent economy with a balanced growth path µc = g .
    1 Mathematically, the sum of the three limits in the decomposition below may not be well-defined, even if the limit of

the sum is. In this case, the right-hand side should be interpreted as the limit of the sum. For instance, this can happen
if the bubble term is , but the present value of surpluses is -. While this may seem a pathological case, it can make
sense economically because the bubble and surpluses are not separately tradeable, but necessarily bundled together to one
asset: government debt. As long as the value of this asset is well-defined and finite, infinite subcomponents do not imply
arbitrage opportunities or infinite utility.
    2 A formal derivation can be found in Online Appendix A.1.
    3 Here, we assume that all risk takes the form of Brownian risk. The intuition derived from the argument is unaltered if

more general sources of consumption risk are permitted.


                                                             4
     Equation (2) suggests three reasons for the growth rate to exceed the risk-free rate. First, a higher
growth rate g may not always imply higher individual consumption growth µc . This is the case, for
example, in an OLG model with population growth. Second, if agents do not have strong desires to
smooth consumption (large  ), then the risk-free rate is very insensitive to changes in consumption
growth and an increase in growth does not translate into an increase in the risk-free rate. Third, large
individual risk exposure (large  c 2 ) or risk aversion (large  ) may depress the risk-free rate through
the last term in equation (2) and offset any positive effects of growth g on rf through  -1 µc . In the
example we provide below, the latter channel generates a bubble in government debt. However, the main
insights we generate from this example are insensitive to this choice and would equally apply to other
environments in which a bubble term in equation (1) is possible.
     The possibility of rf  g is not merely a theoretical curiosity. Historically, real interest rates on
government bonds of advanced economies have mostly been below the growth rate. Even Abel, Mankiw,
Summers, and Zeckhauser (1989), who are often cited as providing evidence against the existence of
rational bubbles, report that the safe interest rate rf is smaller than g . With the more recent decline in
rf , as stressed by Blanchard (2019), the evidence for rf < g has become more clear-cut. See also Geerolf
(2013).

2.3     Three Forms of Seigniorage
Equation (1) suggests three forms of seigniorage, which here we define simply as government spending
that is not backed by offsetting future taxes. The first takes the form of a dilution of private claims to
future primary surpluses through surprise devaluations of existing government debt or money.4 Under
rational expectations, this cannot be a regular source of revenue for governments. For the U.S., Hilscher,
Raviv, and Reis (2014) assess the possibility of future surprise devaluations based on option-implied
(risk-neutral) probabilities and conclude that this form of seigniorage is perceived to be a negligible
source of revenue. The likelihood of a devaluation exceeding 5% of GDP is less than 1%.
    A second form of seigniorage comes from exploiting the liquidity benefits (convenience yield) of
"narrow" money (M in equation (1)). This form of seigniorage can only be extracted from the portion
of government debt that takes the form of "narrow" money and provides liquidity services. It depends on
the interest rate differential i = i - im between illiquid and liquid government debt. It is small if either
that differential is small or if the stock of "narrow" money is only a small part of total government debt.5
This form of seigniorage is not an important funding source for advanced economies. For example, in the
U.S., Reis (2019) reports a flow revenue of approximately 0.36% of GDP and estimates a present value
of  20% and, at most, 30% of GDP. Moreover, in the future the i term is likely to decline, because
central banks pay interest on reserves and as money becomes more digitalized, its velocity rises.
    Besides these standard forms of seigniorage, equation (1) suggests a third form of seigniorage that has
remained unexplored in prior work and is the focus of this paper. The government can "mine" the bubble
by using its outstanding government debt to run an ever-expanding Ponzi scheme: letting the stock of
government debt grow generates a steady revenue flow that does not have to be paid for by future taxes
as long as a bubble term is present in equation (1). Unlike a surprise dilution through inflation, dilution
   4 Without long-term debt as in equation (1) such dilution must work through a sudden surprise inflation (an unexpected

upward jump in Pt ). In a more realistic setting with long-term debt, news of higher inflation going forward would have
similar effects and work through bond prices instead of the general price level.
   5 In reality, one has to distinguish between reserves, whose quantity is nonnegligible, but which pay interest and have

therefore a small it , and cash, which has a much larger it , but whose quantity is almost negligible relative to the overall
stock of government debt.



                                                             5
of the bubble value is even feasible if it is fully expected by the private sector. This form of seigniorage
is arguably larger than the officially measured seigniorage from growing narrow money M because all
revenue from growing B + M is relevant for bubble mining.


3     A Simple Example with a Bubble: "I Theory without I"
There are several model structures in which rational bubbles can exist and thus the bubble term in
equation (1) does not necessarily disappear. We illustrate this in a simple example with incomplete
idiosyncratic risk sharing, where a bubble and a productive asset (capital) can coexist, yet the model is
sufficiently simple to have a closed-form solution. The model is a streamlined version of the "I theory
of money" (Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2016a) without banks and has been previously analyzed in
Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2016b) and Di Tella (2019). Here, we add fiscal policy and reinterpret
money in their model as bonds. For simplicity, we abstract from the presence of additional "narrow"
money that yields transaction benefits.6 After introducing the model, we discuss under which conditions
the private-sector transversality condition is insufficient to rule out the bubble, how the standard fiscal
theory argument for price level determination has to be adjusted to still guarantee a uniquely determined
price level, and how the bubble can be "mined" for fiscal spending.

3.1     A Model with Idiosyncratic Return Risk
Environment. There is a continuum of households indexed by i  [0, 1]. All households have identical
logarithmic preferences
                                                           
                                                  E           e-t log ci
                                                                       t dt
                                                       0

with discount rate .7
                                                                  i            i
   Each agent operates one firm that produces an output flow akt    dt, where kt is the capital input chosen
by the firm. Absent market transactions of capital, capital of firm i evolves according to
                                                i
                                             dkt                  ~t
                                               i
                                                  =  i
                                                     t -  dt + ~ dZ i
                                                                      ,
                                             kt

where i   i
       t kt dt are physical investment expenditures of firm i (in output goods),  is a concave function that
captures adjustment costs in capital accumulation,  is the depreciation rate, and Z     ~ i is an agent-specific
                                                    ~ i
Brownian motion that is i.i.d. across agents i. Z introduces firm-specific idiosyncratic risk. To obtain
                                                                              1
simple closed-form expressions, we choose the functional form  () =             log (1 + ) with adjustment
cost parameter   0 for the investment technology.
    The key friction in the model is that agents are not able to share idiosyncratic risk. While they are
allowed to trade physical capital and risk-free assets, they cannot write financial contracts contingent on
individual Z ~ i histories. As a consequence, all agents have to bear the idiosyncratic risk inherent in their
physical capital holdings.
   6 Other than adding an additional source of seigniorage, including transaction benefits into the analysis does not sub-

stantially alter our conclusions. For the FTPL with transaction benefits but no bubble, see, e.g., Sims (2019).
   7 We assume log utility for maximum simplicity. At the expense of heavier notation and more involved algebra, the

model can be solved in closed form with isoelastic recursive utility with EIS kept at 1 and arbitrary coefficient of relative
risk aversion  . The expressions for the model solution p, q, ,  remain identical under these generalized preferences, except
                                            
that  ~ has to be replaced everywhere with     ~.


                                                                6
     Besides households, there is a government that funds government spending, imposes taxes on firms,
and issues nominal government bonds. The government has an exogenous need for real spending gKt dt,
where Kt is the aggregate capital stock and g is a model parameter. The government imposes a propor-
tional output tax (subsidy, if negative) t on firms. Outstanding nominal government debt has a face
value of Bt and pays nominal interest it . Bt follows a continuous process dBt = µB   t Bt dt, where the growth
rate µB t is a policy choice of the  government.   In short, the government  chooses the policy instruments t ,
it , µB
      t  contingent  on histories of  prices taking g as given and  subject to the nominal  budget constraint8

                                          it Bt + Pt gKt = µB
                                                            t Bt + Pt t aKt ,                                            (3)

where Pt denotes the price level as in Section 2.
  The model is closed by the aggregate resource constraint

                                                Ct + gKt + t Kt = aKt ,                                                  (4)

where Ct :=      ci
                  t di is aggregate consumption and t =            i  i
                                                                   t kt /Kt di is the average investment rate.


Price Processes and Returns. Let qt be the market price of a single unit of physical capital. Then,
qt Kt is private capital wealth. Let further pt := Bt /Pt
                                                     Kt   be the ratio of the real value of government debt
to total capital in the economy.9 Then, the real value of the total stock of government bonds is pt Kt and
the real value of a single government bond is pt  Kt
                                                 Bt . It is convenient to define the share of total wealth in
the economy that is due to bond wealth,
                                                              p t Kt
                                                   t :=                 .
                                                          (pt + qt ) Kt
We postulate that qt and pt have a generic deterministic evolution

                                           dqt = µq
                                                  t qt dt,       dpt = µp
                                                                        t pt dt.

Whenever pt , qt = 0, the unknown drifts µq          p
                                                t , µt are uniquely determined by the local behavior of qt and
                                                                         t             p     q
pt , respectively. In the following, we also use the notation µ    t := t = (1 - t ) (µt - µt ).
     Households can trade two assets in positive net supply (if pt = 0), bonds and capital. Assume that
in equilibrium t = i   t for all i (to be verified below) such that aggregate capital grows deterministically
at rate (t ) -  . Then, the return on bonds is

                                                                 =:µB
                                                                    t

                B             d (pt Kt /Bt )   d (pt Kt )                           p
              drt = it dt +                  =            - µB                          B
                                                             t - it dt = (t ) -  + µt - µt dt.                           (5)
                                pt Kt /Bt        p t Kt
The return on agent i's capital is

            K,i i         (1 - t ) a - i
                                       t   d(qt kti
                                                    )        (1 - t ) a - i
                                                                          t            q         ~t
          drt   t =                      +       i
                                                      =                     +  i
                                                                               t -  + µt dt + ~ dZ i
                                                                                                     .
                               qt           qt kt                 qt
   8 At this point, we do not impose additional restrictions on government policy. In particular, policy can be characterized

by either monetary dominance or fiscal dominance and the choice of policy regime is irrelevant for most of our discussion.
We do make more restrictive assumptions on policy in Section 3.4 where we explain how one can adjust the fiscal theory
arguments for price level determination based on fiscal dominance if government debt has a bubble component.
   9 It is more convenient to work with this normalized version of the inverse price level 1/P , because the latter depends
                                                                                               t
on the scale of the economy and the nominal quantity of outstanding bonds in equilibrium, whereas pt does not.


                                                             7
   Using the government budget constraint (3) to substitute out t a yields

                            K,i i             a - g - i
                                                      t  pt B          q         ~t
                          drt   t =                     + µ +  i
                                                               t -  + µt dt + ~ dZ i
                                                                                     .
                                                  qt     qt t

Household Problem and Equilibrium. Denote by ni                                                i
                                                        t the net worth of household i and let t be the
fraction of net worth invested into bonds. Then net worth evolves according to

                                   dnit     ci
                                             t        B       i                    K,i i     B
                                        = -    dt + drt + 1 - t                  drt   t - drt .                                (6)
                                    ni
                                     t      ni
                                             t

The household chooses consumption ci                     i                           i
                                     t , real investment t , and the portfolio share t to maximize utility
  i
V0 subject to (6). The HJB equation for this problem is (using the returns expressions from the previous
paragraph)
                                                                                                                 K,i i
                                                                                                        =
                                                                                                             [
                                                                                                            Et drt ( )] - drt
                                                                                                                     t      B
                                                                                                                  dt      dt

                                                                             B
                                                                           drt                a-g-  i
                                                                                                                µ - µB
Vt ni - t Vt ni = max                   log ci + Vt ni       -ci + ni            + 1 - i           +  i - (t ) - t    t
                            ci , i ,i                                      dt                   qt               1 - t

                                                      1                2           2
                                                  +     Vt   ni   ni       1 - i       ~2 .
                                                                                       
                                                      2

This is a standard consumption-portfolio-choice problem, so we conjecture a functional form Vt ni =
     1
t +    log ni
            t for the value function,
                                     10
                                        where t depends on (aggregate) investment opportunities, but
not on individual net worth n . Substituting this into the HJB and taking first-order conditions yields11
                              i


                                                  1
                                          qt =        ,                                                     Tobin's q
                                                   it
                                          ci    i
                                           t = nt ,                              permanent income consumption
                a - g - t  µ - µB
                          - t    t       i
                                   = 1 - t ~2.
                                                                                                Merton portfolio
                    qt      1 - t
                                              1
Using the functional form  () =                   log (1 + ) and goods market clearing (4), the first two equations
aggregated across agents imply

                                                        (1 - t ) (a - g) - 
                                                      t =                   ,
                                                             1 - t + 
                                                                 1 +  (a - g)
                                                   qt = (1 - t )              ,
                                                                  1 - t + 
                                                           1 +  (a - g)
                                                   pt = t               ,
                                                            1 - t + 
 10 We    relegate the technical but standard verification argument to Online Appendix A.2.
 11 In   particular, the first condition verifies i                                                                   i
                                                  t = t , and the last condition already uses this fact to eliminate   - (t ).




                                                                   8
which determines the equilibrium uniquely up to the nominal wealth share t . Bond market clearing and
                                                i        i
the fact that all households choose the same t    imply t  = t and substituting this and goods market
clearing into the first-order condition for  gives the additional condition (after solving for µ )
                                            i

                                                               2
                                        µ    B
                                         t =+µt - (1 - t ) ~2.
This is a backward equation for t that has been derived under the assumption that bonds have a positive
value (t > 0). In particular, in these cases multiplying the equation by t represents an equivalence
transformation. Furthermore, if t = 0, then by no arbitrage agents must expect also      t = 0; otherwise,
they could earn an infinite risk-free return from investing into bonds. Consequently, the ODE
                                       t =  + µ            2 2
                                              Bt - (1 - t ) ~ t                                        (7)

must hold along any equilibrium path, regardless of whether bonds have positive value or not.

Steady-State Equilibria. We now focus on government policies that hold µ           B and  constant over
time and consider steady-state equilibria with constant p and q ­ and thus constant . All such equilibria
must solve equation (4) with     = 0. The right-hand side is a third-order polynomial, so there are three
solutions to this equation.  = 0 is always a valid equilibrium. In this equilibrium, government bonds
have no value, p = 0, the price level is infinite, P = , and the government does not raise primary
surpluses,  a = g. Substituting  = 0 into the equations for , p, and q yields the nonmonetary steady
state
                                 a-g-                1 +  (a - g)
                           0 =            ,     q0 =               ,     p0 = 0.
                                  1 +                   1 + 
                                                      
                                                        +  µB
The other stationary solutions to (7) are 1 -  = ±       ~    . The "-" solution has always the property
 > 1 and would therefore imply either a negative capital price (if p > 0) or a negative value of government
bonds. Both cases violate   free disposal and therefore this solution cannot be a valid equilibrium. The
                        ~-
                                 +µB
remaining solution  =      ~      corresponds to a valid equilibrium, if ~       B . In this case, there
                                                                                +µ
is a second monetary steady state

        B (a - g) - 
       +µ           ~                     B (1 +  (a - g))
                                         +µ                               ~-      B (1 +  (a - g))
                                                                                 +µ
=                            ,     q=                          ,    p=                                   .
           B + 
          +µ   ~                             B + 
                                            +µ   ~                                  B + 
                                                                                   +µ   ~
In the following we focus exclusively on this monetary steady state. In particular, from now on we make
the assumption   ~  +µ       B . In Section 3.4 we show that an off-equilibrium modification to the fiscal
policy rule can select this steady state as the unique equilibrium.

3.2    Transversality Condition and Existence of a Bubble
In our model, government debt can have value even in the absence of primary surpluses ( µB  0) because
it has a bubble component. It provides a store of value that is free of idiosyncratic risk, which allows
agents to self-insure against their risk exposure. In this subsection we discuss why the private-sector
transversality condition may not rule out the existence of a bubble.
    For each individual agent, the transversality condition,
                                                  i i
                                            lim E T nT = 0,
                                           T 


                                                    9
                                                          b,i    k,i         b,i
is necessary for an optimal choice. We can write ni T = nT + nT , where nT is bond wealth at time T
      k,i
and nT is capital wealth at time T . Because nb,i , nk,i  0, the transversality condition for total wealth
also implies individual transversality conditions
                                         i b,i                                     i k,i
                                   lim E T nT = 0,                           lim E T nT = 0
                                  T                                         T 

for bond wealth and capital wealth, respectively. The former condition seems to suggest that there is a
transversality condition on government bonds that should rule out a bubble. This argument overlooks
that individual bond wealth nb,i
                               T is optimally chosen to be risky, because agents constantly adjust their
portfolio in response to idiosyncratic shocks. It is therefore discounted by the individual agent at a
discount rate that takes into account the idiosyncratic risk. Specifically, nb,i     i
                                                                             T = nT and the SDF is
                         i b,i
T i
    = e-T n1  i , so E T nT    = e-T  and thus the individual transversality condition on bond wealth
              T
is trivially satisfied in the model. Yet, when valuing a marginal additional unit of bonds, the relevant
discount rate from the perspective of all agents is the risk-free rate, because government bonds do not
have idiosyncratic risk. Formally, the marginal time 0 valuation of any agent i of the entire time T bond
wealth in the economy is
                                                                                f                  f
                            i
                          E T       nb,j      i
                                     T dj = E T pKT = e
                                                        -r                          T
                                                                                        pKT = e(g-r )T pK0

and the latter expression does not converge to zero, if rf  g .
   Nothing in the model implies that the risk-free rate must necessarily be above the growth rate. Indeed,
the growth rate of the economy equals the growth rate of capital, g = () -  , and the risk-free rate
equals the return on bonds, by equation (5) (in steady state)

                                                         B = g - µ
                                            rf = () -  - µ       B .                                                   (8)

                         B  0. A nonnegative value of µ
Consequently, rf  g , if µ                            B is consistent with the existence condition of
a monetary equilibrium,  ~  +µ    B
                                  , as long as idiosyncratic risk is sufficiently large.

3.3        Mining the Bubble
In this section, we show how the government can mine a bubble, i.e., finance government expenditures
without ever raising taxes for it.
    Primary surplus is defined as Tt - Gt =  aKt - gKt =: sKt . Due to our assumptions on fiscal policy,
it grows at the same rate as K . From the government budget constraint (3), s = -µ   B p. Hence, in our
model the fiscal theory equation (1) reduces to (this time more precisely with a limit of the sum):12
                                                    T
                                                               f                            f
                              pK0 = lim                 e-(r       -g )t
                                                                           sK0 dt +e-(r         -g )T
                                                                                                        pK0 .
                                       T        0
                                                         =:P V S0,T

Provided p > 0, equation (8) implies precisely three cases:13
  12 Since the model does not include "narrow" money, there is no i term.
  13 The apparent dichotomy, a positive bubble value and nonnegative surpluses or positive surpluses and no bubble, is due
to the steady-state nature of our analysis. In a more general model, a positive present value of surpluses and a bubble can
coexist.


                                                                    10
             B < 0: then rf > g , P V S0, > 0 and a bubble cannot exist. This is the "conventional"
   1. s > 0, µ
      situation considered in the literature.
          B = 0: then rf = g , P V S0, = 0 and there is a finite positive bubble whose value exactly
   2. s = µ
      equals pK0 and grows over time at the growth rate/risk-free rate.

   3. s < 0, µB > 0: then rf < g and thus the integral P V S0,T converges to - as T  . Yet,
      p is still positive, which is only possible if there is an offsetting infinite positive bubble. These
      infinite values do not violate any no-arbitrage condition and are also not otherwise economically
      problematic, since the bubble cannot be traded separately from the claim on surpluses. Both are
                                                                          Bt
      necessarily bundled in the form of government bonds. As long as P     t
                                                                              = pKt is determined and finite
      in equilibrium, the model remains economically and mathematically sensible despite the infinite
      values in the decomposition of the value of government bonds.14
In all three cases, the (possible) presence of a bubble grants the government some extra leeway. Clearly
in case 3, the government can run a perpetual deficit, "mine the bubble" and never has to raise taxes to
fully fund all government expenditures. In case 2, the existence of the bubble is beneficial, because the
value of government debt is positive ­ allowing agents to share part of their idiosyncratic risk ­ despite
the fact that the present value of primary surpluses is zero. Even in case 1, government debt is more
sustainable since an unexpected drop of primary surpluses to zero results in a bubble instead of a total
collapse of the value of debt.

3.4     Price Level Determination, Uniqueness, and Off-Equilibrium Policy
The key equation (1) of the fiscal theory of the price level without a bubble term can be solved for
the price level as a function of the present value of primary surpluses and the outstanding quantity of
nominal government debt. For a given real allocation and initial quantity of debt, this equation alone
therefore pins down the price level.15 In the fiscal theory with a bubble, this is no longer true because the
size of the bubble is not determined by the present value identity itself. Instead, goods market clearing
determines the price level. A larger real value of bonds, holding taxes constant, means bonds represent
more net wealth for the private sector, which increases consumption demand through a wealth effect.
The equilibrium price level is the price level at which consumption demand equals consumption supply.16
The fiscal theory equation itself determines the size of the bubble as the residual value of government
debt that is not explained by the present value of primary surpluses.
    As a consequence, the presence of a bubble makes price level determination based on fiscal dominance
more challenging because it eliminates the simple one-to-one relationship between the present value of
primary surpluses and the price level. Even making primary surpluses completely exogenous may not
be sufficient to determine the price level uniquely if government policy fails to pin down the value of the
bubble. The same path of surpluses can be consistent with multiple paths for the bubble value and thus
                                                                                      B and reaches zero at the finite value
  14 However, surpluses s cannot become arbitrarily small, because p is decreasing in µ

B = 
µ     ~ 2 - ; there is a Laffer curve for bubble mining.
  15 This conclusion does not rely on the assumption of fiscal dominance. Assuming fiscal dominance just ensures that

surpluses do not react too strongly to the price level to make the "given real allocation" the only possible equilibrium
allocation.
  16 The same mechanism is present in the fiscal theory without a bubble, but it may not be as clearly visible because one

can mechanically solve the model by reading off the price level from the fiscal theory equation.




                                                            11
with multiple initial price levels.17
    The steady state equilibria derived above are consistent with a policy that fixes µB at a constant
level and adjusts taxes  such that the government budget constraint (3) holds after any price history.18
While simple, such a policy is clearly inadequate to determine the price level. This is evident from
the existence of a nonmonetary equilibrium in which nominal government bonds are worthless (p = 0).
However, government policy can easily be modified off-equilibrium to select the monetary steady state
as the unique equilibrium.19 To see this, recall that along any equilibrium path ODE (7) must hold. The
converse is also true, provided  is contained in [0, 1]:
Lemma 1. An absolutely continuous function [0, )  [0, 1], t  t corresponds to a model equilibrium,
if and only if it satisfies equation (7).

   Above, we have already provided the proof that equation (7) is necessary for an equilibrium. The
proof of sufficiency requires (1) that equilibrium prices p and q consistent with market clearing can be
expressed as a function of  (see above) and (2) a number of technical arguments verifying that the
resulting equilibrium satisfies all optimal choice conditions of households (see Online Appendix A.3).
   With constant µ  B , there is a continuum of solution paths for  consistent with     the requirement
                                                                                                       +µB
in Lemma 1, which can be indexed by the initial value 0  [0,  ], where  :=                ~    denotes the
monetary steady-state level of . For any initial value but the right endpoint,  asymptotically converges
to 0.20 Conversely, if for some reasons agents expected that the equilibrium value of  could never fall
below a positive threshold  > 0, then all equilibria but the monetary steady state 0 =  could be
ruled out.
    These considerations suggest a simple off-equilibrium modification of the fiscal policy rule to achieve
equilibrium uniqueness: fix an arbitrary threshold 0 <  <  and, whenever  falls below , switch
from a constant debt growth rule (constant µ  B ) to a positive surplus rule with a constant output tax
rate  > g/a for as long as   . From the government budget constraint (3) it follows that under this
modified fiscal policy ODE (7) becomes
                             
                               - (1 - t )2   ~2 + µ B t ,                 t > 
                        t =
                                                                                  .
                                           2
                               - (1 - t )    ~ 2 t - ( a - g) 1-   t +
                                                                  1+a   ,   t   

It is easy to see that this modified ODE has a strictly negative left-hand side on the interval [0,  )
including the left endpoint, and therefore all solutions that start inside this interval turn negative in finite
time. By Lemma 1, the only possible equilibrium path for  is therefore the steady-state equilibrium
 =  .
    The above rule modifies fiscal policy only off-equilibrium, whereas along the equilibrium path of the
remaining unique equilibrium the government is free to choose any debt growth rate net of interest
  17 In an augmented version of our model with lump-sum taxes, Ricardian equivalence holds and thus changing the path of

lump-sum taxes does not affect the equilibrium allocations otherwise, including the real value of the bubble. To the extent
that (exogenous) surpluses are raised using lump-sum taxes, not capital taxation, both the no-bubble steady state and the
bubble steady state are valid steady-state equilibria of this augmented model, but they imply different initial price levels.
  18 We have opted not to choose the opposite specification where  is constant and µ     B adjusts to make the government
budget constraint hold because this is only a valid policy specification, if   0. For  < 0, there are histories of prices in
which no value of µ B is consistent with equation (3) (e.g. P = , i.e., the moneyless equilibrium).
  19 Here, we focus on equilibria that are deterministic and feature absolutely continuous price paths. With additional

technical arguments, one can also rule out non-time-continuous equilibria and equilibria driven by sunspot noise.
  20 This is implied by the fact that the right-hand side of equation (1) is negative for all   (0,  ).
                                                                                              t



                                                             12
payments µ B . This raises questions about the credibility and fiscal capacity to promise off-equilibrium
surpluses. These issues are beyond the scope of the present paper.


4    Conclusion
This paper integrates the typically ignored bubble term in the FTPL equation, which is necessary to
explain low inflation in countries with persistently negative primary surpluses. Brunnermeier, Merkel,
and Sannikov (2020) argue that this model provides a tractable framework to discuss and evaluate
Modern Monetary Theory and enrich the debate on sovereign debt sustainability analysis. The analysis
can also be easily extended to include a transaction role of money. In this case "narrow money" has an
interest rate advantage i = i - iM , which constitutes another source of seigniorage besides the "bubble
mining" emphasized in this paper.


References
Abel, A. B., N. G. Mankiw, L. H. Summers, and R. J. Zeckhauser (1989): "Assessing Dynamic
 Efficiency: Theory and Evidence," The Review of Economic Studies, 56(1), 1­19.
Bassetto, M., and W. Cui (2018): "The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level in a World of Low Interest
 Rates," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 89, 5­22.
Bewley, T. F. (1980): "The Optimum Quantity of Money," in Models of Monetary Economies, ed. by
 J. H. Kareken, and N. Wallace, pp. 169­210. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Blanchard, O. J. (1985): "Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons," Journal of Political Economy, 93(2),
 223­247.
         (2019): "Public Debt and Low Interest Rates," American Economic Review, 109(4), 1197­1229.
Brunnermeier, M. K., S. Merkel, and Y. Sannikov (2020): "The limits of modern monetary
 theory," Unpublished.
Brunnermeier, M. K., and Y. Sannikov (2016a): "The I theory of money," Princeton University
 mimeo.
         (2016b): "On the optimal inflation rate," American Economic Review, 106(5), 484­89.
Cochrane, J. H. (2019): "The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level," Book Draft.
Di Tella, S. (2019): "Risk Premia and the Real Effects of Money," Stanford University mimeo.
Geerolf, F. (2013): "Reassessing Dynamic Efficiency," UCLA mimeo.
Hilscher, J., A. Raviv, and R. Reis (2014): "Inflating away the public debt? An empirical assess-
  ment," NBER Working Paper 20339.
Jiang, Z., H. Lustig, S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and M. Z. Xiaolan (2019): "The US Public Debt
  Valuation Puzzle," NBER Working Paper 26583.



                                                   13
Leeper, E., and C. Leith (2016): "Understanding Inflation as a Joint Monetary­Fiscal Phenomenon,"
  in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and H. Uhlig, vol. 2, chap. 30, pp. 2305­2415.
  Elsevier.
Leeper, E. M. (1991): "Equilibria under `active'and `passive'monetary and fiscal policies," Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 27(1), 129­147.

Martin, A., and J. Ventura (2018): "The macroeconomics of rational bubbles: a user's guide,"
 Annual Review of Economics, 10, 505­539.
Miao, J. (2014): "Introduction to economic theory of bubbles," Journal of Mathematical Economics,
 53, 130­136.

Reis, R. (2019): "Can the Central Bank Alleviate Fiscal Burdens?," in The Oxford Handbook of the
 Economics of Central Banking, ed. by D. G. Mayes, P. L. Siklos, and J.-E. Sturm, chap. 5, pp. 131­170.
 Oxford University Press.
Samuelson, P. A. (1958): "An exact consumption-loan model of interest with or without the social
  contrivance of money," Journal of Political Economy, 66(6), 467­482.
Sims, C. A. (1994): "A simple model for study of the determination of the price level and the interaction
  of monetary and fiscal policy," Economic Theory, 4(3), 381­399.
        (2019): "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Distorting Taxes," Griswold Center for
  Economic Policy Studies, Working Paper No. 256.
Woodford, M. (1995): "Price-level determinacy without control of a monetary aggregate," Carnegie-
 Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 43, 1­46.




                                                   14
A      Online Appendix
A.1     Derivation of the Continuous-time Fiscal Theory Equation (Equation
        (1))
As in the discrete-time case, the derivation of the fiscal theory equation starts with the government flow
budget constraint, which here is

                                µB       M                           m
                                 t Bt + µt Mt + Pt Tt dt = (it Bt + it Mt + Pt Gt ) dt,
                                                                                   B    M
where Bt , Mt , Tt , Gt , it and im
                                  t have the same meaning as in the main text and µt , µt are the growth
                                                   21
rates of nominal bonds and money, respectively.       Multiplying the budget constraint by the nominal
SDF t /Pt and rearranging yields

                                 t               t                             Mt
                    µB
                     t - it         Bt + µM
                                          t - it    Mt dt = -t (Tt - Gt ) + it                                   dt.            (9)
                                 Pt              Pt                            Pt

Next, Ito's product rule implies

                                t                 t          t     d (t /Pt )
                           d       Bt   = µB
                                           t - it    Bt dt +    Bt            + it dt ,
                                Pt                Pt         Pt      t /Pt
                               t                   t            t     d (t /Pt )
                       d          Mt    = µM
                                           t - it     Mt dt +     Mt             + it dt .
                               Pt                  Pt          Pt        t /Pt
                                                 t                                         t
Solving these last two equations for µB                         M
                                         t - it Pt Bt dt and µt - it                       Pt Mt dt,     respectively, and substi-
tuting the results into equation (9) yields (after rearranging)

              t                                                                      Bt + Mt           d (t /Pt )
          d      (Bt + Mt )        = -t (Pt (Tt - Gt ) + it Mt ) dt + t                                           + it dt ,
              Pt                                                                        Pt               t /Pt

or in integral form
                                            T                          T                       T
    BT + M T    Bt + Mt                                                           Ms                   Bs + Ms    d (s /Ps )
T            -t         =-                      s (Ts - Gs ) ds-           s is      ds+           s                         + is dt .
       PT          Pt                   t                          t              Ps       t              Ps        s /Ps

Up to this point, we have merely rearranged and integrated the government budget constraint. To derive
the fiscal theory equation, the literature proceeds by using two equilibrium conditions. First, if the
nominal SDF /P prices the government bonds, then its expected rate of change must be the negative
of the nominal interest rate. Then, the last stochastic integral on the right must be a martingale and
disappears when taking conditional time-t expectations Et [·]. Second, a private-sector transversality
condition is invoked to eliminate a terminal value of government debt when passing to the limit T  .
We perform the first operation, but do not want to restrict attention to environments where transversality
can rule out a nonzero discounted terminal value. When taking the limit T  , we therefore arrive at
the more general equation (1).
  21 Here we abstract from long-term bonds and the possibility of taxes, spending, and adjustments in B and M that are

not absolutely continuous over time (e.g., lumpy adjustments in response to a Poisson shock). Such elements could be
easily added, but require more complicated notation without generating additional insights for our purposes.



                                                               15
A.2      Verification Argument for the Value Function
While one could adjust standard verification arguments for HJB equations, we present here a more direct
                                                            1
verification proof for the functional form Vt ni = t +        log ni that does not make reference to the HJB
equation. In what follows, we drop all i superscripts as we always consider a single household's decision
                                       B     K
problem. Taking return processes drt     , drt (t ) as given, the household chooses c, ,  to maximize
                                                                       
                                                            E             e-t log ct dt
                                                                   0

                                                                                                                           
subject to the net worth evolution (6). For any n > 0, denote by V0 (n) := sup{ct ,t ,t } E 0 e-t log ct dt
the optimal objective at t = 022 , if n0 = n. To make the dependence of nt on n0 and the chosen policy
{ct , t , t } explicit, we write furthermore nc,,
                                               t  (n0 ) instead of just nt .
                                                                                 (1) (1) (1)
     We first prove the following auxiliary result: if n(1) , n(2) > 0 and {ct , t , t } is an admissible
                                              (2)   n(2) (1)   (2)      (1)  (2)     (1)
policy for initial wealth n0 = n(1) , then ct := n    (1) ct , t := t , t := t is an admissible policy
                                               (2)
                                                     , (2) ,(2)                           (1) (1) (1)
                                                                                   n(2) c , ,                              (1)   (1)   (1)
for initial wealth n0 = n(2) and nc
                                  t                               n(2) =               n
                                                                                   n(1) t
                                                                                                        n(1) . Indeed, if {ct , t , t } is
                                                            (1)   (1)   (1)
                                           (1)
                                        c , ,
admissible for n0 = n(1) , then nt := nt         n                                 (1)
                                                       must be strictly positive and satisfy equation
(6), i.e.,
                      (1)       (1)    (1)   B       (1)     K    (1)      B
                    dnt = -ct dt + nt      drt + 1 - t     drt   t     - drt    .
        (2)        n(2) (1)
Then nt       :=       n
                   n(1) t
                              is also strictly positive and satisfies the equation

                 (2)       n(2) (1)     n(2) (1)      n(2) (1)   B       (1)                                 K    (1)       B
           dnt         =        dnt = -      ct  dt +     n    drt + 1 - t                                 drt t        - drt    ,
                           n(1)         n(1)          n(1) t
                                                 (2)                      (2)
                                            =ct                        =nt

                                                                                (2)    (2)   (2)                           (2)    n(2) (1)
which is exactly equation (6) for the policy choice {ct , t , t }. Because in addition n0 =                                           n
                                                                                                                                  n(1) 0
                                                                                                                                             =
 (2)      (2)                                                             (2) (2) (2)                                            (2)
n , {nt }        is the solution to (6) with policy                     {ct , t , t }          and initial condition n0 = n          , that is
   (2) (2) (2)                 (2)
 c , ,                n              (1)
nt           n(2) = n   (1) nt   , which proves the auxiliary result.
   Next, let  > 0 be arbitrary and again n(1) , n(2) > 0. By the definition of V0 n(1) , we can choose
admissible policies {ct , t , t } for n0 = n(1) , such that
                                                         
                                           E                e-t log ct dt +   V0 n(1) .                                                  (10)
                                                     0
  22 The verification argument for any initial time t > 0 is identical. For notational convenience, we therefore restrict

attention to t = 0.




                                                                              16
                                    (2)
By the previous auxiliary result, { n   c ,  ,  } is then an admissible policy for n0 = n(2) and thus
                                    n(1) t t t

                                          
                                                       n(2)
                     V0 n(2)  E              e-t log        ct dt
                                      0                n(1)
                                                                              
                                                       n(2)
                               =E            e-t log           dt + E            e-t log ct dt
                                      0                n(1)               0
                                                     
                               1      n(2)
                               = log    (1)
                                              +E      e-t log ct dt
                                      n            0
                               1            1
                                log n - log n + V0 n(1) - ,
                                     (2)         (1)
                                            
where the last inequality follows from (10). In total, this argument implies the value function inequality
                                           1                    1
                           V0 n(2) +         log n(1)  V0 n(1) + log n(2) - 
                                                                

for any arbitrary n(1) , n(2) ,  > 0. Because  > 0 was arbitrary, the inequality must then also hold for
 = 0. Because n(2) , n(1) were arbitrary, the inequality must still hold, when the roles of n(1) and n(2)
are interchanged. Taking both facts together implies the equality
                                             1                     1
                             V0 n(2) +         log n(1) = V0 n(1) + log n(2) .                          (11)
                                                                   

   To complete the proof, choose n(2) = n, n(1) = 1 in equation (11), which implies
                                                               1
                                           V0 (n) = V0 (1) +     log n.
                                                               
Consequently, with the definition 0 := V0 (1), V0 has the desired functional form.

A.3     Missing Steps in Proof of Lemma 1
It is to show that any solution  : [0, )  [0, 1] to (7) corresponds to a unique equilibrium of the model.
For any such function, define , q , and p consistent with the expressions given in the main text, i.e.,
                                               (1 - t ) (a - g) - 
                                          t =                      ,
                                                    1 - t + 
                                                        1 +  (a - g)
                                          qt = (1 - t )              ,
                                                         1 - t + 
                                                  1 +  (a - g)
                                          pt = t               .
                                                   1 - t + 
Because t  [0, 1] at all times, qt , pt  0, so these expressions are consistent with free disposal of both
money and capital. We now verify that t , qt , pt and t := t satisfy all household choice conditions and
the aggregate resource constraint.
   One immediately verifies that t and qt satisfy households' optimal investment choice condition,
       1
qt =  ( t ) = 1 + t . In addition, total wealth of all households is (pt + qt ) Kt and because individual


                                                       17
consumption demand ci    i
                    t = nt implies an aggregate consumption demand of Ct =  (pt + qt ) Kt , we
obtain

                   Ct + gKt + t Kt = ( (pt + qt ) + g + t ) Kt
                                            1 +  (a - g)      (1 - t ) (a - g) - 
                                    =                    +g+                        Kt
                                             1 - t +              1 - t + 
                                                           (1 - t )
                                    =                    +              (a - g) + g Kt
                                            1 - t +  1 - t + 
                                    = aKt ,

so this equilibrium candidate satisfies the aggregate resource constraint (4).
    It is left to show that at the asset prices p and q , agents' capital portfolio share t = t is consistent
with their optimal choice condition for t . We consider two cases:
  1. If t > 0, then equation (7) (that  satisfies by assumption) is equivalent to µ       B
                                                                                   t =  + µt -
             2 2
     (1 - t ) ~ and rearranging the latter equation and using t = t yields

                                                       1 +µ Bt -µ
                                                                 
                                             1 - t =     2
                                                                  .                                     (12)
                                                       ~   1 - t
      Next, by definition of t and qt

                            a - g - t   (a - g) (1 - t + ) - (1 - t ) (a - g) + 
                                      =
                                qt                 (1 - t ) (1 +  (a - g))
                                           (1 +  (a - g))             
                                      =                          =         ,
                                        (1 - t ) (1 +  (a - g))     1 - t

      and substituting this into equation (12) yields

                                               1    a - g - t   µ - µBt
                                     1 - t =                  -             ,
                                               ~2
                                                        qt       1 - t

      which is precisely households' first-order condition with respect to t as stated in the main text.

  2. If t = 0, then pt = 0, hence money has no value and the return on money is not well-defined.
     Consequently, the household portfolio choice condition as stated in the main text is not directly
     applicable. Instead, households demand a finite quantity of money (which is consistent with equi-
                                        t  0, i.e., the value of money is expected to become positive in
     librium and t = 0), if and only if p
     the infinitesimal future. Because ps  0 for all s, this condition reduces here to p t = 0        t = 0.
                                                      
     We therefore have to show that t = 0 implies t = 0. We do this in two steps.
     First, at t = 0 equation (7) is misleading, because it appears that always     t = 0, but this ignores
                                                         g-t a    g-t a 1-t +
     that by the government budget constraint, µ  B t =   pt   =   t 1+(a-g)   , which   diverges to  as
     t     0. Nevertheless, the right-hand side of (7) remains well-defined even at the limit point, if we
     plug in µBt ,
                               t =  - (1 - t )2                      1 - t + 
                                                 ~ 2 t + (g - t a)               .                      (13)
                                                                    1 +  (a - g)


                                                       18
We use this representation of ODE (7) in the remaining argument.
Second, substituting t = 0 into equation (13) yields

                                 t = (g - t a) 1 - t +  = 0,
                                
                                               1 +  (a - g)

where the last equality follows from the government budget constraint (3) in the limit Pt  
(which is equivalent to pt = t = 0) and the assumption that government policy is specified to be
consistent with the government budget constraint. Consequently, t = 0 implies indeed   t = 0.




                                            19
