                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE MACROPRUDENTIAL ROLE OF STOCK MARKETS

                                     Kyriakos T. Chousakos
                                        Gary B. Gorton
                                      Guillermo Ordoñez

                                      Working Paper 27113
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27113


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




Thanks to Stefano Lovo, Enrique Mendoza, Ernesto Pasten, Diego Saravia, Yuliy Sannikov and
participants in seminars at the Board of Governors, the 2018 Amsterdam Workshop on Safe
Assets, the 2018 SED Meetings at Mexico City, the Cowles Foundation 15th Annual GE
Conference, the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics 2019 Macroeconomics Conference,
the Copenhagen Business School Conference on Financial Frictions, the Bank of France, HEC,
and INSEAD for comments and suggestions. We also thank Shah Kahn and Tim Rudner for
excellent research assistance and the National Science Foundation for support. A previous version
of this paper was circulated under the title "Aggregate Information Dynamics." The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kyriakos T. Chousakos, Gary B. Gorton, and Guillermo Ordoñez. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Macroprudential Role of Stock Markets
Kyriakos T. Chousakos, Gary B. Gorton, and Guillermo Ordoñez
NBER Working Paper No. 27113
May 2020
JEL No. E32,E44,G01

                                          ABSTRACT

A financial crisis is an event of sudden information acquisition about the collateral backing short-
term debt in credit markets. When investors see a financial crisis coming, however, they react by
more intensively acquiring information about firms in stock markets, revealing those that are
weaker, which as a consequence end up cut off from credit. This cleansing effect of stock
markets' information on credit markets' composition discourage information acquisition about
the collateral of the firms remaining in credit markets, slowing down credit growth and
potentially preventing a crisis. Production of information in stock markets, then, acts as a
macroprudential tool in the economy.

Kyriakos T. Chousakos                            Guillermo Ordoñez
Bank of America                                  University of Pennsylvania
One Bryant Park                                  Department of Economics
NY1-100-05-00                                    428 McNeil Building
New York, NY 10035                               3718 Locust Walk
kchousakos@gmail.com                             Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                                 and NBER
Gary B. Gorton                                   ordonez@econ.upenn.edu
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
Gary.Gorton@yale.edu
1    Introduction

      In stock markets agents produce information, which is then impounded in prices,
improving the allocation of resources in the economy. Stock prices are information-
sensitive. Credit markets, particularly collateralized credit markets, perform better when
information about collateral is not produced ­ when debt is information-insensitive (see
Dang et al. (2019)). To preserve this insensitivity, loan quantities sometimes adjust to
reduce the incentive to produce information about the collateral value. In a financial
crisis, information production about collateral in credit markets cannot be prevented, and
quantities adjust to zero (a run).

     These two systems, one a price system and one a quantity system, interact dynamically
through the cross-incentives to acquire information. We propose a model in which
information production in stock markets is about firms' productivities and determines the
allocation of credit, while information production ­ or the lack thereof ­ in credit markets
is about the firms' collateral and determines the volume of credit.

      Lack of information production about collateral increases the amount of credit
available in credit markets. The volume of credit determines total output in the economy
and the average productivity of projects (the more projects are undertaken, the lower is
the productivity of the marginal project). This reduction in the average quality of projects
in the economy induces information acquisition in stocks markets. When information is
produced in stock markets, weak firms (those with relatively lower project quality) are
identified and stop participating in credit markets. This cleansing effect of stock markets'
information on credit markets' composition discourages information acquisition about
the collateral of the firms remaining in credit markets, slowing down credit growth and
potentially preventing a crisis. Stock markets act as an automatic macroprudential tool ­
it slows down credit and stabilizes the economy.

     This novel dynamic interaction between stock and credit markets through information
acquisition highlights the delicate balance of their function in macroeconomics. When
credit is booming because there is scarce information about collateral, output also booms
but the average productivity declines. Both forces make the economy more fragile. On the
one hand lenders are more worried about the quality of collateral backing their loans, which
is concerning as information production about a high volume of collateral of uncertain


                                             1
quality (the one fueling the credit boom) is a crisis. On the other hand, worse average
project quality induces investors in stock markets to investigate firms. Information from
stock markets, however, feeds back into the composition in credit markets and reduces the
incentives for information acquisition in credit markets, and if strong enough can prevent
a crisis altogether.

     As the linkage between these two markets operates through the evolution of the
average quality of projects, the model incorporates technology shocks in a different
way than standard macroeconomic models. Credit booms can be triggered by a positive
technology shock, generating a credit boom and giving rise to the aforementioned dynamics.
Similarly, negative technological shocks can induce a crisis, regardless of the amount of
information produced in stock markets.

      The macroprudential role of stock markets is enhanced if the cost of producing
information in stock markets is low, and crises less likely if the cost of acquiring information
in credit markets is high. This rationalizes the endogenous push in markets towards
facilitating information about firms in stock markets (large investment in fast computers
and detailed analysis of projects), while hampering information about collateral in credit
markets (the design of complex securities that back credit using over-the-counter opaque
contracts).

     The model generates empirical counterparts of information acquisition in stock
markets, which can be proxied by the evolution of the cross-sectional dispersion of stock
returns. We also obtain the empirical counterparts for the average quality of projects
from a credit perspective, which can be proxied by the average time-series volatility of
stocks ­ a proxy of average fragility. As we want to capture the relation between stock
markets and financial crises, we implement an empirical analysis exploiting data for many
countries over a relatively long period of time, so we can include enough crisis events.
For that purpose, we construct stock market information measures from daily stock price
data for 52 countries over the period 1973-2012, amounting to approximately 105 million
observations.

     With these measures of information, credit and quality of projects, we confront
testable implications of our model. In particular, information in stock markets reduces
future credit growth and tends to precede and predict financial crises, but less so during
high-TFP credit booms.


                                               2
     Related Literature: In this paper we exploit the informational interpretation of
financial crises in Gorton and Ordonez (2014) and 2016), and add a stock market with
informative prices and endogenous incentives to acquire such information. Then we extend
the pure interaction between credit markets and macroeconomic variables to include
the role of stock markets and their informative role, uncovering a novel purpose of such
information as a leaning force against financial crises. Our work suggests that in the
absence of a well-developed stock markets we could have seen more crises developing in
several countries.

     Our view of stock markets is consistent with a long literature on stock prices being
informative and feeding back onto real variables (see, e.g., Dow and Gorton (1997) and
Dow et al. (2017)). In this literature, the information content in asset markets direct
managers' investments decisions and allows for a better allocation of resources in the
economy. In the work here, however, information in stock markets has another, unexplored,
positive role in the economy beyond its pure allocative use ­ it endogenously acts as a
macroprudential tool to reduce the likelihood of a financial crisis. While information about
firms' collateral can be counterproductive by reducing aggregate credit in the economy,
information in stock markets can be beneficial in allocating such credit. Holmström (2015)
and Dang et al. (2019) discuss the two systems independently. Here we explore their
interaction.

     There is a rich literature considering the conceptual link between information pro-
duction and economic booms and busts, such as Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2006),
Straub and Ulbricht (2017), Fajgelbaum et al. (2017), Farboodi and Kondor (2019), and
Petriconi (2019). Perhaps the closest to our paper is Asriyan et al. (2019), who study
a setting in which credit can be backed either by collateral (with perfect information)
or by costly screening of projects, with this mix affecting macroeconomic dynamics and
the probability and recovery from crises. Our setting considers both information about
projects for trading in stock markets and information about collateral in credit markets,
and the effect of their interaction for macroeconomic dynamics and the likelihood of crises.

    In the model, households lend directly to firms and loans are collateralized (because
output is not verifiable) by an asset that we call "land." Indeed, real estate is very
important for firm borrowing behavior (see, e.g., Benmelech et al. (2005) and LaPoint
(2019)) and for firm investment behavior (see, e.g., Chaney et al. (2012), Campello and


                                             3
Giambona (2013)). Even though there is no explicit financial intermediation in the model,
our preferred interpretation is that the collateral represents assets like mortgage-backed
securities, for example, and we think of the loans as short-term, as with sale and repurchase
agreements (repo).

     Some literature has studied the interaction between stock and credit markets, but it
tends to be empirical and to focus on the pricing interactions. Examples include Beck
and Levine (2004) and Gilchrist et al. (2009). Our work highlights the informational
interactions between these two markets, with opposite informational properties but com-
plementary informational implications. Furthermore, we explore this interaction through
its impact on macroeconomics, providing a contribution to most standard macroeconomic
models, which focus on the stock pricing implications of macro, while we are focusing on
the macro implications of the informational content of stock prices.

     The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the model, first in a general
setting, and then with a more detailed, tractable model. Section 3 analyzes the dynamic
interactions between stock markets and credit markets. In Section 4 we provide tests of
three hypotheses implied by the model. Section 5 concludes.



2     Model

     This model highlights the interaction between the incentives to acquire information
in stock markets and in credit markets, their interdependence, and effects in business
cycles and financial crises. We first provide a general overview (not a complete model) of
the main sources of interactions and their dynamic implications. Then we present a full
model that can allow us to illustrate those dynamics in a transparent way and to map
the model to data counterparts.


2.1    General Overview

     Time is discrete and is denoted by t  {0, 1, ....}. At the beginning of each period t
there is a continuum of firms and households. Each firm i has an investment opportunity
(a project) which requires external funding K to operate. The firm's project succeeds with


                                             4
probability qit  Gq (we call this the quality of the project), in which case it generates cash
of F (K ) such that F (K ) > 0 and F (K ) < 0. We normalize the project to produce 0 if it
fails. The firm also holds an asset, which it can pledge as collateral, of value Cit  GC (we
call this the quality of collateral). The distributions Gq and GC constitute the underlying
fundamentals in the economy.

     There are two markets that open at the beginning of period t, and operate sequentially.
First, there is a stock market to trade firms (that is, the combination of a project and a
pledgeable asset, with their qualities not necessarily correlated and not necessarily known
at the beginning of the period). Then, there is a credit market for firms to obtain funding
for the project to operate. At the end of period t there is production, all credit contracts
are fulfilled and each firm draws a new project and a new pledgeable asset to operate next
period. These new realizations can potentially depend on the firm's identity, in which
case their expected characteristics depend on past information about the individual firm.

     We start by describing credit markets. Given that projects have a decreasing return
to scale there is an optimal operation level K  . As firms do not have any K at the
beginning of the period, firms would like to borrow K  but they may be restricted by
their available collateral. Lenders know they will receive the collateral in case of default,
which happens with probability 1 - E (qit |Pit ) (this is, the expected probability the project
defaults, conditional on observing the price at which firm i was traded at t in the preceding
stock market). Hence, lenders may want to acquire information about the collateral before
granting a loan, which is costly in terms of consumption goods. We will denote the
value of acquiring information (the difference between the expected lenders' utilities from
acquiring information and from not acquiring information about the firm's collateral), as

                             Vcredit = f (K, E (qit |Pit ), E (Cit )) ,

a function of the loan size, the expected probability of default and the expected value
of collateral. It is intuitive (and we will show later) that the value of information about
collateral increases with the loan size (as more collateral is at stake in the loan), increases
with the probability of getting the collateral (i.e., decreasing in E (qit |Pit )) and decreases
with the expected value of the collateral (this is, decreasing in E (Cit )).

    We assume that the borrower asks for a loan of K that either induces information pro-
duction about the collateral quality or does not, to maximize expected profits conditional

                                                 5
on lenders' participation constraints. From the previous discussion it is not obvious that
the borrower always applies for the desired loan amount, as it may trigger information
acquisition about the collateral value. A small loan that does not trigger information
production and is of a certain amount may be preferred to a larger loan that triggers
information production but introduces uncertainty about project financing depending on
the realized collateral quality. Formally, depending on the distribution GC it may be the
case that E (F (K |Cit )) < F (K |E (Cit )), in which case increasing K may reduce expected
production if it induces information production about the collateral.

     The expectation of the project quality conditional on the observed stock price (this
is E (qit |Pit )) depends on how much information is generated in the stock market, which
depends on the stock market protocol (i.e., the rules that govern trade in the stock market
and hence how the stock price is formed), which we denote M. To be more precise,
buyers may acquire information about the quality of the project at a cost in terms of
consumption goods, and the extent to which this information gets into the price depends
on M. For instance, in the case of a continuum of buyers with dispersed unbiased signals,
prices perfectly aggregate information and discourage private information acquisition
(the celebrated impossibility result of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980)). The literature
has explored market protocols that do not completely dissipate the private gains for
information acquisition, such as noise traders (as in Kyle (1985) or Black (1986)), multiple
dimensions of the asset characteristics (as in Vives (2014) or Bostanci and Ordonez (2020))
or the use of auctions (as in Milgrom (1981) and Cole et al. (2018)). Later we propose
a market protocol that does not dissipate private information gains and allows us to
highlight information acquisition choices.

     We denote the value of acquiring information (i.e. the difference between the expected
buyers' utilities from acquiring information and from not acquiring information about the
firm's project), as
                               Vstock = f (M, E (qit ), E (Cit )) ,

a function of the market protocol, the expected probability of default, and the expected
value of the collateral. It is intuitive (and we will show later) that the value of information
about the project increases with the expected value of credit that is expected to be
obtained in the credit market, which depends on the expectation of what the stock price
may reveal, the expected value of collateral E (Cit ) and on the expected implications for


                                              6
information acquisition in credit markets, which depends on the E (qit ).

     As we discussed, with regards to the incentives to acquire information, both Vcredit and
Vstock depend on expectations, which in turn depend on information that changes those
expectations. This general setting then highlights the sources of interaction: information
in stock markets is contained in stock prices and affects information acquisition and the
loan size in credit markets, as it affects the likelihood that lenders receive the collateral.
At the same time, information in credit markets affects the amount of funds the firm will
obtain in credit markets, affecting the incentives to acquire information about the project
in stock markets.

     The dynamics in this setting rely on potential shocks to projects and collateral that
happen at the end of each period. If, for instance, there is an unconditional new realization
of both projects and collateral each period, then the solution is given by the previous
interaction, and it is the same every period, as the system lacks persistence. Dynamics
occur, however, when shocks do not happen to all projects and/or collateral or when the
draw of the new realization of the shock depends on the previous project and/or collateral
of the firm. Both of these possibilities would add persistence into the system through the
evolution of expectations E (qit ) and E (Cit ), which correspond to the state variables in
this setting.


2.2    Detailed Model

     We now illustrate the feedback between information in stock and credit markets, and
the dynamic implications, with a full detailed model with specific assumptions that allow
us some mileage on the analysis and testable implications.

     Agents and Goods: To model who buys, who operates, and who sells firms, we
assume an overlapping generation structure, such that in each period t three overlapping
generations coexist ­ young, middle-aged and old ­ each generation is of mass 2 of a
continuum of agents. There are three goods in the economy ­ numeraire, labor, and land.
Numeraire, denoted by K , is productive and reproducible ­ it can be used to produce more
numeraire and it is non-storable and so it should be consumed before new production of
numeraire. Land, on the other hand, is storable but non-productive and non-reproducible.
Each generation is risk neutral and derives utility from consuming numeraire, without


                                              7
discounting.1 Labor does not generate any disutility.

    Technology: The labor endowment of a member of the young generation, L    ¯ , produces
numeraire one-for-one, this is L¯=K  ¯ . Labor in the hands of the old generation can be
used to run a project. A project is an idea that a middle-aged agent may imagine at the
beginning of the period and that, when combined with a unit of land constitutes a firm.
Firms (the idea and the land) can be sold in a stock market by middle-aged agents to old
agents who have the labor L to implement the idea. We assume there is a limited supply
(mass 1) of projects in the economy per period, so in each period at least half of the old
generation will not have the chance to use their labor to produce. The reason for this will
become clear shortly.

     To capture decreasing returns to scale in the most convenient way we assume a
piecewise linear production function for the firm: with probability q there is success and
F (K ) = A min{L, K }, otherwise F (K ) = 0. There are two types of projects available:
An exogenous fraction  has high probability of success, qH , and the rest have a low
probability of success, qL . We assume all projects are efficient, i.e., qH A > qL A > 1, which
implies that it is optimal for all firms, regardless of their project quality, to operate at the
optimal scale K  = L .

     An Agent's Lifetime: The lifetime of an individual agent is as follows: At the start
of a period, say t, the individual is born young and obtains a labor endowment L ¯ that can
be transformed immediately into numeraire. The agent can use this numeraire to lend to
firms against collateral in credit markets and to buy land in asset markets to create a
firm in the next period, if the agent gets to imagine an idea for a project. In period t + 1
the agent becomes middle-aged. Then if he imagined an idea, he can combine it with the
unit of land, form a firm and sell it in a stock market. In period t + 2 the agent becomes
old and can use the numeraire accumulated to bid for a firm in the stock market. After
the stock market closes, agents consume what they have because consumption goods are
perishable. Then the old agent obtains a labor endowment L and can borrow numeraire
in credit markets to productively operate the project. Firms produce and loan contracts
are settled. At the end of their lives, agents sell land and consume. This time line (in
particular that consumption goods perish right after the stock market closes) guarantees
that resources are in the wrong hands before production takes place and so firms need to
  1
    No discounting and no concern about when to consume makes credit only useful for facilitating
production rather than for consumption smoothing.


                                               8
participate actively in credit markets to operate. We summarize the agent's lifetime in
Figure 1.

                              Figure 1: An agent's lifetime

            Young                          Middle-age                              Old

      Born with L.                 If get an "idea," forms a firm.     Bids for a firm in the stock market.
      Produces numeraire.          Sells a firm in the stock market.   Consumes and obtains more labor L .
      Lends and buys land.                                             If owning a firm, borrows.


     Land as Collateral: At the time of production, young agents have numeraire while
firms have a project and labor but not the numeraire essential to produce. We assume that
K > K  and since production is efficient, if output were verifiable it would be possible for
young agents to lend the optimal amount of numeraire K  to firms using state-contingent
claims. In what follows, however, we assume limited liability and a financial friction ­ the
output of the project is only observable by the borrower and is non-verifiable by the lender.
Then firms would never repay their loans and young agents would never be willing to lend
since the loan would never be repaid. The output would be hidden. While we assume
that firms can hide the numeraire output, we also assume that firms cannot hide land,
which makes land useful as collateral to relax the financial friction. Firms can credibly
promise to transfer a fraction of land to households in the event of not repaying the loan,
which relaxes the financing constraint from output non-verifiability.

     We say a firm is active if it has the chance (based on perceived collateral quality) to
obtain a loan in credit markets. We denote by  the mass of active firms, which we will
show later is endogenous, depending on the loans granted to particular firms. There is an
exogenous fraction of good projects in the economy,  and we assume that active firms
are randomly assigned to a queue to choose their project quality. When a firm has its
turn to choose its project quality according to its position in the queue, an active firm
naturally picks the project with the highest available quality q of those remaining in the
pool. This protocol induces an average productivity of projects among active firms, which
we denote by q ( ), that is given by
                                  
                                             qH             if  < 
                      q ( | ) =                                                                (1)
                                    qH
                                  
                                         + 1-     
                                                      qL      if   .
                                                  



                                                  9
     The average quality of projects in the economy depends on two factors: the exogenous
fraction of good projects in the economy,  and the endogenous fraction of firms operating
projects,  . In other words, the distribution Gq in this simple setting is endogenous: if
   then Gq is degenerate (the project is qH with probability 1) and if  >  it is
binomial (the project is qH with probability   
                                                 and qL with probability 1 - 
                                                                              ).

    We assume land is non-productive (it is not an input into the project technology)
but may have an intrinsic value. If land is "good", it can deliver C units of numeraire,
but only once. If land is "bad"', it is worthless. We assume an exogenous fraction p of
land is good in every period. In other words, the distribution GC is binomial (land has
value C with probability p and 0 otherwise).

     The land type can be privately observed (and its quality certified) at the beginning
                         l
of the period, at a cost C  in units of numeraire by households (diverting its use from
                                   b
consumption) and/or at a cost C      in units of labor by firms (diverting its use from
production). We assume information produced about land quality (the certification) is
private immediately after obtained and becomes public at the end of the period. Still,
the agent can credibly disclose private information (the certificate) immediately if it is
beneficial to do so.

     The perception about the quality of collateral is critical for the granting of loans. We
assume that C > K  so that land that is known to be good can sustain the optimal loan
size, K  . But land that is known to be bad is not able to sustain any loan. We refer to
firms that have land with a positive probability of being good (p > 0) as active firms, the
parameter  , since in contrast to firms that are known to hold bad land, they can actively
raise funds to start their projects.2

     Stock Market Protocol, M: An old agent can buy a firm (a combination of an
idea, i.e., a project and land) to operate. As there are twice as many buyers as firms we
assume a protocol in which two old agents are randomly assigned to a firm and each submit
their individual bids in a sealed envelope. The firm is then sold to the highest bidder.
In the stock market bidders can privately acquire information about the firm before
submitting their bids. Production of such information costs q in terms of numeraire. In
   2
     The assumption that active firms are those for whom p > 0 is just imposed for simplicity, and is
clearly not restrictive. If we add a fixed cost of operation, then it would be necessary a minimum amount
of funding to operate, and firms having collateral with small but strictly positive beliefs p would not be
active either.


                                                   10
the case of acquiring information we assume the bidder is not only perfectly informed
about q but also that he learns whether his competitor has also acquired information.
This last part is not relevant to the mechanism but greatly simplifies the exposition.


2.3     Timing and Equilibrium

     We have discussed the environment, preferences, technologies and information struc-
tures. Here we discuss the timing in a single period and define the equilibrium.

      1. Technology: The technology  arrives. Of the available projects, fraction  are
qH   projects.

     2. Market for firms (stock markets): A mass one of middle-aged agents have an idea
for a project, which together with collateral creates a firm. Among the firms which are
created, those with a sufficiently high p will be active and will draw the quality of the
project q , according to the process (1). Two old agents (buyers) are randomly assigned
to a middle-aged agent who created a firm (seller) and bid for that firm. At the time
of bidding the firm is composed of the idea, a project of quality q , and a collateral with
known belief p. Each bidder can choose to become informed about q at a cost q before
submitting the bid.

    3. Consumption and new labor endowments: Numeraire goods will perish at this
point so all numeraire will be consumed. After consumption, young and old agents are
endowed with L ¯ and L units of labor, respectively. Using their labor, young agents
immediately produce K ¯ units of numeraire goods.

     4. Market for loans (credit markets): There is random matching between one young
agent (lender) and one old agent (borrower). If the old agent does not own a firm, this
market is irrelevant. If the old agent owns a firm, both the lender (l) and borrower (b)
know the probability p that the land owned by the borrower is good and observe the price
at which the firm was traded at the beginning of the period (then making an inference
about the quality q of the firm's project). The borrower makes a take-it-or-leave-it offer
for a loan that specifies the size of the loan K , the face value R to be repaid, and the
fraction of collateral that should be transferred to the lender in case of default, x. The loan
contract (in effect) also specifies whether the lender or borrower acquires information (an
information-sensitive loan, denoted IS ) or not (an information-insensitive loan, denoted

                                              11
II ), which should be consistent with an agent's choice. The lender either accepts or
rejects the offer.

    5. Production and loan contract settlements: Production takes place and all infor-
mation generated about land at the time of the loan (information privately acquired) gets
revealed. Loan contracts are settled.

     6. Market for land (asset markets): Young agents who did not receive land as collat-
eral because of default randomly match with old agents with land. As old agents are
about to die they will sell their land in order to consume. Buyers of land have all the
bargaining power and the price of land is its expected value pC .

     7. Idiosyncratic shocks to land: After the land market closes, there are mean-reverting
idiosyncratic shocks to land types as follows. Either the true quality of each unit of land
remains unchanged with probability , or there is an idiosyncratic shock that changes its
type with probability (1 - ). In this last case, land becomes good with a probability
p, independent of its current type. Even when the shock is observable, its realization is
not. An implication of this is that the distribution of collateral qualities has a three-point
support: 0, p, 1. This process insures that the distribution of collateral in the economy is
not changed over time, but its perception changes. As beliefs change, there is a credit
boom as more firms become active.

     We summarize the timeline of a single period t in Figure 2. The timing is such that
credit and stock markets operate separately in a period and periods are only linked by
the evolution of beliefs about land quality.

                              Figure 2: Timeline in period t

     Stock Market            Consumption             Credit market         Production Asset market

Match: 1 seller - 2 bidders. All numeraire consumed. Match: young - old. Firm production. Match: young - old.
Info choice about q .        New labor endowment... Info choice about C . Loan contracts Land traded at pC .
Trade at auction price.      ...and numeraire prod.  Loan contract.       settled.        Shocks to land type.


     We will use the following notation: IS l indicates an information-sensitive loan
contract where the information is produced by the lender; similarly IS b indicates an
information-sensitive loan contract where the information is produced by the borrower;
and II indicates an information-insensitive contract, where no party produces information.


                                               12
Now we can define the equilibrium.

Definition 1. Equilibrium:

   · In the credit market borrowers choose the loan contract type (i  {IS l , IS b , II } and
     Ki , Ri and xi ) to maximize expected profits conditional on the lender accepting the
     given loan (participation constraint); the borrower repays when the project succeeds
     and defaults when the project fails (truth-telling constraint); and there are no private
     incentives to acquire information in the information-insensitive contract (incentive-
     compatibility constraint).

   · In the stock market potential buyers choose to acquire information or not before
     submitting a bid for a firm, conditional on knowing collateral type p of a randomly
     assigned firm and the mass of active firms that will be participating in credit markets
     in the next period ( ). The stock price for each firm is determined by the highest bid.


2.4    The Credit Market

     The functioning of the credit market and the information acquisition about collateral
follows the same logic and analysis as Gorton and Ordoñez (2014) and Gorton and Ordoñez
(2016), which we briefly discuss here. We first study the optimal short-term collateralized
debt contract for a single firm with a unit of land that is good with probability p and
that has a project that is believed to succeed with probability q .

      There are two possible loan contracts. The first, information-sensitive debt (IS),
                                                                  l
specifies information production by either lenders (at a cost C     ) or borrowers (at a cost
  b                         b
C   in units of labor, or C   p(qA - 1) in units of expected numeraire), whichever is smaller.
                      l   b
Denote C = min{C , C p(qA - 1)}, where the second argument reflects the opportunity
cost of the amount that cannot be invested in the project because it is used to produce
information.

     Lenders are willing to lend the optimal amount K  < C only if they find out that the
collateral is good (with probability p). Then from an ex-ante perspective, the participation
constraint implies
                             p[qRIS + (1 - q )xIS C - K  ]  C ,



                                             13
where RIS is the promised return in case of repayment and xIS the fraction of land of
value C that a lender expects to receive if the firm defaults. The truth-telling constraint
implies RIS = xIS C , otherwise the firm always pays or defaults. This implies

                                  C                            RIS
                    RIS = K  +              and        xIS =        1.
                                  p                             C

Note that, since the fraction of land posted as collateral does not depend on q , firms
cannot signal their q by posting a different fraction of land as collateral (or similarly, by
offering to pay a different rate). Intuitively, since collateral completely covers the loan
value it prevents a loss due to default, so the loan cannot be used to signal the probability
of default.

     The second possible loan contract is information-insensitive debt, where firms borrow
just based on the expected value of collateral. No information is produced. In this case,
the lenders' participation constraint binds when

                                qRII + (1 - q )xII pC = K,

and subject to the truth-telling constraint, RII = xII pC . We obtain,

                                                            RII
                        RII = K          and        xII =        1.
                                                            pC

For this contract to be information-insensitive (II), there are the extra constraints for
guaranteeing that neither lenders nor borrowers have incentives to deviate and check the
value of collateral privately.

     Lenders may want to deviate because they can lend at beneficial contract terms if
the collateral is good, and not lend at all if the collateral is bad. They do not want to
deviate if the expected gains from acquiring information, evaluated at xII and RII , are
                             l
lower than the private loss, C , from acquiring information,

                         l                                       l
                        Vcredit = p[qRII + (1 - q )xII C - K ] < C ,




                                               14
or in terms of the loan size,
                                                         l
                                                        C
                            K < K l (p|q, II )                    .                      (2)
                                                  (1 - p)(1 - q )

    So, quantities adjust to maintain information-insensitivity.

     Borrowers may want to deviate because they will not lend if the collateral is bad and
renegotiate even better terms if the collateral is good. They do not want to deviate if the
expected gains from acquiring information, evaluated at xII and RII , are smaller than
            b
the losses C  from acquiring information. Specifically when

             b
            Vcredit = [pK  + (1 - p)K ](qA - 1) - K (qA - 1) < pC
                                                                b
                                                                  (qA - 1),

or in terms of the loan size,

                                K > K b (p|q, II )  K  - C
                                                         b
                                                           .                             (3)


     Combining conditions (2) and (3), information-insensitive debt is feasible only when
the loan is both above the red dotted line in Figure 3 (to avoid information acquisition by
borrowers) and below the blue solid line (to avoid information acquisition by lenders).
The y-axis is expected profits. In other words, information-insensitive debt (II Loans) is
feasible only for relatively high beliefs p > p about collateral quality, where the threshold
p is given by the point in which K l (p ) = K b (p ) from equations (2) and (3). Then

                                             l
                                             C             K  - C
                                                                b
                      p = max 1 -                        ,            .                  (4)
                                       (K  - b )(1 - q )      C

     This threshold, and the expected payoffs of a firm as a function of p, are depicted in
Figure 3. Firms with low enough p cannot obtain information-insensitive loans while firms
with p close to 1 can. In the figure, firms with land of quality p, for instance, can obtain
information-insensitive loans but if p increases above p, that would not be a possibility
for those firms anymore. Subsequently, as the credit boom proceeds, p will increase as q
declines (as H projects are used up), as can be seen in (4), eventually exceeding p. This
is a crisis because of the discontinuous jump resulting in information production about
all collateral. Some firms that were getting loans prior to this suddenly cannot get loans.

                                             15
Output and consumption go down­a crisis.

     It is clear from inspecting equation (4) that the information-insensitive debt region
widens with information costs (p decreases with b and l ) and shrinks with the project's
expected probability of success (p decreases with q ). This is the main link between stock
markets and credit markets. When prices in stock markets are informative about q they
will create greater heterogeneity about which firms will be examined in credit markets,
and as such how much information will be generated in credit markets.

                      Figure 3: Expected Profits in Equilibrium

                                                                          K  (qA   1)
                                            l
                                      (1 p)(1 q )
                                                    (qA   1)
                                                               -




                        p (K       b )(qA   1)
                                                 -




                                IS Loans                               II Loans


             0                              Beliefs p              p     b
                                                                         p              1




2.5    The Stock Market                                                                     1/1




     The stock market is the place where all firms are offered for sale at the end of each
period and where two buyers compete for each firm. The information production choices
of the two bidders, which depend on beliefs about the collateral of the firm, are relevant
for the informativeness of firms' stock prices about q , information which is then used
in credit markets to determine the size of the loan and whether information should be
produced about collateral quality. Here we explore this intricate relation.

    When a potential buyer is randomly assigned to a firm, he has a belief about the
quality of the land of that particular firm (p). The buyer also knows the fraction of

                                                 16
active firms in credit markets ( ) and then the probability of bidding for a firm with a
qH -project, which we define as z ( )  P r(qH ) =   
                                                     . A firm's value is composed of two
parts, one is the expected value of its collateral pC and the other is the expected profit
generated by the project according to Figure 3. We define VH (p) as the value of a firm
with a qH -project and VL (p) as the value of a firm with a qL -project.

     Define y to be the fraction of uninformed buyers in the economy and let PU (p) to be
the pooling price (i.e., the bid submitted by an uninformed investor for a firm known to
have collateral with belief p). These two variables will be jointly determined in equilibrium
by the bidding and the information production decisions of the potential buyers.

    The expected gains for an uninformed potential buyer are:

                          y                                   y
              U (p) = z     (VH - PU ) + (1 - z )    1-y+       (VL - PU ) .
                          2                                   2

In words, an uniformed buyer always bids the pooling price in equilibrium PU (p). When
he faces another uninformed bidder, he buys with a probability 1/2, regardless of the
firm's project quality. When the uninformed bidder faces an informed bidder, he never
buys a good firm in equilibrium (as the informed bidder would bid P U (p) + for a good
firm) and the uninformed bidder always buys a low quality firm (as the informed bidder
would bid less than PU (p)).

    Similarly, the expected gains for an informed potential buyer are:

                                             1-y
                           I (p) = z    y+       (VH - PU ) .
                                              2

In words, an informed buyer always bids the value of the firm when facing another informed
bidder (which for simplicity we assume he knows), a bit above the pooling price when
facing an uninformed bidder and the firm is of high quality, and less than the pooling
price when facing an uninformed bidder and the firm is of low quality.

    This implies that there will not be information acquisition as long as

                               Vstock = I (p) - U (p) < q .


    Notice that bidding competition across uninformed investors implies that U = 0,


                                             17
otherwise there are incentives to marginally increase the bid PU and discretely raise the
probability of buying the firm. This implies that PU should be such that, for a given y ,
the pooling price PU balances the gains of buying a good firm and the losses of buying a
bad one. Hence

                                                                         zy
           PU = VH + (1 -  )VL          with         (z, y ) =                         .
                                                                 zy + (1 - z )(2 - y )

The fraction of uninformed investors y affects the price that uninformed investors bid for
a firm. When no investor is informed (this is when y = 1), then PU = zVH + (1 - z )VL ,
the ex-ante value of the firm. When all investors are informed (i.e., when y = 0), then
PU = VL , as the only firms that are available for uninformed to buy are those of bad
quality.

     All potential buyers acquire information (this is, y = 0) when Vstock > q . When
y = 0,  = 0 and PU = VL . This implies that U (y = 0) = 0 and I (y = 0) =
z
2
  (VH - VL ) > 0, and then we can express the condition for all investors being informed as
q  2  2
        (VH - VL ) > q . In words, when the cost of information production is very small
all buyers acquire information and all firms are traded either at a price VH if the firm
has a qH -project or at a price VL if the firm has a qL -project. This situation is the most
informative one, in which all prices in the stock market are informative about the projects'
qualities.

     At the other extreme, no investor acquires information (this is, y = 1) when Vstock < q .
When y = 1,  = z and PU = zVH + (1 - z )VL . This implies that U (y = 1) = 0 and
I (y = 1) = z (1 - z )(VH - VL ) > 0, and then we can express the condition for no investor
being informed as  q  z (1 - z )(VH - VL ) > q . In words, when the cost of information is
very large no investor has incentives to deviate and become informed. This is the case in
which the stock market is the least informative as all firms are traded at the same price,
PU .

     Hence, there is an intermediate range of the cost q  ( q ,  q ) in which the equilibrium
is given by I = q , with an interior y that has to be consistent with equilibrium prices
PU . In this case y  is the solution to the following equation

                            zy  (1 - z )(2 - y  )
                                                   (VH - VL ) = q .
                           zy  + (1 - z )(2 - y  )


                                               18
     The first panel of Figure 4 shows a particular numerical illustration of how the fraction
of informed investors (1 - y ) depends on the fraction of active firms with qH -projects (this
is z = / ). In the figure, the fraction of qH projects is on the x-axis. The economy will
initially be one in which all firms are of type qH and so the economy will start at the
right side of the x-axis where the fraction is one. As there are more and more active firms
during the credit boom, eventually more of the projects will be qL firms. The incentives
to acquire information are maximized when there is relatively large uncertainty about the
composition of projects in the market, the peak of the inverted-U shape. At the right end
of the inverted-U, most firms have qH projects and at the left end, most firms have qL
projects. Notice that the shape in the figure is just one possible outcome. It may be that
there is no decline at the left side, for example, depending on the available mix of high
and low projects and the cost of producing information.

     The second panel shows the pooling price, PU , also as a function of the fraction of
active firms with qH -projects. Again, starting from the right on the x-axis, not surprisingly,
as the composition of projects in the market worsens, PU declines. As more informed
bidders participate in the market they decline faster because those bidders "cream skim"
the market. Note that the two kinks in in the second panel correspond to points where
there are no informed investors, because either almost all the projects are qH (RHS) or qL
(LHS) so it does not pay to produce information.
                                                      Figure 4: Fraction of Informed Investors and Pooling Price
                                      0.8                                                                                                    26


                                      0.7
                                                                                                                                             24

                                      0.6
     Fraction of Informed Investors




                                                                                                                    Pooling Price of Firms




                                                                                                                                             22
                                      0.5


                                      0.4                                                                                                    20


                                      0.3
                                                                                                                                             18

                                      0.2

                                                                                                                                             16
                                      0.1


                                       0                                                                                                     14
                                            0   0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4    0.5     0.6    0.7   0.8   0.9   1                                      0   0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4    0.5     0.6    0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                                                  Fraction of qH firms                                                                                  Fraction of qH firms




     Notice that the solution y  determines the information content in the stock market.
The distribution of observed prices in the economy determines beliefs about q . A fraction
z (1 - y  )2 of firms trade at price VH , which reveals that the firm has a qH -project, a

                                                                                                               19
fraction (1 - z )(1 - y  )2 of firms trade at price VL , which reveals that the firm has a
qL -project, and a fraction 1 - (1 - y  )2 of firms are traded at the pooling price PU , which
is uninformative about q . As can be seen, the higher is the fraction of informed bidders
(the lower is y  ), the more information about q will be revealed in the stock market and
affect information in the credit market.



3      Credit and stock markets - Dynamic interactions

     In this section we show how information about collateral in credit markets and
information about projects in stock markets interact.


3.1     The Evolution of Beliefs

     The idiosyncratic shock process for collateral generates depreciation of its information.
With probability  the true quality of land remains unchanged, and with probability
1 -  it changes. In this last case, land becomes good with probability p independent
of its current type. Given this stochastic process, a unit of land falls into one of three
possible categories: it is either known to be good (p = 1), known to be bad (p = 0) or of
uncertain quality (p = p). We denote the mass of land in each category p  {0, p, 1} at
the beginning of period t (after idiosyncratic shocks to land but before the stock market
opens) as m(p)t .

      We define the mass of active firms as all firms that may have good collateral, then

                                    t = m(p)t + m(1)t .                                   (5)

These are all those firms that could in principle operate (as they have perceived collateral
quality with a chance to obtain some credit) and then these firms are traded at a positive
price in the stock market.

     In what follows we assume that p < p (qL ) (there is information production about
collateral of unknown quality for firms known to operate with qL -projects) and that
p > p (qH ) (there is no information production about collateral of unknown quality for
firms known to operate with qH -projects). These assumptions allow us to focus on an

                                             20
environment in which information about firms' projects affects their performance in credit
markets. Otherwise, information about collateral in the credit market does not depend
on the availability of information about projects in the stock market.

     After the stock market operates in period t, credit markets open and a fraction vt of
land of unknown quality is investigated based on the observed stock prices. This implies
that the mass of land in each category after credit markets close (which we denote by t )
changes to:

                           m(p)t   = (1 - vt )m(p)t
                           m(1)t   = m(1)t + vt pm(p)t
                           m(0)t   = m(0)t + vt (1 - p)m(p)t .


    These are the masses of beliefs at the end of period t, and then the masses at the
beginning of the next period t + 1 further change according to idiosyncratic shocks, and
then:

                             m(p)t+1 = m(p)t + (1 - )
                             m(1)t+1 = m(1)t
                             m(0)t+1 = m(0)t .

Putting these elements together, the mass of active firms in period t + 1 is

                t+1 = m(p)t+1 + m(1)t+1
                      = m(p)t + (1 - ) + m(1)t
                      = (1 - vt )m(p)t + (1 - ) + [m(1)t + vt pm(p)t ]
                      = [1 - vt (1 - p)]m(p)t + m(1)t + (1 - ).                       (6)

The first term corresponds to land p that was not examined during last period's credit
market, that was examined and was found to be good and that has not suffered an
idiosyncratic shock in the transition between t and t + 1. The second term correspond to
land known to be good (i.e., p = 1) that has not suffered an idiosyncratic shock. The last
term corresponds to all land that has suffered an idiosyncratic shock.



                                           21
     Combining equations (5) and (6) a credit boom is defined as the change in credit in
the economy,

              t+1 - t = (1 - )(1 - m(1)t ) - [1 - (1 - vt (1 - p))]m(p)t
                          = (1 - )m(0)t - vt (1 - p)m(p)t .                                    (7)

The credit boom is given by the old collateral known to be of bad quality that suffered an
idiosyncratic shock and started in the pool of unknown collateral, minus the unknown
collateral that is investigated and found to be bad collateral.

     Now, we can put structure on the fraction of collateral vt that is investigated in
                                                                              
period t. First, the mass of active firms t reduces the fraction zt =          t
                                                                                 of qH -projects in
the economy. This fraction reduces the average quality of projects, qt = zt qH + (1 - zt )qL
and, as depicted in Figure 4, determines information acquisition in the stock market,
(1 - yt ). Among firms with collateral p, a fraction (1 - zt )(1 - yt )2 is identified in the stock
market as qL -firms, a fraction zt (1 - yt )2 as qH -firms, and the rest are not explored in the
stock market. If p (qt )  p there is no information production about the third group, just
about the first. If in contrast, p (qt ) > p there is also information production about the
third group, which we denote a crisis. Denoting by IC a crisis indicator function with
IC = 1 in case of a crisis and 0 otherwise,

                          vt = (1 - zt )(1 - yt )2 + IC 1 - (1 - yt )2                         (8)

In short, when IC = 0 and there is no information production about collateral of unknown
quality of a firm with unknown project quality, vt = (1 - zt )(1 - yt )2 (only the collateral
of qL -projects are investigated). In contrast, during a crisis (this is IC = 1) only the
collateral of known qH -projects is not investigated, and then vt = 1 - zt (1 - yt )2 .

    The fraction of collateral that is examined in credit markets, vt , is a function of the
mass of active firms in the economy, t and changes in the following way.
              
       vt
               (1-
              t  2
                   yt )
                     (1 - yt ) + 2(1 - zt ) y
                                            zt
                                              t
                                                          if    IC = 0 (i.e., t <   )
          =                                                                                    (9)
       t     (1-
              2
                yt )
                     (1 - yt ) - 2zt y
                                     zt
                                       t
                                                           if   IC = 1 (i.e., t >   )
                    t



where   is the mass of active firms for which p (qt (  )) = p.


                                                22
     This derivative shows that information in credit markets changes with the volume of
credit in the economy (the mass of active firms) through two channels. The first is by
triggering a a financial crisis, in which vt increases discontinuously after a certain volume
of credit requests. From equation (4), p (qt ) decreases with qt (which increases with t ),
and then the indicator IC switches from 0 to 1 when t gets large enough.

     The second channel is more continuous and comes from changes in information in
stock markets. When there is no crisis, there is more collateral examination when there
is more information in the stock market and there are more qL -projects. When there is
a crisis, there is more collateral examination when there is less information in the stock
market, but more qL -projects.

    Given these relations, the next Lemma characterizes the evolution of credit in the
economy.
Lemma 1. The mass of active firms follows the following first-order difference equation.

                           t+1 = 1 -  + [vt (t )p + (1 - vt (t ))t ]                    (10)

and then
                             t+1                           vt
                                 = (1 - vt (t )) - (t - p)                              (11)
                             t                             t
       vt
with   t
            given by equation (9).

    Proof Among collateral with known quality (this is, 1 - m(p)t ), a fraction p is of
good quality. Then, m(1)t = p(1 - m(p)t ). Substituting into equation (5), we can express
m(p)t as a function of t . This is,

                                                                    t - p
                     t = p + (1 - p)m(p)t       =         m(p)t =         ,
                                                                    1-p

and we can rewrite equation (6) as

                   t+1 = (1 - ) + (m(p)t + m(1)t ) - vt (1 - p)m(p)t
                         = (1 - ) + t - vt (1 - p)m(p)t

Replacing m(p)t in this equation we obtain the equation (10) in the Lemma.         q.e.d.




                                              23
3.2    Steady States

     We use the equations in the Lemma to characterize the stationary equilibrium in the
economy. We start with three benchmark cases: first, we take the case of no information
production in the stock market; second, we examine the case of perfect information in
the stock market; and third, the case of a constant amount of information in the stock
market. Finally, in the next subsection, we use these cases to explore the general case
where the amount of information produced in the stock market is endogenous.

     Assume first that q = , then there is never information production in the stock
market (i.e., yt = 1 in all t). Here we show the economy can be in a stationary good boom
equilibrium (in which all firms receive credit), a stationary no boom equilibrium (in which
a fraction of firms receive credit) and a stationary cyclical bad boom equilibrium, with a
deterministic sequence of booms and busts.

Proposition 1. Assuming q = , yt = 1 for all t. From equation (8), vt = IC in all t.
Then
                       t+1 = 1 -  + [IC p + (1 - IC )t ]

where IC = 1 for all t >   and 0 otherwise, with   is given by p (q (  )) = p.

     Defining   1 -  + p the lowest possible mass of active firms (the fraction of col-
lateral facing an idiosyncratic shock and good quality collateral not facing an idiosyncratic
shock), the stationary equilibria are:

  1. No Boom: If     , information is replenished every period and SS =  .

  2. Good Booms: If    1, information is never generated and SS = 1.

  3. Cycles of Bad Booms: If    (, 1), information is generated only when t >   .

      The proof comes from the dynamics in equation (10) and (11). When there is no
crisis,  t
          t+1
              =  and when there is a crisis    t
                                                t+1
                                                    = 0. We show this next using a phase
diagram. The first panel of Figure 5 shows the first case of the proposition, in which the
mass of active firms is constant and at the minimum, as information is replenished every
period. The second panel shows the second case of the proposition, in which an economy
with information transits to a steady state without information about any collateral and
all firms being active (a good boom). The third panel shows the last case of the proposition,


                                             24
in which the economy cycles between booms that end in crises once there mass of active
firms (  ) is high enough, just to restart the process again from  .

                              Figure 5: No Booms and Good Booms
 t+1                                   t+1                                 t+1
                                            1




                                                                                    t+1 = 1 -  + [IC p +(1 - IC )t ]
                                                t+1 = 1 -  + t




             t+1 = 1 -  + p
                                       1-                                 1-



   0                          1   t         0                     1   t         0                                      1   t
                                      1/7                                 2/7                                                  3/7




       (a) No Boom                               (b) Good Booms                         (c) Bad Booms


      Now we analyze the opposite extreme, assume q = 0, then there is always information
in the stock market (this is, yt = 0 in all t). Here we show the economy just has one
stationary equilibrium with an intermediate level of active firms, and there is never a
crisis.

Proposition 2. Assuming q = 0, yt = 0 in all t. From equation (8), vt = 1 - zt in all t.
Then
                                                                    
          t+1 = 1 -  + [(1 - zt )p + zt t ]        with zt = min      ,1
                                                                    t
There is a unique steady state in which SS  (, 1).

      When there is perfect information in the stock market, collateral of unknown quality
is only investigated if it is backing qL -projects. This is why there are no crises, as there
are only two possible thresholds for information acquisition, p (qL ) > p and p (qH ) < p.
The credit boom is continuous, strictly increasing at a decreasing rate, as there are more
qL -firms operating in the economy. Formally, from equation (11),       t
                                                                         t+1
                                                                             =   p
                                                                                  2 (positive
                                                                                  t
and decreasing in  ). Figure 6 shows this result graphically.


3.3    The Stock Market as Macroprudential Mechanism

    The comparison of the two previous extremes suggests that information in the stock
market generates a stationary equilibrium that is mediocre (i.e., low consumption because

                                                          25
                    Figure 6: Full Information in the Stock Market
                   t+1




                             t+1 = 1 -  + [(1 - zt )p + zt t ]

                                                                 1 - (1 - p)(1 -  )




                   1-



                      0                                                   1     t
                                                                                      4/7




fewer firms get credit) but prevents fragility. To highlight this result, we now assume
the case in which there is constant information production in the stock market (this is,
yt = y  (0, 1)) in all t.

Proposition 3. Information in the stock market prevents crises and, if not, it reduces
their magnitude.

     Proof The sufficient condition for this result is that the credit boom grows at a
slower rate than without information when there is no crisis, and that the mass of active
firms is larger than without information when there is crisis.

     Formally, the first condition is   t+1
                                            |
                                       t IC =0,yt =y
                                                     <    t+1
                                                              |
                                                         t IC =0,yt =1
                                                                       from equation (11).
This is the case, as    t+1
                            |
                       t IC =0,yt =y
                                     = [1 - (1 - zt )(1 - y )2 ] - (t - p) 
                                                                            2 < , because
                                                                            t
                     2
1 - (1 - zt )(1 - y ) < 1 and t >  > p.

    Formally, the second condition is t+1 |IC =1,yt =y > t+1 |IC =1,yt =1 from equation (10).
This is the case, as t+1 |IC =1,yt =y = 1 -  + p + zt (1 - y )2 (t - p) >  , because
 = 1 -  + p.

                                                                                            q.e.d.



                                                 26
                   Figure 7: Some Information in the Stock Market
 t+1                                                         t+1




                            Case: y = 0                                               Case: y = 0




 1-                                                      1-
                           Case: y = 1                                               Case: y = 1

   0                                      1   t                0                                    1   t
                                                  5/7                                                       6/7


         (a) High Info (Low y )                                       (b) Low Info (High y )


     Figure 7 is based on the parametric combination that generates bad booms in the
absence of information in the stock market (third panel of Figure 5). The first panel
displays the case with relatively high information in the stock market (that is, relatively
low y ). This information slows down the credit boom so much that the economy comes to a
steady state without triggering a crisis. The second panel displays the case with relatively
low information in the stock market (that is, relatively high y ). This information slows
down the credit boom, but not so much to prevent a crisis. However, the information
acquired in the stock market allows qH -projects to avoid collateral examination and
decreases the magnitude of the crisis relative to the situation without information in the
stock market. In other words, information in stock markets may prevent crises, and if
not, reduces the volatility of the deterministic cycles.

      Finally, in general, information in stock markets changes as credit booms and the
mass of active firms evolve. The first panel of Figure 4 shows how yt changes with zt and
then with t . That information in the stock market reacts to credit changes the nature
of the stationary equilibrium. If stocks markets attract information acquisition before
crises develop, then not only does information production in the stock market prevent a
crisis but it may also generate non-crisis cycles. Figure 8 shows this possibility. As can
be seen the evolution of t bends as information acquisition in the stock market changes.
If at some point information starts being acquired in the stock market, the difference
equation transitions gradually from the case without information (y = 1) to the case of
full information (y = 0). Once the credit moves back to a situation with low information

                                                        27
acquisition in the stock market, the difference equation transitions back to the case y = 1.

     The shape of the difference equation will critically depend on the shape of the first
panel of Figure 4. In the depicted case, the economy cycles before suffering a crisis. The
cycle still displays less volatility that the one involving crises.

                               Figure 8: No-Crises Cycles
                   t+1




                                                     Case: y = 0




                   1-
                                                    Case: y = 1

                      0                                            1   t
                                                                            7/7




4     Testing Aggregate Information Dynamics

     In this section, we test a number of implications of the model. First, we explain
the empirical measures that we use in our analysis. Motivated by our setting, we use
stock market price data to construct an empirical proxy of information produced in the
economy and a measure of economy-wide fragility that captures the probability of default
in credit markets. We then discuss our dataset. Finally, we turn to the hypotheses tests.


4.1    Measures of Information and Fragility

    Corresponding to the model we examine two measures that capture information
encoded in stock markets and a stock-based measure of fragility or default probability in

                                            28
credit markets.

     The first is a stock price-based measure of information in the economy. If information
is produced in stock markets, firms are distinguished by the quality of their project,
which gets embedded in firms' stock prices. Our empirical counterpart is a cross-section
characterization, more specifically the cross-section of firms' average stock returns. In
particular we look at the standard deviation of firms' average returns: CsAvg .3 We label
this variable Information.

     The second measure also comes from the model and corresponds to default probability
in credit markets, which has implications for the likelihood of information acquisition
about collateral, and then credit. It is is a stock price-based measure of economy-wide
fragility. When  is low, eventually there are more qL firms in the economy and these
firms are more likely to default because qL < qH . We measure fragility (the extent of
low-quality projects operating in the economy) with the inverse of the time-series volatility
of a stock, which we denote by 1/V ol and label as Fragility.4

     This definition of fragility is from Atkeson et al. (2013). Based on Leland's (Leland
(1994)) and Merton's (Merton (1974)) structural models these authors develop two
concepts of default: Distance-to-Insolvency and Distance-to-Default. They then show
that the variable one over the firm's equity volatility (1/V ol) is bounded between these
two measures. Intuitively, when a firm's equity volatility is high, the firm is more likely
to default (for given leverage). The fragility of an economy moves over time and spikes
significantly during a crisis. Based on 1/V ol, Atkeson et al. (2013) study the U.S. over
1926-2012 and show that 1932-1933, 1937 and 2008 stand out as especially fragile periods.5
   3
      This variable is related to the cross-section of firms' stock return volatility: CsV ol, and are highly
correlated, 0.96. Hence, we will restrict attention to CsAvg in the remaining of the paper.
    4
      Fragility is essentially a measure of economy-wide bankruptcy risk. There is a history of research
that shows that firms are increasingly prone to bankruptcy leading up to a recession. Burns and Mitchell
(1946) show that the liabilities of failed non-financial firms is a leading indicator of recession. Also see
Zarnowitz and Lerner (1961). As mentioned above, Gorton (1988) shows that when the unexpected
component of this variable spikes there was a banking panic during the U.S. National Banking Era,
1863-1914. There was never a panic without the threshold being exceeded; and the threshold was never
exceeded without a panic. See the discussion in Gorton (2012), p. 75-77.
    5
      Vassalou and Xing (2004) use the Merton (1974) model measure of default risk to show that default
risk is a systematic risk and that the Fama-French asset pricing factors partially reflect default risk.




                                                     29
4.2       Data

    The measures of Information and Fragility are constructed using daily stock price data
from Thomson/Reuters DataStream. We use daily stock price data from 52 countries over
1973-2012, which amounts to approximately 105 million observations.6 Online Appendix
Figure 9 shows the evolution of the number of countries included in the sample and Tables
6 and 7 summarize our quarterly and annual data respectively. Online Appendix Tables
4 and 5 show the countries and the time period covered for each country. The panel is
unbalanced. We follow Valencia and Laeven (2012) for the dating of financial crises.

     We proceed as follows. To measure CsAvg in each country we compute the cross-
sectional standard deviation of average of firms' monthly stock returns in the stock market
of that country. For 1/V ol, we compute the average of firms' monthly stock return
volatilities in each country. For stability of these figures, we take these two monthly series
and average them across months to create quarterly series. The annual series that we
study next are formed using the last quarter observation of the quarterly series.


4.3       Three Tests

       In this subsection we test three hypotheses that follow from the model.

     1) Information and Fragility predict financial crises: As the credit boom
goes on, the economy is becoming increasingly fragile. This is because the marginal
project is of lower quality and higher fragility that the average (in the model, more qL
projects are under taken and they are more likely to default than qH projects). As this
occurs, information is increasingly produced in the stock market, leading up to the crisis.
Table 1 below addresses this hypothesis. The left-hand side variable is a dummy variable
indicating that there was a crisis in a specific country that year when equal to 1, as per
Valencia and Laeven (2012). We provide results from Linear Probability and LOGIT
specifications (controlled by GDP, credit and productivity, as well as clustering). We
confirm the hypothesis, as an increase in Information (this is, an increase in CsAvg and
an increase in Fragility (this is, a decline in 1/V ol), both tend to precede and predict
  6
      We drop stock price data when there are less than 100 listed stocks.




                                                    30
financial crises.7

Table 1: Information Measures, Macroeconomic Variables, and Financial
Crises. The table summarizes the predictive power of information measures (1/V ol,
CsAvg , (1/V ol), CsAvg ) and macroeconomic variables (rGDP , Credit, T F P ,
Labor P roductivity ) on the occurrence of financial crises. The linear probabil-
ity model regression specification is: 1n,t (Crisis) = n +  Xn,t-1 + n,t and the
logit regression specification is: 1n,t (Crisis) = n +  Xn,t-1 + n,t , where Xn,t-1 =
(1/V oln,t-1 , CsAvgn,t-1 , V oln,t-1 , CsAvgn,t-1 , rGDPn,t-1 , Creditn,t-1 , T F Pn,t-1 , LPn,t-1 ) .
The data are annually and span a period from 1973 until 2012. All regression specifications
take into account country fixed effects and standard errors are clustered both at a country
and time level.
                                                  (1)             (2)
                                                 LPM             LOGIT

                           1/V olt-2            -0.052           -0.796+
                                                (-1.48)           (-1.65)

                           CsAvgt-2             0.743+           7.555
                                                (1.80)           (2.18)

                           (1/V ol)t-1         -0.087           -1.337
                                                (-2.82)           (-6.21)

                           CsAvgt-1             0.551+           4.983+
                                                (1.84)           (1.87)

                           rGDPt-1             -4.052           -45.629
                                                 (-4.35)          (-3.65)

                           Creditt-1            -0.000           -0.275
                                                (-0.02)          (-0.59)

                           T F Pt-1             0.780            14.046
                                                (0.99)           (1.45)

                           LPt-1                0.789             7.469
                                                (0.87)            (0.76)

                           Constant             0.267+            0.208
                                                (1.66)            (0.13)

                           N                     674              575
                           R2                    0.22              .
                           F                     3.79              .
                           Cluster (Time)        YES              YES
                           Cluster (Country)     YES              YES
                           FE (Country)          YES              YES
                           t-statistics in parentheses
                           +
                              p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,     
                                                                        p < 0.001

    2) Information and Fragility do not predict financial crises when preced-
ing credit boom happens jointly with high productivity growth: The theoretical
analysis showed that the technological (or TFP) level,  is important to drive credit
booms and to determine the dynamic interaction between stock and credit markets. More
   7
    Table 8 in the internet Appendix confirms the result using quarterly data, but without the macro
variables which are only available annually. Also, Table 9 in the internet Appendix shows that the
predictive power of the Information measure extends up to four quarters prior to the crisis, whereas that
of the Fragility measure extends up to eight quarters (two years) prior to a crisis.



                                                           31
specifically, when TFP is high, the probability of default in the q ( ) is lower for all  and
the condition p (q (  )) = p at which a crisis happens implies   is larger and that crises
are less likely, regardless of information in stock markets.

     We follow the definition of Gorton and Ordoñez (2016), who show that good booms
(those that do not end in a crisis) are indeed characterized by high productivity growth
during the boom, i.e., high  . Bad booms (those that do end in a crisis) have a growth
path that starts to decline leading up the crisis, low  . Similar to Gorton and Ordoñez
(2016), we define a credit boom as follows. The beginning of a credit boom is marked
by three consecutive years of credit growth greater or equal to 3% and the end by two
consecutive years of negative credit growth. Empirically, we distinguish between high-TFP
and low-TFP credit booms by dividing the booms around the mean growth in TFP across
all the identified booms. Since low and high-TFP are indeed interpreted as low and
high Fragility, we dispense from Fragility in the regression. Table 2 shows that indeed
Information predicts financial crises during low-TFP booms, but not in high-TFP booms.

Table 2: Information Production during Low and High Productivity Credit
Booms.The table summarizes the predictive power of CsAvg interacted with dummy
variables indicating years into the credit boom on future Credit. The regression
specification is: 1n,t (Crisis) = n +  CsAvgn,t-1 + CsAvgt-2 +  Xn,t-1 + n,t , where
Xn,t-1 = (rGDPn,t-1 , T F Pn,t-1 , LPn,t-1 , IN Vn,t-1 ) . The data are annual and
span a period from 1973 until 2012. All regression specifications take into account country
fixed effects and standard errors are clustered both at a country and time level.
                                             (1)          (2)           (3)
                                         All Booms    Low T F P     High T F P
                        CsAvgt-1           0.691       0.741          0.367
                                           (2.13)       (2.22)        (0.56)

                        CsAvgt-2          0.829           0.811        0.583
                                          (2.54)          (2.36)       (0.61)

                        LPt               -1.404          -2.578       0.074
                                          (-0.89)         (-1.16)      (0.04)

                        GDPt-1            -0.648+         -1.245       -0.265
                                           (-1.74)        (-1.33)      (-1.19)

                        T F Pt-1           0.647          0.684        0.490
                                           (0.91)         (1.31)       (0.39)

                        IN Vt-1           -0.771          -0.649       -0.799+
                                          (-2.51)         (-1.22)       (-1.96)

                        N                  382             235          147
                        R2                 0.34            0.33         0.31
                        F                  4.19            5.87         0.87
                        Cluster (Boom)     YES             YES          YES
                        Cluster (time)     YES             YES          YES
                        FE (Boom)          YES             YES          YES
                        t-statistics in parentheses
                        +
                           p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,          
                                                                       p < 0.001

    3: Information production in stock markets negatively predicts future

                                                     32
credit during credit booms. As highlighted when comparing the two panels in Figure
7, information in stock markets delays credit growth during a credit boom (the first panel
shows a faster decline in the growth rate of credit than the second). In words, more
information production in stock markets reduce the amount of future credit because a
larger fraction of weak firms are revealed as such, their collateral is examined and they
are cut out of the credit market when found out with bad collateral.

     To test this hypothesis and to track the role of information in different phases of the
credit boom, we interact the change in the measure of Information, CsAvg with the
year of the credit boom, e.g., first year, second year, and so on. Table 3 shows the results.
For boom years one, two, and three the coefficients on the interaction terms are negative
and significant, implying that indeed, when there is more information generated in stock
markets during a credit boom there is a decline in subsequent credit growth.




                                             33
Table 3: Future Credit in Relation to Information Production Dur-
ing Credit Booms. The table summarizes the predictive power of CsAvg
interacted with dummy variables indicating years into the credit boom on
future Credit.          The regression specification is:         Creditt+1 = n +
 5   k=1  CsAvg  k,t-1 × 1 n,t ( Boom -year =   k ) +    X n,t-1 + n,t , where Xn,t       =
(Creditt-1 , (1/V ol)t , CsAvgt , rGDPn,t , Creditn,t , T F Pn,t , LPn,t ). The data
are annually and span a period from 1973 until 2012. All regression specifications take into
account country and year fixed effects, and standard errors are clustered at the country
and year level.
                                                    (1)       (2)          (3)
                        CsAvgt                   -0.128+    -0.177
                                                  (-1.72)   (-0.97)

                        1t (Boom)                 0.034     0.037        0.033+
                                                  (1.63)    (1.29)       (1.77)

                        CsAvgt × 1t (Boom = 1)   -0.021     -0.150
                                                 (-0.07)    (-0.36)

                        1t (Boom = 1)            0.057      0.054+       0.059
                                                 (2.49)     (1.79)        (2.82)

                        CsAvgt × 1t (Boom = 2)   -0.006     -0.012
                                                 (-0.03)    (-0.04)

                        1t (Boom = 2)            0.046      0.032       0.048
                                                  (3.39)    (1.28)       (3.35)

                        CsAvgt × 1t (Boom = 3)   -0.281     -0.280+
                                                 (-2.42)     (-1.93)

                        1t (Boom = 3)             0.003     -0.022       0.003
                                                  (0.20)    (-1.10)      (0.21)

                        CsAvgt × 1t (Boom = 4)    0.214     0.136
                                                  (1.30)    (0.28)

                        1t (Boom = 4)            -0.014     -0.014       -0.010
                                                 (-1.17)    (-1.55)      (-0.86)

                        CsAvgt × 1t (Boom = 5)   -0.069     0.030
                                                 (-1.22)    (0.12)

                        1t (Boom = 5)             0.005     0.001        0.006
                                                  (0.25)    (0.04)       (0.27)

                        Creditt                  -0.101     -0.137       -0.085
                                                 (-1.62)    (-2.24)      (-1.39)

                        CsAvgt-1                 -0.187     -0.367+
                                                 (-2.47)     (-1.90)

                        LPt                                 -0.003
                                                            (-0.01)

                        rGDPt                               0.186
                                                            (0.87)

                        T F Pt                              -0.168
                                                            (-0.38)

                        IN Vt                               0.174
                                                            (1.30)

                        N                         891        583          930
                        R2                        0.13       0.13         0.12
                        F                         3.69       2.35         4.36
                        Cluster (country)         YES        YES          YES
                        Cluster (time)            YES        YES          YES
                        FE (country)              YES        YES          YES
                        FE (time)                 YES        YES          YES
                        t-statistics in parentheses
                        +
                           p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,       
                                                                       p < 0.001


                                                 34
5     Conclusion

      A financial crisis occurs when information-insensitive debt becomes sensitive, affecting
all collateral that, because it was information insensitive, all looks alike. This is more likely
to happen after long credit booms, as the quality of projects undertaken decreases with the
boom. As the boom evolves the average quality of projects decline (as marginal projects
are of lower quality) and comes a (Minsky) moment when it is suddenly profitable to
produce information about all firms' collateral. In a financial crisis information production
about all firms' collateral cannot be prevented and the quantity of credit goes to zero.

     In this paper we add information about projects in stock markets to these dynamics
of information about collateral in credit markets. As credit booms evolve and average
projects' quality decline, not only there are more incentives to acquire information about
collateral in credit markets but also about firms in stock markets. Once weaker firms are
discovered and stop participating in credit markets, lenders are discouraged to acquire
information about the collateral of participating firms, potentially preventing a crisis.

     In few words, stock markets play an unexplored positive macroprudential role in
the economy. Stock markets become an automatic stabilizer of credit markets. This
cleansing effect of stock markets? information on credit markets? composition discourage
information acquisition about the collateral of the firms remaining in credit markets,
slowing down credit growth and potentially preventing a crisis. Without stock markets
we may observe more crises.




                                               35
References
Asriyan, Vladimir, Luc Laeven, and Alberto Martin, "Collateral booms and
 information depletion," 2019. Working Paper, CREI.

Atkeson, Andrew G., Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Pierre-Olivier Weill, "Measuring
 the Financial Soundness of U.S. Firms, 1926-2012," NBER Working Papers 19204,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc July 2013.

Beck, Thorsten and Ross Levine, "Stock markets, banks, and growth: Panel evidence,"
 Journal of Banking and Finance, 2004, 28, 423­442.

Benmelech, Effraim, Mark Garmaise, and Toby Moskowitz, "Do Liquidation
 Values Affect Financial Contracts? Evidence from Commercial Contracts and Zoning
 Regulation," Quarterly Journal of Ecoomomics, 2005, 120, 1234­1258.

Black, Fisher, "Noise," Journal of Finance, 1986, 41, 529 ­ 543.

Bostanci, Gorkem and Guillermo Ordonez, "Price Informativeness and Business
 Cycle Misallocation," 2020. Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.

Burns, Arthur F. and Wesley C. Mitchell, Measuring Business Cycles, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 1946.

Campello, Murillo and Erasmo Giambona, "Real Assets and Capital Structure,"
 Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 2013, 48, 1333­1370.

Chaney, Thomas, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, "The Collateral Channel:
 How Real Estate Shocks Affect Corproate Investment," American Economic Review,
 2012, 102, 2381­2409.

Cole, Harold, Daniel Neuhann, and Guillermo Ordonez, "A Walrasian Theory of
 Sovereign Debt Auctions with Asymmetric Information," 2018. NBER Working Paper
 24890.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, and Bengt Holmström, "The Information View of
 Financial Crises," Annual Review of Financial Economics, forthcoming, 2019.

Dow, James and Gary Gorton, "Stock Market Efficiency and Economic Efficiency:
 Is There a Connection?," Journal of Finance, 1997, 52, 1087­1129.


                                         36
  , Itay Goldstein, and Alexander Guembel, "Incentives for information production
  in markets where prices affect real investment," Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 2017, 15, 877­909.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Edouard Schall, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel, "Un-
  certainty Traps," Quarterly Review of Economics, 2017, 132, 1641­1692.

Farboodi, Maryam and Peter Kondor, "Rational Sentiments and Economic Cycles,"
  2019. Working Paper MIT.

Gilchrist, Simon, Vladimir Yankov, and Egon Zakrajsek, "Credit market shocks
 and economic fluctuations: Evidence from corporate bond and stock markets," Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 2009, 56, 471­493.

Gorton, Gary, "Banking Panics and Business Cycles," Oxford Economic Papers, 1988,
 40, 751­781.

  , Misunderstanding Financial Crises: Why We Don't See Them Coming, Oxford
  University Press, 2012.

   and Guillermo Ordoñez, "Collateral Crises," American Economic Review, February
  2014, 104 (2), 343­78.

   and , "Good Booms, Bad Booms," Journal of the European Economic Association,
  2016, forthcoming.

Grossman, Sanford and Joseph Stiglitz, "On the Impossibility of Informationally
 Efficient Markets," American Economic Review, June 1980, 70 (3), 393­408.

Holmström, Bengt, "Understanding the Role of Debt in the Financial System," BIS
 Working paper No. 479, 2015.

Kyle, Albert, "Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading," Econometrica, 1985, (1315 -
 1336).

LaPoint, Cameron, "You Only Lend Twice: Corporate Borrowing and Land Values in
  Real Estate Cycles," Columbia Working Paper, 2019.

Leland, Hayne, " Corporate Debt Value, Bond Covenants, and Optimal Capital Struc-
  ture," Journal of Finance, September 1994, 49 (4), 1213­52.



                                        37
Merton, Robert, "On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest
 Rates," Journal of Finance, 1974, 29 (2), 449­70.

Milgrom, Paul, "Rational Expectations, Information Acquisition, and Competitive
 Bidding," Econometrica, 1981, 49, 921­943.

Nieuwerburgh, Stijn Van and Laura Veldkamp, "Learning asymmetries in real
 business cycles," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2006, 53, 753­772.

Petriconi, Silvio, "Bank competition, information choice and inefficient lending booms,"
 2019. Working Paper, Bocconi.

Straub, Ludwig and Robert Ulbricht, "Endogenous Uncertainty and Credit
  Crunches," 2017. Working Paper, Harvard University.

Valencia, Fabian and Luc Laeven, "Systemic Banking Crises Database; An Update,"
 IMF Working Papers 12/163, International Monetary Fund June 2012.

Vassalou, Maria and Yuhang Xing, "Default Risk in Equity Returns," Journal of
 Finance, 2004, 59 (2), 831­868.

Vives, Xavier, "On the Possibility of Informationally Efficient Markets," Journal of
 European Economic Association, 2014, 12, 1200­1239.

Zarnowitz, Victor and Lionel J. Lerner, "Cyclical Changes in Business Failures
  and Corporate Profits," in "Business Cycle Indicators, Volume 1," National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc, 1961, pp. 350­385.




                                          38
6    Appendix

Figure 9: Number of countries. The figure summarizes the evolution of the number
of countries in the equity data sample. The data are quarterly from Thomson/Reuters
(DataStream) and span a period from 1973 until 2012.

                             40
                             35
                      # of Countries
                     25       30
                             20
                             15




                          1973-Q1 1978-Q3 1984-Q1 1989-Q3 1995-Q1 2000-Q3 2006-Q1 2011-Q3
                                                          date




                                                       39
     Table 4: Equity data - part 1. The table summarizes the number of firms for a given country and year for which
     return data is available. The frequency of the data is daily. Data is from Thomson/Reuters DataStream.
      Country          1973   1974   1975   1976   1977   1978   1979   1980   1981   1982   1983   1984   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993
      Argentina                                                                                                                   13     14     16     18     28     78
      Australia          73     74     77     79     82     82     82     84     86     80     90     99    100    112    127    250    336    330    370    407    484
      Austria            15     13     10      9     12      9     15     11     12     16     15     14     27     24     30     27     49     67     69     78     85
      Belgium            34     40     39     40     36     37     39     39     40     41     41     44     48     80     92     86     88     89     85     88     93
      Brazil                                                                                                                                    10     16     24     40
      Bulgaria
      Chile                                                                                                                              83    101    109    120    138
      Colombia                                                                                                                                                34     32
      Croatia
      Czech Republic                                                                                                                                                 94
      Denmark            22     29     14      9     16     15     16     19     18     35     39     39     44     45     43    137    151    156    181    191    209
      Ecuador
      Egypt
      Estonia
      Finland                                                                                                                     32     46     56     54     63     68
      France             65     70     83     85     87     86     90     94     98     99     98    104    106    113    130    191    466    559    558    550    590
      Germany           109    111    107     99    112    111    100    110    118    121    123    120    135    148    157    325    375    414    440    416    470
      Greece                                                                                                                      77     78    110    132    147    160
      Hungary                                                                                                                                          13     10     26
      India                                                                                                                       10     10    867    985   1110   1341
      Ireland            30     26     31     32     34     37     30     31     35     28     33     24     31     38     48     50     59     49     49     44     53
      Israel                                                                                                       163    181    180    189    196    181    244    450
      Italy              62     63     64     61     60     60     62     62     66     64     65     61     67    192    222    242    273    297    305    308    320




40
      Japan             738    732    751    767    772    781    789    792    804    831    859    890    890    902   1031   1603   1935   2172   2371   2409   2545
      Kenya                                                                                                                                            22     27     32
      Latvia
      Lithuania
      Luxembourg                                                                                                                                              26     31
      Malaysia                                                                                 15     26     22    182    203    197    229    260    296    350    403
      Mexico                                                                                                                      55     39     52     85    118    172
      Morocco                                                                                                                                                        14
      Netherlands        97    103    102    100     98     98    103    102    103    110    106    103    119    132    151    145    156    154    151    159    162
      New Zealand                                                                                                    6     15     43     49     50     61     75     91
      Nigeria
      Norway                                                              15     25     26     37     40     50     53     54     61     76     87     91    100    122
      Pakistan                                                                                                                                               119    145
      Peru                                                                                                                                             15     40     64
      Philippines                                                                                                                        65     77     78     83    126
      Poland                                                                                                                                                  13     16
      Portugal                                                                                                                    80     90    103    107     99    103
      Romania
      Russia
      Slovakia
      Slovenia
      South Korea                                                                                    269    259    320    362    477    579    619    642    656    667
      Spain                                                                                                                45     50     81     94    103    106    113
      Sweden                                                                            32     40     45     51     59     66    105    147    157    165    188    215
      Thailand                                                                                                             84    120    163    197    263    297    345
      Turkey                                                                                                                      48     64     93    120    128    149
      Ukraine
      United Kingdom   1372   1238   1210   1215   1249   1195   1226   1365   1279   1309   1330   1300   1379   1342   1441   1348   1277   1135   1006   1104   1110
      United States     706    712    759    761    743    756    767    843    863    900    983   1028   1146   1314   1451   1474   1514   1565   1697   1863   2121
     Table 5: Equity data - part 2. The table summarizes the number of firms for a given country and year for which
     return data is available. The frequency of the data is daily. Data is from Thomson/Reuters DataStream.
      Country          1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014
      Argentina          74     75     79     70     61     66     57     49     69     74     67     66     72     72     68     67     74     66     67     63     64
      Australia         556    598    869    905    910    979   1084   1101   1113   1173   1303   1411   1536   1718   1610   1635   1680   1655   1616   1588   1597
      Austria            77     86     77     79     87     94     99     99     79     83     74     81     89     98     99     93     94     79     78     73     80
      Belgium           109    107    141    167    187    193    180    183    177    168    173    186    189    199    195    212    187    182    157    143    143
      Brazil             47     40     56     59     72    107     93     91     91    121    126    114    147    216    213    213    215    231    215    217    213
      Bulgaria                                       29     27     31     33     41     38     31     30     38     44     48     51     49     55     53     54     55
      Chile             139    143    129    145    140    132    122    119    110    114    118    119    122    113    116    123    120    123    116    109    108
      Colombia           52     43     48     49     36     25     30     36     32     33     40     49     37     43     30     41     42     34     31     33     29
      Croatia                          27     42     32     48     43     49     53     67     97    138    151    175    143    138    119    111    105     95     97
      Czech Republic    135    224    234    157    148    123     93     87     41     44     65     44     28     30     30     22     26     27     26     21     27
      Denmark           198    208    214    218    210    216    209    172    153    162    168    166    184    204    207    199    190    180    164    161    151
      Ecuador             8      6     11      7      9      8      2      2      6      5      7      8      4      4     10     11      6     10      8      7      8
      Egypt                            58     60     67    101     93     92    108    125    116    110    117    123    130    135    129    128    134    140    150
      Estonia                          10     16     19     21     20     19     17     18     24     25     32     36     39     33     30     29     29     28     28
      Finland           105    110    128    138    150    166    169    164    158    153    148    141    149    146    142    134    136    131    130    129    137
      France            638    655    793    880    892    891    937    924    870    828    799    805    853    871    820    811    756    707    666    669    695
      Germany           466    474    538    596    786   1127   1383   1462   1418   1407   1457   1566   1798   1944   1958   1814   1828   1600   1538   1372   1384
      Greece            206    222    230    242    263    292    336    336    338    335    340    320    300    290    280    269    245    231    206    191    178
      Hungary            38     43     51     58     69     77     85     76     71     74     76     70     74     67     66     71     74     79     79     74     76
      India            1911   2763   2568   2213   1943   2418   1938   1744   1810   1978   2059   2469   2567   2877   2885   3031   3209   3288   3408   3250   3534
      Ireland            43     39     42     49     50     51     58     56     51     51     51     53     59     62     62     52     48     47     44     42     43
      Israel            538    545    560    544    519    620    549    542    476    465    486    529    559    609    556    565    551    523    487    463    436
      Italy             325    312    331    351    356    406    452    464    551    489    521    552    565    577    569    554    555    534    507    530    545




41
      Japan            2731   2948   3041   3179   3205   3326   3446   3577   3634   3617   3703   3802   3896   3928   3872   3716   3610   3546   3467   3507   3539
      Kenya              40     30     31     34     35     33     26     34     30     39     36     35     43     46     46     45     45     47     52     50     54
      Latvia                                         16     16     15     13     17     24     19     23     19     20     17     17     39     41     44     32     37
      Lithuania                                      41     35     38     31     35     39     40     42     40     39     38     38     37     61     54     53     55
      Luxembourg         38     38     47     48     50     45     40     48     48     47     53     50     54     62     70     67     70     63     64     79     58
      Malaysia          462    519    613    698    707    717    738    744    752    855    913    956   1006    961    890    910    917    905    870    880    896
      Mexico            145    137    144    141    140    141    113    120     91     93    100     99    107     92     91    106    107     97    114    121    117
      Morocco            19     26     21     31     45     44     42     48     46     47     48     56     64     72     79     71     75     76     75     69     70
      Netherlands       156    173    192    197    221    227    211    188    173    165    151    147    154    153    146    137    125    126    115    108    108
      New Zealand       103    101    107    111    110    103    115    110    103    122    146    139    138    132    116    115    112    107    115    128    132
      Nigeria                                                      18     44     39     39     46     31     32     39     27     25     29     24     23     25     31
      Norway            155    170    197    230    239    223    218    224    230    219    240    296    334    409    415    412    416    407    401    422    440
      Pakistan          164    158    169    194    196    285    245    222    292    289    301    279    253    255    152    235    231    207    222    225    225
      Peru               85     86     81     82     64     65     61     56     67     70     83     89     91     96     85    107     92     74     64     63     65
      Philippines       152    183    202    203    194    200    170    165    135    170    178    184    197    203    180    212    210    229    234    230    235
      Poland             35     47     66    121    176    193    196    216    200    190    214    244    274    338    361    412    534    709    797    850    855
      Portugal          110    102    105    100     96     95     78     67     64     59     60     57     55     55     54     51     54     51     50     51     52
      Romania                          37    133    179    174    152    116    217    222    266    253    254    426    312    261    256    236    209    207    208
      Russia                    14     15     52     28     33     47     73     32     43     52     91    140    197    221    250    277    277    270    235    215
      Slovakia                                              23     16     17     15     19     19     10     11      3      5      4      6      6      8      8      9
      Slovenia                         18     38     51     78     86    107     72     60     51     36     25     18     17     12     10     12     13     12     11
      South Korea       694    711    903   1009    956   1142   1300   1411   1534   1569   1574   1624   1684   1766   1808   1784   1792   1793   1753   1798   1847
      Spain             111    107    122    135    164    162    164    157    150    139    124    132    139    146    145    136    144    140    134    133    142
      Sweden            247    266    290    339    381    417    433    409    390    367    381    405    446    502    507    499    504    501    477    494    533
      Thailand          387    407    422    381    342    315    292    316    326    382    402    435    483    467    491    488    508    521    539    562    633
      Turkey            171    197    221    250    268    262    288    279    284    282    293    296    309    311    307    307    329    352    381    400    394
      Ukraine                                                                                                68     89     82     61     53     46     39     36     37
      United Kingdom    939   1016   1170   1165   1180   1209   1274   1295   1313   1322   1478   1684   1758   1754   1615   1502   1480   1386   1297   1328   1366
      United States    2359   2615   2871   2924   2787   2675   2525   2472   2531   2593   2721   2854   2976   3202   3263   3330   3466   3598   3738   4005   4352
Table 6: Summary Statistics (Quarterly). The table reports summary statistics for
rGDP , , 1/V ol, CsV ol, (1/V ol), CsV ol. The data are from the OECD iLibrary
and Thomson/Reuters (DataStream), and span a period from 1973 until 2012. "Count"
label refers to country-quarters.
                                              count    mean          sd      min    max
                         1/V ol               3963      3.226      0.977    0.888   6.796
                         CsAvg                3963      0.134      0.095    0.023   1.138
                         (1/V ol)             3952      0.002      0.533   -2.721   3.316
                         CsAvg                3952        0        0.077   -0.654   0.640
                         No. of Countries      169     25.633      8.809     15       42




Table 7: Summary Statistics (Annual). The table reports summary statistics
for real GDP in bn. $, T F P , Credit/rGDP , Labor P roductivity in hours, rGDP ,
T F P , Credit/rGDP , Labor P roductivity , 1/V ol, CsAvg , (1/V ol), and CsAvg .
The data are from the Penn World Tables (PWT), WIPO statistics database, World Devel-
opment Indicators, Total Economy Database (TED), and Thomson/Reuters (DataStream),
and span a period from 1973 until 2012. "Count" label refers to country-years.
                                               Count      Mean         StDev       Min         Max
               real GDP in bn $                2787      383.466      939.771     3.096     10228.909
               TFP                             1895      451.679      175.543   104.050      823.585
               Credit/rGDP                     2730       57.454       46.122    1.385       232.097
               Labor P roductivity in hours    1903       15.171       8.738      1.586       41.145
               rGDP                            2726       0.035        0.042     -0.321        0.308
               T F P                           1857       0.007        0.038     -0.180        0.236
               Credit/rGDP                     2674       0.036        0.168     -0.863        2.881
               Labor P roductivity             1858       0.026        0.033     -0.179        0.196
               1/V ol                           998       3.191        0.999      0.921        6.680
               CsAvg                            998       0.135        0.092      0.023        0.854
               (1/V ol)                         959       0.007        0.850     -2.867        3.403
               CsAvg                            959       0.002        0.080     -0.429        0.536




                                                       42
Table 8: Information Measures and Financial Crises - Quarterly Observa-
tions. The table summarizes the predictive power of information measures (1/V ol,
CsAvg , (1/V ol), CsAvg ) on the occurrence of financial crises. The regression
specification is: 1n,t (Crisis) = n +  Xn,t-1 + n,t for linear probability models and
P r(1n,t (Crisis) = 1|Xn,t-1 ) = (n +  Xn,t-1 ) for LOGIT models, where Xn,t-1 =
(1/V oln,t-1 , CsAvgn,t-1 , V oln,t-1 , CsAvgn,t-1 ) . The data are quarterly and span a
period from 1973 until 2012. All regression specifications take into account country fixed
effects and standard errors are clustered both at a country and time level.
                                                   (1)                      (2)
                                                  Linear                   Logit

                            1/V olt-2            -0.098                  -1.761
                                                   (-3.88)                 (-6.54)

                            CsAvgt-2              0.491+                  4.104
                                                  (1.95)                  (2.22)

                            (1/V ol)t-1          -0.059                  -1.068
                                                  (-2.89)                  (-3.88)

                            CsAvgt-1              0.327                  2.792
                                                  (2.33)                  (2.71)

                            Constant               0.180                 2.465
                                                   (1.52)                 (3.01)

                            N                      3920                    3220
                            R2                      0.16                     .
                            F                      14.64                     .
                            Cluster (Time)         YES                     YES
                            Cluster (Country)      YES                     YES
                            FE (Country)           YES                     YES
                            t-statistics in parentheses
                            +
                               p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,             
                                                                                   p < 0.001

Table 9: Information Measures and Financial Crises - lagged regressions
(LOGIT). The table summarizes the predictive power of information measures (1/V ol,
CsAvg , (1/V ol), CsAvg ) on the occurrence of recession with crises events. The
regression specification is: P r(1n,t (Crisis) = 1|Xt-q ) = (n +  Xt-q ), where
Xn,t-q = (1/V oln,t-q , CsAvgn,t-q , V oln,t-q , CsAvgn,t-q ) . The data are quarterly and
span a period from 1973 until 2012. All regression specifications take into account country
fixed effects and standard errors are clustered both at a country and time level.
                                        (1)       (2)             (3)       (4)          (5)        (6)
                                        q=0       q=1             q=2       q=3          q=4        q=8

              1/V olt-q-1         -1.808        -1.761       -1.578      -1.346        -1.105      -0.500+
                                    (-6.58)       (-6.54)      (-5.77)     (-4.76)       (-4.03)    (-1.95)

              CsAvgt-q-1           4.976         4.104        3.173+       2.436        2.026      1.243
                                    (2.65)       (2.22)       (1.74)       (1.45)       (1.25)     (0.82)

              (1/V ol)t-q          -0.955       -1.068       -1.179       -0.969       -1.015      -0.491+
                                    (-3.20)       (-3.88)      (-4.45)     (-3.18)       (-3.53)    (-1.94)

              CsAvgt-q             3.011        2.792         2.525        1.818+       1.578+     0.711
                                    (3.00)       (2.71)        (2.68)      (1.72)       (1.79)     (0.88)

              N                        3201       3220            3196      3116         3093       3001
              Cluster (Time)           YES        YES             YES       YES          YES        YES
              Cluster (Country)        YES        YES             YES       YES          YES        YES
              FE (Country)             YES        YES             YES       YES          YES        YES
              t-statistics in parentheses
              +
                 p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,              
                                                                    p < 0.001


                                                             43
