                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE EFFECTS OF NEED-BASED FINANCIAL AID ON EMPLOYMENT AND EARNINGS:
    EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM THE FUND FOR WISCONSIN SCHOLARS

                                        Deven E. Carlson
                                         Alex Schmidt
                                         Sarah Souders
                                        Barbara L. Wolfe

                                       Working Paper 27125
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27125


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




The authors thank the Executive Director and Board of the Fund for Wisconsin Scholars (FFWS),
the Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction, The University of Wisconsin System, Higher
Educational Aids Board, the Kohl Initiative at the La Follette School of Public Affairs and the
Institute for Research on Poverty (IRP) at the University of Wisconsin-Madison for their
cooperation and contributions to this project, including making the data available. We thank
FFWS for funding the cleaning and merging of data elements. We have presented previous
versions of this paper at the IRP Summer Research Workshop, the annual meeting of the
Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management, and the annual meeting of the American
Economic Association. We appreciate the comments and suggestions of participants at these
presentations, which helped improve the paper. This RCT was registered in the American
Economic Association Registry for randomized control trials under trial AEARCTR-0003306.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

 2020 by Deven E. Carlson, Alex Schmidt, Sarah Souders, and Barbara L. Wolfe. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including  notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Need-Based Financial Aid on Employment and Earnings: Experimental Evidence
from the Fund for Wisconsin Scholars
Deven E. Carlson, Alex Schmidt, Sarah Souders, and Barbara L. Wolfe
NBER Working Paper No. 27125
May 2020
JEL No. I23,I24,I28

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper, we leverage the random assignment of a need-based financial aid grant offer--the
Fund for Wisconsin Scholars (FFWS) grant--and several sets of administrative records to
provide experimental evidence on the effects of the grant offer on students' in-state employment
and earnings. For students in four-year universities, our results demonstrate significant
employment reductions in the two years immediately following the aid offer as well as in the
sixth, seventh, and eighth after receiving the randomized grant offer. We also find the aid offer to
reduce these students' in-state earnings throughout the full eight-year period we study. However,
we show that the aid offer increases student grade point average, suggesting that the employment
and earnings reductions during students' in-college years are attributable to a reallocation of time
and effort away from employment and toward coursework. For students' post-college years, we
provide suggestive evidence that the reductions are attributable to a combination of two
mechanisms: 1) Reduced loan debt offering greater financial flexibility when selecting among
employment options, and 2) Offer-induced outstate migration. We find little evidence that the
FFWS grant offer affects the labor market outcomes of students in two-year institutions, although
the effects for students in technical colleges are significantly more positive than the effects for
students in two-year colleges in the University of Wisconsin System.

Deven E. Carlson                                  Sarah Souders
University of Oklahoma                            La Follette School of Public Affairs
Department of Political Science                   1225 Observatory Dr
205 Dale Hall Tower                               Madison, WI 53706
455 W. Lindsey St.                                USA
Norman, OK 73019                                  sarahasouders@gmail.com
decarlson@ou.edu
                                                  Barbara L. Wolfe
Alex Schmidt                                      3458 Social Science Building
University of Wisconsin-Madison                   University of Wisconsin
8128 Social Science Bldg.                         Madison, WI 53706
Madison, WI 53706                                 and NBER
ajschmidt6@wisc.edu                               BWolfe@wisc.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/3306
Introduction
The ever-increasing cost of postsecondary education threatens to put a college degree out of
reach for many low- and middle-income students in the United States. Indeed, gaps in college
access and completion between low- and high-income students have widened in recent decades
(Bailey and Dynarski 2011), a pattern that may exacerbate already high levels of social and
economic inequality. Advocates and like-minded policymakers have responded to these trends
with calls to increase funding for need-based financial aid programs. These calls are driven by an
expectation that such aid will increase postsecondary access and completion for low-income
students, and, ultimately, facilitate their transition into the labor force. To date, a fairly
substantial body of work estimates the effect of need-based aid on postsecondary access and
attainment (e.g. Castleman and Long 2016; Carlson et al. 2019; Goldrick-Rab et al. 2016;
Anderson and Goldrick-Rab 2018; Anderson et al. 2019; Angrist et al. 2016; Page et al. 2017;
Page et al. 2018)--much of it returning evidence of meaningful positive effects--but there has
been less work examining how need-based financial aid affects students' labor market outcomes,
particularly in their post-college years.
        In this paper, we leverage the random assignment of a need-based financial aid grant
offer--the Fund for Wisconsin Scholars (FFWS) grant--and several sets of administrative
records to provide among the first experimental evidence on the effect of need-based financial
aid on students' labor market outcomes during both their in-college and post-college years.
Specifically, we estimate the effect of the need-based aid offer on students' in-state employment
and earnings for each of the eight years following receipt of the grant offer. We estimate these
effects separately for students attending 4-year universities and two-year institutions, both
colleges and technical schools. In addition to estimating the effect of the financial aid offer--the
intention-to-treat (ITT) parameter--we also estimate the effect of receiving need-based aid, the
treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) parameter, using the randomized aid offer as an instrument for
receipt of need-based aid.
        Our results show that, for students in four-year universities, the FFWS grant offer reduces
in-state employment both during students' college years as well as during the time period where
they would typically transition into the labor market. In particular, our results demonstrate
significant employment reductions in the two years immediately following the aid offer as well
as in the sixth, seventh, and eighth years after receiving the randomized grant offer. Moreover,

                                                                                                   3
we find the aid offer to reduce in-state earnings throughout the full eight-year period we study--
the magnitude of these reductions are approximately five percent of mean control group earnings
throughout most of the time period, although they are slightly larger in some years.
       In further analysis, we show that the aid offer increases student grade point average
(GPA), suggesting that the employment and earnings reductions during students' in-college years
are attributable to a reallocation of time and effort away from employment and toward
coursework. Such an interpretation is reinforced by the results of three additional analyses. First,
we show that, in addition to employment reductions, the grant offer significantly reduces
participation in the federal work-study program. Second, we demonstrate that, distributionally,
the negative earnings effects are concentrated around the maximum grant amount, suggesting a
one-to-one replacement of earnings with grant dollars for many students. Third, we provide
evidence that the observed employment reductions disproportionately occur in the food
service/accommodation and retail sectors, job types that typically represent substitutes rather
than complements to students' academic efforts. Together, these analyses indicate that the grant
offer allows students to reduce employment activities and place greater focus on their academic
endeavors, behavioral patterns that perfectly align with the goals of the FFWS program.
       For students' post-college years, we provide suggestive evidence that the reductions are
attributable to a combination of two mechanisms: 1) Reduced loan debt offering greater financial
flexibility when selecting among employment options, and 2) Offer-induced outstate migration.
With respect to the first mechanism, we show that the grant offer reduces cumulative loan debt
by an average of $2,000 to $3,000, with significant heterogeneity in offer-driven debt reduction
by students' baseline level of unmet need. Indeed, individuals with high levels of unmet need
exhibit average debt reductions about 2.5 times larger than that of their lower-need peers. We
further demonstrate that the negative post-college employment and earnings effects are
concentrated among individuals who had relatively high levels of unmet need at baseline.
Together, these results are consistent with a scenario where the substantial offer-driven debt
reductions for high-need students provide a degree of flexibility to work in lower-paying but
more rewarding jobs. With respect to the second mechanism, we provide evidence that FFWS
offerees are less likely to be confirmed Wisconsin residents, relative to their non-offered peers.
Finally, we find little evidence that the FFWS grant offer affects the labor market outcomes of
students in two-year institutions, although the effects for students in technical colleges are

                                                                                                     4
significantly more positive than the effects for students in two-year University of Wisconsin
System colleges.
       We proceed by first providing context for our study, situating our work within the
existing literature on the effects of need-based financial aid and outlining the conceptual
considerations relevant to our analysis. In that section, we also provide an overview of FFWS
and describe the eligibility criteria for the aid offer as well as the details of program
administration. We then detail our data and empirical strategy, present our results, and close the
paper with a discussion of the implications of our results for both need-based financial aid policy
and research on the topic.


Need-Based Financial Aid: Effects of Postsecondary Outcomes and Beyond
The need-based financial aid landscape is a fragmented one, with programs administered by the
federal government, state governments, philanthropic organizations, and postsecondary
institutions themselves. Undoubtedly the most well-known of these initiatives is the federal Pell
Grant program. First authorized under the Education Amendments of 1972 and initially referred
to as Basic Educational Opportunity Grants, the federal Pell Grant program has provided need-
based grants that can be used to cover educational expenses at any Title IV-eligible institution
for nearly a half century. Early research on this program concluded that its introduction had little
effect on individuals' postsecondary enrollment decisions (Hansen 1983; Kane 1994, 1995).
Later work, however, provides evidence of nuance in programmatic effects, with Seftor and
Turner (2002) showing that the initial introduction substantially increased the postsecondary
enrollment rates of individuals aged 25 or older, but had only modest effects on the enrollment
decisions of recent high school graduates--Carruthers and Welch's (2019) work from Tennessee
also finds little effect of Pell eligibility on enrollment decisions of high school graduates.
       Turning to the labor market effects of the Pell program, recent work from Texas exploits
a discontinuity in the award formula to show that qualifying for the maximum Pell award at the
time of initial postsecondary enrollment significantly increases students' likelihood of college
graduation and their average earnings four years later, compared to students who qualified for
less generous awards (Denning, Marx, and Turner 2019). Among community college students,
though, Park and Scott-Clayton (2018) provide evidence that Pell receipt leads to a reduction in
labor supply and a corresponding increase in effort toward coursework.

                                                                                                     5
        Although the evidence base surrounding Pell Grants continues to expand, the share of
educational expenses covered by the aid program has steadily declined over the years. The
maximum Pell award covered less than 30 percent of educational expenses at the average four-
year public college in 2016-17 (Protopsaltis and Parrot 2017), a stark decline from the nearly 80
percent of cost coverage in 1975-76. The declining purchasing power of the Pell Grant has
contributed to the development of need-based financial aid programs by both state governments
and philanthropic organizations. At the state level, the Education Commission of the States
identifies 52 separate state-funded programs that award financial aid solely on the basis of
financial need (Education Commission of the States 2019). 1 Despite the prevalence of state-
administered need-based aid programs, there have been relatively few rigorous evaluations of
their effects, with Castleman and Long's (2016) analysis of the Florida Student Access Grant
(FSAG) being one of the only studies in this realm. 2 Analysis of the FSAG demonstrated that
grant eligibility increased student postsecondary enrollment--the effects were particularly
pronounced at public four-year institutions. Moreover, grant eligibility boosted the mean number
of credits that students earned, as well as their likelihood of earning a bachelor's degree within
six years.
        Relative to state-administered need-based aid programs, rigorous evaluation of
philanthropically-funded programs has been much more common (e.g. Angrist et al. 2016; Page
et al. 2017; Page et al. 2018; Bartik, Hershbein, and Lachowska 2017; Anderson et al. 2019;
Carlson et al. 2019). The design details of these programs vary, but the vast majority have a
place-based component--they offer aid to students with demonstrated financial need in a defined
geographical area. 3 Research on philanthropically-funded programs in Pittsburgh (Page et al.
2018), Kalamazoo (Bartik, Hershbein, and Lachowska 2017), Nebraska (Angrist et al. 2016), and
Wisconsin (Goldrick-Rab et al. 2016; Carlson et al. 2019; Anderson et al. 2019) as well as the




1
  An additional 22 programs award aid using both need and merit criteria.
2
  Scott-Clayton and Schudde (2019) examine the academic and labor market effects of Satisfactory Academic
Progress (SAP) requirements typically included in need-based aid programs, but does not estimate the effect of
need-based aid per se. The authors find SAP requirements have heterogeneous short-term effects, but harm
academic and labor market outcomes after six years.
3
  Perna and Leigh (2018) provide a comprehensive catalog and classification of existing place-based aid programs.

                                                                                                                    6
nationwide Dell Scholars Program (Page et al. 2017), all provide convincing evidence that need-
based aid increased students' postsecondary access or attainment, or both.4


The Fund for Wisconsin Scholars
The FFWS, the organization that funds and administers the FFWS grant, was established in 2007
with a founding gift of $167 million. The goal of the FFWS is to increase postsecondary
persistence and attainment for economically disadvantaged students in Wisconsin and,
ultimately, increase the number of adults in the state with a bachelor's degree. The FFWS works
to achieve these goals by providing need-based grants, with the organization awarding grants to
the first cohort of recipients in the fall of 2008. Throughout the time period we study a student is
eligible to receive one of these grants if she:
         Graduated from a public high school in Wisconsin;
         Was less than 21 years old;
         Was pursuing a first degree at either one of the 13 four-year universities that are part of
          the University of Wisconsin System (UWS), one of the 13 UWS two-year colleges, or
          one of the 16 technical colleges that are part of the Wisconsin Technical College System
          (WTCS); 5 and
         Is eligible to receive a federal Pell Grant.
         Students do not directly apply for the FFWS grant. Rather, early in the fall of each
academic year, every institution with the potential to enroll eligible students uses internal data to
identify all newly eligible students who meet the award criteria. The institutions then send their
lists of eligible students to the Wisconsin Higher Educational Aids Board (HEAB), which
randomly assigns students to receive a FFWS grant offer. During the period we study, HEAB
would compile all eligible four-year students into one pool and all eligible two-year students into
a second. They would then perform two separate randomizations, with a target of approximately
500 award acceptances in each pool.


4
  A substantial literature examines the academic effects of merit aid (e.g. Bruce & Carruthers 2014; Carruthers &
Ozek 2016; Cornwell, Mustard, & Sridhar 2006; Dynarski 2000, 2008; Pallais 2009; Scott-Clayton 2011; Zhang &
Ness 2010; Cohodes & Goodman 2014; see Page and Scott-Clayton 2016 for a comprehensive review of this work).
5
  Beginning in fall 2016, FFWS ceased offering grants to students enrolled in Wisconsin technical colleges, although
students awarded a grant in prior years could continue to receive funds if they met all other eligibility criteria. In fall
2017, FFWS ceased offering grants to students enrolled in UWS two-year colleges, but, as was the case with
technical colleges, students awarded a grant in prior years could continue to receive funds.

                                                                                                                         7
         As a result of this design, students not selected to receive the FFWS grant offer are
typically unaware they were even eligible. During the fall semester, students selected for the
FFWS grant offer receive an award letter that they are instructed to sign and return to the FFWS
in order to access the funds. Students who follow the instructions in the award letter have their
FFWS grant automatically renewed--up to a maximum of ten semesters--as long as they meet
the initial eligibility criteria, maintain continuous enrollment, and make satisfactory academic
progress. This award length applies to students offered FFWS grants at both two- and four-year
institutions. Students offered a FFWS grant while attending a two-year institution maintained full
eligibility if they transferred to an eligible four-year institution.
         Currently, the FFWS grant is worth up to $4,000 per year for students at four-year
schools, an increase from the maximum grant of $3,500 for the 2008-09 through 2014-15 award
cohorts. For students at a two-year institution, the award was worth up to $1,800 per year.
Importantly, FFWS is designed as a "last-dollar" aid program, meaning that it is designed to
satisfy unmet financial need and, for a given student, will only be applied after all other sources
of grant aid have been exhausted. Thus, FFWS offer recipients whose financial need is covered
by other forms of grant aid will ultimately realize no financial benefit from the FFWS offer.
         The first FFWS grants were awarded in the 2008-09 school year--about 1,200 grants
were made that year--and a similar number of awards have been made each subsequent year.
Table 1 presents the number of students who were eligible for the FFWS grant, the number
offered the FFWS grant, and the number who accepted the award for the 2009-10 through 2016-
17 offer cohorts. 6 In addition to the totals, it presents this information separately for technical
colleges, two-year UW System colleges, and four-year UW System universities for each of the
eight award cohorts. Among the cohorts we study, the table shows that nearly 9,400 students
were offered an FFWS grant, out of a pool of more than 54,000 eligible students. About half of
these offers have been made to students at four-year universities, with the other half made to
students at two-year institutions, either technical colleges or the UW System colleges.
                                          [Insert Table 1 about here]



6
  Our sample begins with the 2009-10 cohort--as opposed to the initial 2008-09 FFWS cohort--on the advice of
FFWS personnel. They noted that institutions' implementation and administration of the initial cohort of FFWS
awards did not adhere to protocol, with one or more institutions failing to provide HEAB with the full set of students
eligible to receive an award under FFWS criteria.

                                                                                                                    8
       Because FFWS grants are only offered to matriculated students, they are highly unlikely
to affect college access outcomes. Rather, the effects of the program are designed to manifest in
the form of increased persistence and attainment--these outcomes have served as the basis of
previous evaluations of the program (Goldrick-Rab et al. 2016; Carlson et al. 2019; Anderson
and Goldrick-Rab 2018; Anderson et al. 2019). Focusing exclusively on students at four-year
institutions, Goldrick-Rab et al. (2016) provide evidence that--for the first FFWS cohort--the
aid offer increased the four-year graduation rate by nearly five percentage points. And, in an
analysis that combines the first, second and third cohorts, the authors find that the FFWS grant
offer boosted students' cumulative GPA and credits completed. Interestingly, the increases in
cumulative GPA and earned credits that the authors find for the second and third cohorts were
not apparent in the first cohort.
       Although time censoring prevented Goldrick-Rab et al. (2016) from examining
graduation rates for the second and third cohorts, their increases in earned credits and cumulative
GPA suggest that the aid offer had the potential to increase graduation rates for these students.
However, two subsequent--and separate--evaluations provide no evidence of such increases for
these cohorts (Carlson et al. 2019; Anderson et al. 2019). For students at two-year institutions,
prior work provides no evidence that the FFWS grant offer had any significant effect on either
persistence or attainment (Carlson et al. 2019; Anderson and Goldrick-Rab 2018).
       The existing evidence base surrounding the FFWS program--and need-based aid more
generally--usefully informs a discussion of theoretical considerations relevant to potential labor
market effects of the grant offer. We focus this discussion on two main considerations, one that
points toward the FFWS grant exerting positive effects on employment and earnings and one that
suggests the grant could negatively impact these outcomes. On the positive side, the grant offer
has the potential to boost human capital among recipients. Although existing analyses suggest
that the degree attainment effects of the FFWS program are relatively modest (Carlson et al.
2019; Anderson et al. 2019), this work also shows that the grant offer increases year-to-year
persistence (Carlson et al. 2019) as well as the probability that students major in a STEM field
(Anderson et al. 2019). Considering this evidence alongside the large literature demonstrating
substantial labor market returns to these sorts of postsecondary attainments (see Altonji, Blom,
and Meghir 2012 for a relatively recent review of this literature) suggests that the grant offer
could lead to greater levels of employment and earnings in students' post-college years. Recent

                                                                                                    9
empirical work produces findings consistent with such a scenario, providing evidence of
increased future earnings among individuals who received the maximum Pell Grant in Texas
(Denning, Marx, and Turner 2019) and among recipients of California's main merit-based
scholarship (Bettinger et al. 2019).
       On the other hand, the grant provides students with up to $20,000 in additional income
over a five-year period, and standard economic theory predicts that increased income will lead
individuals to reallocate labor market efforts toward other activities, such as schooling or leisure.
This prediction is corroborated by recent work showing Pell Grant receipt to reduce labor supply
and increase enrollment intensity (Park and Scott-Clayton 2018). In addition to possibly reducing
labor supply during the years of grant receipt, the FFWS program also has the potential to affect
behaviors and outcomes that manifest in the labor market only in later years. For example, the
FFWS grant reduces loan debt, which may provide students with financial flexibility allowing
them to enter a lower-paying, but more rewarding, profession when it comes time to exit college.
Similarly, the reduced undergraduate loan debt could facilitate greater levels of graduate school
enrollment among FFWS offerees, which would likely depress earnings in the early postgraduate
period with the promise of improved labor market outcomes down the line. More generally, it is
important to recognize the potential for the income infusion accompanying FFWS grant receipt
to reduce labor supply not only contemporaneously, but also in future years, although there are
several reasons to expect that such reductions may not hold in the longer run (i.e. for individuals
in their mid-30s to 60s).
       Ultimately, the degree to which the labor market effects of the FFWS program are driven
by increased human capital versus the income effect of the grant must be resolved empirically.
One prior study has directly addressed this issue, with Broton, Goldrick-Rab, and Benson (2016)
drawing on data from a survey administered to the first FFWS cohort in the fall of their second
year in college to estimate the effect of the aid offer on employment. They find that the FFWS
grant offer reduced the probability that a student reported working by about 6 percentage points
and decreased reported hours worked by an average of 1.7 hours. Moreover, for employed
students, the authors provide evidence that the aid offer changed qualitative aspects of students'
work experiences, generally allowing them to avoid working the least desirable hours.
       Our study builds on Broton, Goldrick-Rab, and Benson's (2016) work in at least three
ways. First, whereas the prior work is based on survey data, our analysis draws on administrative

                                                                                                  10
data maintained by Wisconsin state agencies. As such, we avoid validity issues that accompany
employment self-reports (see Bound, Brown, and Mathiowetz 2001 for a review of this
literature). Second, our data contain measures of economic outcomes other than employment.
Most notably, our data contain information on individual's earnings as well as their employment
sector. Finally, in contrast to prior work on the FFWS, our data are recorded at quarterly
intervals over a long horizon. We are able to estimate the annual, or even quarterly, effect of the
FFWS grant offer on individuals' in-state employment and earnings up to eight years after the
initial aid offer. Together, our analysis provides insight into the effects of need-based aid on
multiple economic outcomes during both individuals' years of postsecondary enrollment and
their first several post-college years.


Data and Sample
Our analysis is based on a dataset containing a wide range of annual information on every
student eligible to receive an FFWS grant beginning with the 2009-10 academic year. The
information in this dataset is drawn from five sets of administrative records. First, we identify the
annual set of FFWS grant-eligible students using records maintained by HEAB. In addition to
identifying FFWS grant-eligible students, these records indicate whether the student was offered
the FFWS grant (i.e., their treatment status).
        Second, we obtained comprehensive postsecondary enrollment and completion
information from National Student Clearinghouse (NSC) records, which were provided to us by
the Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction (DPI). DPI also provided us with information on
students' high school careers, including their district and school of attendance, their ACT and
other standardized test scores, and their demographic characteristics, among other information.
The FFWS grant eligibility criterion requiring students to graduate from a public Wisconsin high
school ensured that DPI was able to provide this information for the vast majority of FFWS-
eligible students. Third, the UWS provided us with records containing additional information on
student postsecondary outcomes. These records contain student enrollment dates, credit
completion, financial aid package, major, and grade point average, among other information.
Note that UWS records do not contain information on students enrolled in WTCS schools--they
only contain information on students enrolled in a two- or four-year UWS school.



                                                                                                   11
        Our information on individuals' employment, earnings, and participation in public
assistance programs comes from the fourth and fifth sets of Wisconsin state administrative
records we draw upon. We obtain quarterly measures of employment and earnings from the
Unemployment Insurance (UI) database, which is maintained by the Wisconsin Department of
Workforce Development. Information on individuals' participation in various public assistance
programs comes from records contained in the Client Assistance for Re-employment and
Economic Support (CARES) database, which we access via the Multi-Sample Person File
(MSPF) maintained the Institute for Research on Poverty (IRP) at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison. The MSPF contains an anonymous, individual-level identifier for every person ever
entered into any of seven databases maintained by Wisconsin state agencies. 7
        We leveraged the expertise of IRP personnel to perform the matching required to
construct our dataset. This process began with HEAB providing us with the set of students, by
FFWS cohort, eligible to be randomly assigned to receive an FFWS grant offer. For these
students, HEAB provided us with names, birth dates, and Social Security numbers (SSNs). IRP
personnel then used SSNs to match FFWS-eligible students to UWS records, UI records, and the
MSPF-contained CARES records. To match FFWS-eligible students to DPI records--and the
attendant NSC information--IRP personnel employed a multi-faceted approach. First, they drew
upon a standing, annually-updated connection that IRP maintains between DPI records and the
MSPF. However, because not all FFWS-eligible students are present in the MSPF--only those
ever entered into one of the seven MSPF-contributing databases are found in the file--IRP
personnel also matched FFWS-eligible students to DPI records on the basis of name and birth
date. These strategies resulted in near-perfect match rates across all five sets of administrative
records. 8
        Upon completion of this process we had a wide range of annual information for the
54,004 students eligible to be randomly assigned an FFWS grant offer in the 2009-10 through
2016-17 cohorts. 9 This information spans the 2009-10 school year all the way through 2018,

7
  The seven databases are CARES, the Kids Information Data System (KIDS), the Unemployment Insurance (UI)
System, the State Automated Child Welfare Information System (SACWIS), the Department of Corrections (DOC)
records, the Milwaukee County Jail (MJ) records, and Court Record Data (CRD).
8
  The expense of this near-perfect match rate was that a very small number of FFWS-eligible students were matched
to more than one individual in the MSPF database. To account for these multiple matches, we randomly selected one
of the matched cases when necessary.
9
  The vast majority of students were only eligible to be randomly assigned an FFWS grant offer in a single cohort.
However, a small number of individuals--approximately 500, or 2% of the total sample--were FFWS grant-eligible

                                                                                                               12
allowing us to estimate the effect of the FFWS grant offer on student economic outcomes up to
eight years after randomization of the 2009-10 cohort of recipients. Table 2 presents baseline
characteristics for our analytic sample. It provides treatment and control group means separately
for students in four-year universities and two-year schools. It also presents significance tests of
treatment and control group differences, with the results generally consistent with a successful
randomization. In line with the broader demographics of Wisconsin, Table 2 illustrates that more
than three-fourths of students in our sample are white, with an additional 15 percent of the
sample consisting of students from underrepresented racial/ethnic groups, specifically African
American and Latinx students. For four-year students, about 17 percent of students' families
received SNAP benefits in the year prior to randomization. Two-year students are slightly more
disadvantaged, with about a quarter of students' families receiving SNAP in the prior year.
                                           [Insert Table 2 about here]


Analytic Strategy
As specified in our pre-analysis plan, which we registered with the American Economic
Association RCT Registry, we estimate the effect of the FFWS offer using the following model:
                            =  + =8
                                 =1   +  +  + =  +                                                            (1)
where the outcome of interest, Y, for student i in cohort j in year after randomization t is a
function of a constant, , the treatment specification =8
                                                      =1   , a vector of observable student

characteristics X measured prior to randomization and included in the model to increase
efficiency, fixed effects for cohort ( ) and year after randomization ( ), and an error term,  .
We estimate this model over all available observations from 2009-10 through 2017-18 for
students eligible to be randomly assigned an FFWS grant offer in the 2009-10 through 2016-17
cohorts--this allows us to estimate the effect of the grant offer up to eight years after
randomization. We estimate this model via ordinary least squares (OLS) with heteroskedastic-
robust standard errors clustered by student. We also estimate a specification where we omit the
vector of observable student characteristics.




in multiple cohorts. To maintain the integrity of the randomization, we consider the unit of analysis to be a student-
cohort observation in our analyses below. However, we cluster standard errors by student, rather than student-
cohort.

                                                                                                                    13
        In this model, the treatment specification indicates that a student was randomly assigned
to receive an FFWS grant offer. Thus,  is the parameter of interest and represents the estimated
effect of the FFWS grant offer on the relevant outcome of interest. Our specification estimates
this parameter separately for each of the eight years following randomization. Such a
specification allows for the likelihood that the grant offer will affect students' economic
outcomes while they are enrolled in college differently than it would in their post-college years.
        Our pre-registered analysis plan specifies two primary outcome measures, and we
estimate equation (1) separately for each of these outcomes: 1) Annual employment in the state
of Wisconsin, and 2) Annual earnings in the state of Wisconsin. Our measure of employment
takes on a value of one if--in a given year--an individual is recorded in Wisconsin's
Unemployment Insurance (UI) database with any earnings. Our measure of annual earnings in
the state of Wisconsin also comes from the UI database and is simply measured as an
individual's recorded annual earnings. 10
        The fact that our data contain employment and earnings records only from Wisconsin is
perhaps suboptimal--the effects of the grant offer on students' post-college employment and
earnings is of interest regardless of whether these individuals remain in the state or not. That
said, the effect of the FFWS grant offer on students' in-state economic outcomes is undoubtedly
a policy-relevant parameter. As reviewed above, a substantial number of need-based aid
programs--including the FFWS grant--are place-based in nature. These programs are intended
to increase the postsecondary access and attainment of students in the relevant geographic area,
but they are often also designed to advance economic development efforts in that area. State
legislatures and, perhaps to a lesser extent, philanthropic organizations that fund need-based aid
programs likely prefer need-based aid recipients remain in state and use their newly acquired
human capital to contribute to the state economy. Indeed, one stated goal of the FFWS is to
increase the number of college graduates in Wisconsin. These realities make clear the importance
of estimating the effect of the grant offer on in-state employment and earnings. However, we
also recognize the importance of understanding the effect of the FFWS grant offer on students'
employment and earnings outcomes regardless of their state of residence, and we conduct a



10
  To best align with the timing of the randomized FFWS offer, which occurred early in the fall of each academic
year, our measures of annual employment and earnings span from the third quarter of the calendar year through the
end of the second quarter of the following calendar year.

                                                                                                               14
number of supplementary analyses and robustness tests to gain as much insight as possible into
the potential values of this parameter.


Results
Employment and Earnings
We present the estimated effect of the FFWS grant offer on individuals' probability of
employment in Wisconsin in Table 3. We present these estimates separately for students enrolled
in four-year universities and two-year institutions. For each group, we present the estimates from
two specifications--one with covariate adjustment and one without--for each of the first eight
years following randomization. We also present the control group mean to provide a degree of
context and facilitate substantive interpretation.
                                         [Insert Table 3 about here]
         The four-year results demonstrate that the FFWS grant offer reduced employment by a
statistically significant 1.9 to 2.4 percentage points in each of the first two years following
randomization. These results are generally consistent with the survey-based estimates presented
by Broton, Goldrick-Rab, and Benson (2016), although our estimates are noticeably more
modest in magnitude 11. In the third post-randomization year, we estimate the grant offer to
reduce employment by a marginally significant percentage point, a magnitude about half of that
for the first two years. Further, we find the grant offer to have no significant effect on the
probability of employment in the fourth or fifth year after randomization. In each of these years
the point estimates are generally less than one percentage point and statistically insignificant. For
context, we highlight that the control group mean was quite steady through the first five years
following randomization, with between 81.1 and 82.6 of students employed in each of these
years.
         Negative effects of the grant offer on in-state employment re-emerge in the sixth year
following randomization--a time by which most individuals are no longer enrolled in a
postsecondary institution--and persist through the seventh and eighth years after the initial grant
offer. The estimated sixth and seventh year effects are in the range of 2-2.5 percentage points



11
   Broton, Goldrick-Rab, and Benson (2016) estimate that the grant offer decreased the probability of employment in
the fall of students' second year in college by more than six percentage points--our estimates are only about one-
third that size.

                                                                                                                15
while the eighth-year effect is notably larger, approaching four percentage points. Considered as
a whole, the results in Table 3 for students enrolled in four-year universities make clear that the
FFWS grant offer reduced in-state employment in the first two years following the grant offer,
had little effect in the third through fifth years after randomization, and again reduced
employment in the sixth through eighth years following randomization, a time period in which
many individuals have exited postsecondary institutions and transitioned into the labor market.
       The right-hand panel of Table 3 contains the estimated effect of the FFWS grant offer on
the probability of employment for students in two-year institutions. For context, we also present
the annual control group means, which range from 80 to 90 percent, depending upon the
particular year. The results show that, in each of the first eight years following randomization,
the grant offer has no significant employment effects. All points estimates are less than one
percentage point in magnitude and do not approach statistical significance. Taken together, the
right-hand panel of Table 3 makes clear that the FFWS grant offer had no effect on the
probability of in-state employment for individuals enrolled in two-year institutions. In the
appendix, we present results from a series of cross-sectional models--one regression for each
year following randomization (see Table A1). The substantive results of those alternative
specifications mirror those presented in Table 3.
                                    [Insert Table 4 about here]
       We present the estimated effect of the FFWS grant offer on in-state earnings in Table 4.
We again present these estimates separately for students enrolled in four-year universities and
two-year institutions for each of the first eight years following randomization. We present the
mean earnings of the control group to aid in interpreting the substantive magnitudes of the
estimated effects. The four-year results, which are presented in the left-hand column of Table 4,
demonstrate that the FFWS grant offer significantly reduces earnings in each of the first three
years following randomization. For the first year, the estimated effect is -$285 in the
specification without covariate adjustment and -$269 in the model containing baseline
covariates. Compared against the control group mean, these estimated effects represent an
earnings decline of more than 7 percentage points. The estimated effects in the second year
following randomization are even larger, both absolutely and relative to the control group mean.
Indeed, the estimated effects of -$461 to -$483 (depending upon specification) correspond to an
earnings reduction of about 8 percentage points. Although smaller in magnitude, the negative

                                                                                                    16
earnings effect persists into the third year--they are about 5 percent of the control group mean--
before becoming marginally significant in the fourth year (p-values of about 0.07) and fully
insignificant in the fifth post-randomization year (p-values of about 0.15). Still, we highlight that
the point estimates for these years are in the range of -$300 to -$400, which corresponds to
approximately 3 percent of mean control group earnings.
       Significant negative effects of the FFWS grant offer re-emerge in the sixth year after
randomization and persist through the eighth year, the years after most students have already left
school. The absolute magnitude of the estimates consistently increased over these years from
about -$775 in the sixth year after randomization to more than -$1,500 in the eighth year
following the FFWS grant offer. However, mean control group earnings also consistently rose
over this time period, resulting in the estimated negative effects of the grant offer ranging from
5-8 percent of control group earnings in each of the three years. On the whole, the results in the
left-hand panel of Table 4 make clear that the FFWS grant offer reduced students' in-state
earnings throughout almost all of the first eight years following randomization. Moreover, the
magnitude of this reduction is substantively meaningful, consistently in the range of 5-8 percent
of mean control group earnings. For students at two-year institutions (right-hand panel of Table
4), the estimated earnings effects mirror the employment results presented in Table 3, showing
no consistent evidence of any significant impacts of the grant offer. In the appendix, we
demonstrate that identical conclusions emerge from estimating a series of cross-sectional
regressions (see Table A2). Later in the paper we discuss the normative interpretation of these
results and empirically assess a series of possible explanations.


Treatment-on-the-Treated Estimates for Employment and Earnings Outcomes
In Tables 3 and 4 above we present the estimated effect of the FFWS grant offer on individual
employment and earnings outcomes in the years following randomization--estimates of the
intention-to-treat (ITT) parameter. A meaningful proportion of students offered the grant
ultimately did not receive any aid dollars, either because they did not complete the required steps
to take up the offer or because their financial need had been fully met by other aid sources and
the last-dollar design of the FFWS grant program resulted in no contribution to their aid package.
Thus, we employ a second strategy to estimate the effect of FFWS grant receipt--the treatment-
on-the-treated (TOT) parameter--on the employment and earnings outcomes we analyzed above.

                                                                                                     17
In this analysis, we define FFWS grant receipt as a contribution of at least one dollar to a
student's financial aid package in the first semester following the grant offer.
       We estimate this parameter using an instrumental variables (IV) approach commonly
used to estimate the TOT parameter in experimental contexts, where we instrument the
potentially endogenous measure of FFWS receipt with the FFWS grant offer--random
assignment of the grant offer ensures that the instrument satisfies the exclusion restriction. As
stated in our registration, we implement this IV strategy in a two-stage least squares (2SLS)
framework, with the first stage taking the form:
                                =  +  +  +                                                     (2)
where receipt of FFWS grant funds, R, for student i in cohort j is modeled as a function of a
constant, , an indicator for receiving an FFWS grant offer, F, and a cohort fixed effect,  . We
denote the error term with .
       In the second stage, the predicted values of R resulting from estimation of equation (2)--
denoted as  below--are inserted into a model predicting either individual employment or
earnings, represented by Y in equation (3) below. The second-stage model also contains a
constant, , as well as a cohort fixed effect,  , and an error term,  .
                                =  +   +  +                                                    (3)
Because  only contains the variation in FFWS grant receipt attributable to the randomized
offer, it is uncorrelated with  and the resulting estimate of  thus represents--under plausible
assumptions--the causal effect of FFWS grant receipt on the relevant employment or earnings
outcome. For each outcome, we estimate this model separately for each of the eight years
following random assignment of the FFWS grant offer. We are only able to estimate the TOT
parameter for students enrolled in four-year universities because our data do not contain a
measure of grant receipt for all students in the two-year randomization pool--we lack the
measure for students enrolled in Wisconsin technical colleges.
                                    [Insert Table 5 about here]
       We present the results of estimating equations (2) and (3) in Table 5. The left-hand panel
of the table presents results when individual employment in Wisconsin is specified as the
outcome while the right-hand side presents in-state earnings results. The middle column of each
panel presents estimates of  from equation (2) above--these estimates can be interpreted as the
effect of the aid offer on FFWS grant receipt in the first semester. Across both outcomes, these

                                                                                                     18
first-stage estimates indicate that the grant offer resulted in receipt of at least one dollar in aid in
the semester following randomization for 81-85 percent of offered students; the slight year-to-
year variation is attributable to varying receipt rates across cohorts. The third column of each
panel presents estimates of  from equation (3), which can be interpreted as the effect of FFWS
receipt on the outcome of interest. To facilitate interpretation of the substantive magnitude of the
effect, we present the control group mean in the first column of each panel.
         The employment results demonstrate that grant receipt reduced the probability of
employment in Wisconsin by 2.8 and 2.2 percentage points in the first and second years
following randomization, respectively. The estimated effects of grant receipt are less than two
percentage points and generally insignificant in the third through fifth years following
randomization but re-emerge in the sixth and seventh years, with grant receipt estimated to
reduce in-state employment by 2-3 percentage points. The estimate for the eighth post-
randomization year is substantially larger at 4.5 percentage points.
         The earnings results show that grant receipt reduced in-state earnings by $300-$600 in
each of the first four years following randomization, a time period that generally corresponds to
students' in-college years. The estimated effects range from 4 to 10 percent of mean control
group earnings during this time. The negative in-state earnings effects of grant receipt persist in
the sixth through eighth post-randomization years, a time by which most students in our sample
have exited postsecondary education. Although the absolute magnitude of these estimates
increases from -$950 to nearly -$1,900 over this period, the relative size of these effects is fairly
steady at 6-8 percent of mean control group earnings. Together, the results in Table 5 provide
important evidence on the effects of actually receiving FFWS grant funds, as opposed to merely
receiving a grant offer, on individuals' in-state labor market outcomes.


How Does the Grant Offer Affect the Labor-Coursework Tradeoff During Students' In-College
Years?
Our results provide clear evidence that the FFWS offer reduces in-state employment and,
especially, earnings across the eight years following the aid offer for students at four-year
universities. However, these results span two distinct periods in students' lives--their time in
college and their transition into the labor market--and this fact lends nuance to their normative
interpretation. As noted above, the FFWS grant program is intended to improve postsecondary

                                                                                                      19
success for low-income students in Wisconsin by providing aid designed to alleviate financial
pressures that often inhibit student course performance and, ultimately, degree completion. One
specific burden that the FFWS may alleviate is the pressure to balance employment obligations
with the demands of coursework. Many low-income students cannot finance their postsecondary
education without the income from a full-time or near full-time job. However, the time demands
of full-time work can inhibit coursework success--students may simply lack the time necessary
to excel in their classes. And subpar performance in one or more classes in a particular semester
may cascade to affect a student's persistence in postsecondary education, as well as their
ultimate degree completion.
                                       [Insert Table 6 about here]
        In this scenario, the FFWS-induced decline in student employment and earnings in the
first few years following the aid offer can be viewed as normatively desirable, particularly if it is
accompanied by evidence of improved academic outcomes. To assess whether we observe any
such evidence we estimate the effect of the FFWS grant on two measures of student grade point
average (GPA) for the set of students enrolled in four-year universities: 1) First-year GPA and 2)
Last observed UW System GPA. We measure the last observed UW System as a student's GPA
at the time he or she leaves the UW system, either due to degree completion or to discontinuing
enrollment in a UW System institution. 12
                                       [Insert Figure 1 about here]
        We present the results of this analysis in Table 6. The results make clear that the FFWS
offer increases student GPA, regardless of whether we measure it as first-year GPA or last
observed GPA during UW System enrollment. In particular, the FFWS offer increases first-year
GPA by 0.04-0.05 points. The corresponding effect for those who receive at least one dollar of
aid in their first eligible semester is an increase of 0.05-0.06 points. These first-year effects
mostly persist throughout subsequent years, with the estimated effects of both the offer and aid
receipt on students' last observed GPA only slightly smaller in magnitude than the first-year
effects. Figure 1 provides evidence that the GPA-increasing effect of the grant offer operates
throughout all but the very top of the GPA distribution. To create Figure 1, we first estimated a



12
   The last observed UW System GPAs are distributed across years as follows: 7% of students have their last
observed UW System GPA in Year 1; 11% in Year 2; 13% in Year 3; 27% in Year 4; 28% in Year 5; 10% in Year
6; 3% in Year 7; and 1% in Year 8.

                                                                                                          20
series of regressions where we specified the outcome as an indicator that a student's first-year
GPA exceeds x, where x ranges from 0.1 to 4.0 in increments of 0.1--this results in 40 total
regressions. In each regression, we model the outcome as a function of an indicator for randomly
receiving an FFWS grant offer and a cohort fixed effect. Figure 1 plots the estimated coefficient
and 95% confidence intervals for the indicator of receiving an FFWS grant offer from each of
these regressions. Substantively, the figure illustrates that the grant offer significantly increases
the probability that students' first-year GPA exceeds x over the range of 0.4 to 3.2, with the
effects largest in the range of 2.6 to 2.9 where the grant offer increases the probability that
students' first-year GPA exceeds x by more than two percentage points. The grant offer has no
significant effect on the probability that a student's first-year GPA exceeds 3.3.
                                     [Insert Table 7 about here]
       Having shown that the FFWS grant offer has a statistically significant, if perhaps
substantively modest, effect on student GPA, we now leverage our wide-ranging data in an effort
to gain greater insight into the specific employment activities displaced by the increased
emphasis on coursework. First, we take advantage of the fact that our data contain information
on students' financial aid packages to estimate the effect of the grant offer on participation in the
federal work-study program, as well as on the dollars earned via that program. We estimate these
effects using a model with the same structure as that depicted in equation (1), and present the
results in Table 7. They show that the grant offer reduces work-study participation by 2-4
percentage points in each of the first four years following the grant offer. These effects
correspond to 12 to 27 percent of mean participation among the control group. The right-hand
column of Table 7 illustrates that the grant offer induces annual declines in work-study earnings
that are proportionally similar to the reductions in participation.
       Along with reducing participation in work-study, it seems likely that the offer-induced
employment reductions in years one and two, which are depicted in Table 3 above, occurred
primarily among students working in jobs that provide a sufficient paycheck but contribute little
to students' long-term career aspirations, such as food service or the retail sector. To
systematically examine this conjecture, we leverage the fact that the UI records contain the
industry sector in which an individual was employed. Specifically, in addition to the dollar
amount of earnings and employee and firm identifiers, the UI database contains a field
specifying the firm's code under the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS).

                                                                                                    21
NAICS was developed by the Office of Management and Budget in the late 1990s to
systematically classify firms for purposes of data collection and reporting. Under NAICS, each
firm is assigned a six-digit code, with the first two digits corresponding to the sector--there are
21 sectors in NAICS--and each additional digit building on the first two to depict subsector,
industry group, NAICS industry, and detailed industry, respectively. For each of the first four
years following the grant offer, we use this information to generate a series of dummies
indicating whether a student was recorded as working in each of the 21 NAICS sectors. 13 Then,
separately for each year and within a Seemingly Unrelated Regression (SUR) framework, we
specify each of the 21 indicators for employment in a given sector as an outcome that we model
as a function of an indicator for receiving a randomized FFWS grant offer and a cohort fixed
effect. We present the full SUR results in the appendix (see Table A3), and summarize the key
takeaways here.
        First, the grant offer reduces the probability that students are employed in the
Accommodation and Food Service sector by a statistically significant 1.9 percentage points in
the first post-offer year. For each of the three subsequent years, the coefficients remain negative
and in excess of one percentage point--they range from -1.1 to -1.3--with p-values of
approximately 0.10. These results suggest that a nontrivial number of students exited the
Accommodations and Food Service sector in response to the grant offer. Second, the SUR results
indicate that the grant offer reduced employment in the Retail sector by 0.7 to 1.2 percentage
points in each of the first three years following the grant offer, although only the estimate for the
second year achieves a p-value below 0.10. Together, these results are consistent with a scenario
where the grant-induced employment reductions observed in Table 3 are primarily attributable to
students exiting part-time jobs in the Food Service and Retail sectors.
                                         [Insert Figure 2 about here]
        Such an interpretation is reinforced by Figure 2, which provides evidence that the labor
market effects of the FFWS grant in the second post-offer year were largest among students


13
   The 21 NAICS sectors are Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing, and Hunting; Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas
Extraction; Utilities; Construction; Manufacturing; Wholesale Trade; Retail Trade; Transportation and
Warehousing; Information; Finance and Insurance; Real Estate and Rental and Leasing; Professional, Scientific, and
Technical Services; Management of Companies and Enterprises; Administrative and Support and Waste
Management and Remediation Services; Educational Services; Health Care and Social Assistance; Arts,
Entertainment, and Recreation; Accommodation and Food Services; Other Services; Public Administration; and
Unclassified.

                                                                                                               22
earning between $3,000-$6,000, which corresponds almost exactly to the maximum dollar
amount of the FFWS grant. Conceptually similar to Figure 1, we created Figure 2 by first
estimating a series of regressions where we specified the outcome as an indicator that a student's
earnings exceeded x, where x ranges from $1 to $20,000 in increments of $1,000. In each
regression, we model the outcome as a function of an indicator for randomly receiving an FFWS
grant offer and a cohort fixed effect. Figure 2 plots the estimated coefficient and 95% confidence
intervals for the indicator of receiving an FFWS grant offer from each of these regressions. To
illustrate interpretation, Figure 2 indicates that the grant reduces the probability of earning more
than $1 by 1.9 percentage points, an identical estimate to the employment effect presented in
Table 3. And the figure illustrates the grant offer reduces the probability of earning more than
$4,000--the maximum value of the FFWS grant--by 4.1 percentage points. This contrasts with
the estimated effects of earning more than $15,000, which is less than one percentage point for
all bins above $15,000.
       Overall, the story that emerges from this series of analyses is one where the FFWS offer
allows students to reduce labor market effort and reallocate that time toward their coursework,
with tangible evidence of improved academic performance. And this improved course
performance could serve as a mechanism by which the FFWS grant offer improves downstream
academic outcomes. Indeed, in other work we show that the FFWS grant offer increased year-to-
year persistence in postsecondary education, although we find evidence of only small effects of
the aid offer on ultimate degree completion (Carlson et al. 2019).


What is Responsible for the Negative Employment and Earnings Effects in Students' Post-
College Years?
       In addition to containing information on students' in-state employment and earnings
during their postsecondary enrollment, our data also span students' transition into the labor
market--we generally consider this period to be years five through eight following
randomization. Compared to the period where students were enrolled in school, the negative
employment and earnings effects observed during their transition into the labor market are less
obviously explicable, and perhaps less desirable. In this section, we put forth multiple candidate
explanations and--to the extent possible--use our data to assess their plausibility.



                                                                                                   23
Reduced Loan Debt
         Above we describe how FFWS grants are designed to alleviate financial pressures that
constrain students' academic options, and in Table 7 we provide evidence that the FFWS grant
offer resulted in improved academic performance while students were in school. A similar
dynamic may play out as students transition into the labor market. Specifically, the FFWS grant
may reduce students' debt burden, which, in turn, could lead students to consider jobs that are
lower-paying yet welfare enhancing. Put differently, the FFWS grant may provide a degree of
financial flexibility that frees students to consider a broader set of labor market options.
                                          [Insert Table 8 about here]
         We present evidence relevant to this potential explanation in Table 8. In particular, we
present the estimated effect of the FFWS grant offer on cumulative loan amounts accrued during
enrollment in a UW System institution. We present the results for students enrolled in four-year
institutions in the left-hand panel of the table, with the results for students enrolled in two-year
UWS colleges presented in the right-hand. 14 In each panel, we present the estimated effect of the
FFWS grant offer separately for all loans, subsidized loans, and unsubsidized loans. The results
in Table 8 make clear that the FFWS offer significantly reduces cumulative loan debt for
students enrolled at four-year universities, with the magnitude increasing from about $500 in the
year following randomization to approximately $2,000 in the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh
years following randomization. The estimated effects are even larger in the eighth post-
randomization year, but these increased effects are primarily reflective of the fact that the earliest
cohorts in our data--the only cohorts that inform the estimates for this later year--borrowed at
higher rates than more recent cohorts, likely due to their enrollment during the height of the
Great Recession. In contrast, the results for students at two-year UW System colleges reveal the
grant offer to have no effect on cumulative loan debt. In the appendix (see Table A4), we also
show that, by the time of scheduled graduation, the FFWS offer reduced the proportion of
students with any loan debt by nearly three percentage points, with a much larger reduction--
approximately five percentage points--in the fraction of students with more costly unsubsidized
loans. Together, these results suggest that receiving an FFWS grant offer provides students with
a degree of financial flexibility that may play into their post-college labor market decisions.


14
 Our data do not contain loan information for students enrolled in technical colleges--these schools are part of the
Wisconsin Technical Colleges System (WTCS) rather than the UW System.

                                                                                                                  24
                                             [Table 9 about here]
        Table 9 presents additional evidence consistent with such a scenario. In particular, Table
9 presents the results of an analysis where we estimate the employment and earnings effects
separately for students with low versus high levels of unmet need--we define students with low
unmet need as those with levels below the median in the initial year (i.e. before the FFWS grant
was applied to students' aid packages). 15 The table generally shows no significant differences in
employment or earnings between the two groups during students' in-college years, although the
point estimates for students with high unmet need are generally more negative than those for
their lower-need peers, especially with respect to employment. However, in students' post-
college years, which we consider the sixth through eighth years after the grant offer, Table 9
provides evidence that the negative employment and earnings effects seen in Tables 3 and 4 are
almost entirely driven by students with high levels of unmet need. For example, in the sixth post-
offer year, we estimate the grant offer to reduce employment of students with high unmet need
by 3.4 percentage points. By contrast, the offer is estimated to slightly increase employment of
low unmet need students. For earnings, the estimated effects for students with high and low
unmet need are -$1,425 and $29, respectively.
        This pattern of results--where the negative labor market effects in students' post-college
years are attributable to individuals with high unmet need--is consistent with a scenario where
the grant-driven reduction in cumulative debt is much greater for high-need students than for
their lower-need peers, thereby generating a larger relative change in debt-driven labor market
decisions. Indeed, in Table A5 in the appendix, we show that the average grant-driven debt
reduction for high-need students is about 2.5 times larger than the average debt reduction for
lower-need students. The larger debt reductions for high-need students could provide these
individuals with greater flexibility to enter a lower paying, but more rewarding, profession. It
could also facilitate their exit from the labor market entirely, a possibility that, given traditional
societal structure, raises questions about how the labor market effects are distributed across
gender. Consequently, we conducted an analysis where we tested for differences in the effect of
the grant offer by gender, finding no significant differences across any of the first eight years




15
 We calculate unmet need as: unmet need= total cost of attendance  (expected family contribution + grant aid).
We use cohort-specific measures of median unmet need when classifying a student as low or high unmet need.

                                                                                                                  25
following the randomized grant offer. 16 We present full results of this analysis in Table A6 in the
appendix.
                                         [Insert Figure 3 about here]
        Figure 3 presents a final piece of evidence consistent with the scenario depicted above.
Like Figures 1 and 2, Figure 3 presents results from a series of regressions where we estimate the
effect of the grant offer of on the probability of earning more than x in the seventh post-offer
year, where x ranges from $1 to $60,000 in increments of $2,000. Figure 3 makes clear that the
grant offer reduces earnings throughout all but the very upper tail of the earnings distribution. In
particular, the figure illustrates that, for each bin in the range from $1 to $44,000, the grant offer
reduces the probability of earning more than x by between 2-2.5 percentage points--this range
cover approximately 90 percent of the earnings distribution. These reductions over such a broad
range of the distribution is consistent with FFWS grant offerees feeling freer to take lower-
paying jobs, perhaps as a consequence of their reduced loan debt.


Graduate School
        The FFWS program is primarily intended to increase postsecondary persistence and,
especially, degree attainment. Even though evidence indicates that the effects of the grant offer
on these outcomes are relatively modest (Carlson et al. 2019), the slight increases in attainment
combined with the more sizable reduction in loan debt could boost graduate school enrollment.
Given that graduate students generally earn quite meager stipends, increased levels of graduate
school enrollment could, in theory, be responsible for the negative labor earnings and
employment effects seen in students' post-college years.
                                         [Insert Table 10 about here]
To examine this possibility, we use our NSC records to construct multiple measures of post-
baccalaureate enrollment. In particular, we construct individual-level indicators for enrolling in
the following types of postsecondary institutions after earning a bachelor's degree: 1) Any
institution, 2) 4-year institution, indicating a PhD or professional degree such as medical or law
school, 3) 2-year institution suggesting a HVAC training or perhaps a nursing degree. We then
regress each of these three measures on an indicator for receiving an FFWS offer and a cohort


16
  Additionally, we examined the potential for differential effects by gender among individuals with low unmet
need, again finding no significant differences among any of the eight years following the randomized grant offer.

                                                                                                                    26
fixed effect. In Table 10 we present both OLS (top panel) and logit (bottom panel) results. The
first column indicates that the grant offer increases the probability of any post-BA enrollment by
0.7 (OLS) to 1.1 (logit) percentage points. The second and third columns illustrate that,
individually, the grant offer had no significant effects on enrollment in 4-year or 2-year
institutions. Thus, on the whole, here is little evidence the grant offer had any meaningful effect
on graduate school enrollment, a finding consistent with Anderson et al. (2019). Still, to confirm
that post-BA enrollment was not responsible for the negative labor market outcomes, we
estimate a variant of the model depicted in equation (1) where we condition on post-BA
enrollment in any postsecondary institution. The results, which we present in full in Table A7 in
the appendix, exhibit no substantive difference from our main results in Tables 3 and 4.


Outstate Migration
        It is possible that the FFWS grant offer induces either outstate migration or asymmetric
outstate migration for high-earning students (or both). Indeed, a limitation of our data is our
inability to measure employment and earnings outside of Wisconsin. This limitation does not call
into question our ability to validly estimate the effect of the FFWS offer on in-state employment
or earnings, which are clearly policy-relevant parameters and the primary focus of our analysis,
but it does mean that differential outmigration could contribute to the observed results.
        We perform several analyses to gain insight into the role that differential outmigration
might play in generating the negative in-state employment and earnings effects. First, we use all
information at our disposal to construct an annual measure indicating whether an individual in
our sample was confirmed as residing in Wisconsin in that year. In particular, we consider an
individual a confirmed Wisconsin resident if they either: 1) Had earnings recorded in the state, 2)
Were enrolled in a Wisconsin postsecondary institution, or 3) Were recorded in the CARES
database as residing in Wisconsin. 17 Of course, our measure of confirmed Wisconsin residence is
an imperfect one. Most notably, individuals who reside in Wisconsin but do not participate in the
formal labor market will not be captured by this measure.


17
  Our data on earnings and enrollment in a Wisconsin postsecondary institution extend through 2018 while our
CARES records extend through 2017. In the analyses that follow, we impute individuals' 2018 CARES location on
the basis of their 2017 data. However, our results are insensitive to other approaches to determining individuals'
2018 CARES location, including omitting this information entirely when determining confirmed Wisconsin
residency.

                                                                                                                27
       With this in mind, we estimate the effect of receiving an FFWS offer on the probability
of being a confirmed Wisconsin resident and present the results in the first column of Table 11.
The results show that an FFWS offer has no effect on being a confirmed Wisconsin resident in
the fifth post-randomization year, but a negative effect of between two and four percentage
points in the sixth, seventh and eighth years. Again, though, this does not provide conclusive
evidence that the FFWS offer induces outstate migration as these individuals could reside in
Wisconsin and simply not participate in the formal labor market--our data do not allow us to
distinguish between these possibilities.
                                    [Insert Table 11 about here]
       Next, we use our measure of confirmed Wisconsin residence as the basis for constructing
a new measure of annual earnings. In this measure, we code cases with zero Wisconsin earnings
and who are not confirmed to be residing in the state as missing--individuals with zero earnings
but who are confirmed as state residents remain coded as zero. We then regress this measure of
annual earnings on an indicator for receiving an FFWS offer and a cohort fixed effect, which
provides us with the average difference in annual earnings between confirmed Wisconsin
residents who did and did not receive an FFWS offer. We present these results in the second
column of Table 11. In each of the four years we analyze, individuals who received an FFWS
grant offer earned less than their peers who received no such offer, with the estimates for the
fifth and seventh post-randomization years significant at p<0.10. The fifth-year estimate is nearly
identical to the main results presented in Table 4, while the estimates for years six through eight
are all about one-half to three-quarters the size of their analogs in Table 4. Together, the results
in Table 11 suggest that the negative effects of the FFWS offer on in-state earnings are unlikely
to be entirely driven by FFWS-induced outstate migration, but they provide some evidence that it
may play some role.
       We next assess the degree to which an FFWS offer might induce differential outstate
migration of individuals with high earning potential. Such patterns could produce the negative
in-state employment and earnings effects in students' post-college years, even if there are no
mean differences in outmigration. We perform this assessment by estimating a series of
regressions where we predict our annual measure of confirmed Wisconsin residency with an
indicator for receiving an FFWS offer, a student characteristic theoretically associated with post-
college earning potential--ACT score, bachelor degree completion, postsecondary GPA, and

                                                                                                   28
gross family income--and the interaction of that characteristic with the FFWS offer indicator, as
well as a cohort fixed effect.18
         We present the estimated coefficients for the interactions in Table A8 in the appendix.
The results show that the relationships between confirmed Wisconsin residency and composite
ACT score, BA degree attainment (either from the UW System or any institution), or gross
family income is not significantly different for those who received an FFWS grant offer,
compared to their non-offered peers. However, the results in the final column provide evidence
of a differential relationship between confirmed Wisconsin residency and college GPA for those
who did and did not receive an FFWS grant offer. In particular, for each one-point increase in
GPA, students who received an offer of FFWS aid are four (Year 7) to five (Year 8) percentage
points less likely to be confirmed Wisconsin residents, relative to their peers who received no
such offer. This suggests that the FFWS offer could spur high-performing students to migrate out
of Wisconsin at higher rates, but the GPA results should be considered alongside the null
relationships for all other characteristics we analyze.


Bounding the Effect of the FFWS Offer on Total Earnings
Our primary analyses focus on the effect of the FFWS offer on employment and earnings in
Wisconsin, which is the state where the FFWS program is administered. From a societal
standpoint, however, we are interested in the effects of the FFWS offer on individuals' overall
earnings, regardless of the state where they are accrued. Although data limitations prevent us
from estimating this parameter directly, at least without implausibly strong assumptions, we can
bound the effect using the approach developed by Lee (2009). This technique trims the
distribution of the outcome variable for the group with lower attrition levels and then uses this
trimmed group mean--along with the untrimmed mean of the group with higher attrition
levels--as the basis for calculating upper and lower bounds of the treatment effect. 19


18
   We also conducted an analysis where we estimate equation (1) over a sample that excludes individuals attending
institutions located near the Wisconsin border at the time of randomization. In particular, we exclude individuals
attending UW Eau Claire. UW Stout, UW River Falls, UW Superior, UW Parkside, UW La Crosse, and UW
Whitewater. The results of this analysis are substantively similar to our main results, and are available upon request.
19
   More specifically, this technique first requires determining the quantile at which to trim the distribution of the
outcome variable for the group with less attrition. This determination is made by taking the difference in the share of
cases in the treatment and control groups with observed outcomes and then scaling that difference by the proportion
of cases with observed outcomes in the group with less attrition. This calculation identifies the quantile at which to
trim the distribution of the outcome variable for calculating the upper bound of the treatment effect. Calculating the

                                                                                                                    29
                                         [Insert Table 12 about here]
        Specifying the outcome as our measure of annual earnings where we code cases with zero
Wisconsin earnings and who are not confirmed to be residing in the state as missing, we present
the results of Lee's (2009) bounding technique for students enrolled in four-year universities in
Table 12. 20 For each of the first three years, both the lower and upper bound estimates are
negative and significant, making clear that the FFWS offer almost certainly reduces total
earnings--not just in-state earnings--during this time period. Over the subsequent five years, the
lower bound estimates remain negative, relatively large, and statistically significant. The upper
bounds, however, are generally null, although the point estimates for the final three years are
positive and the estimate for the eighth post-randomization is statistically significant.
        Considered as a whole, the results of this exercise produce two main takeaways. First, the
effects of the FFWS offer on overall earnings are almost certainly negative during students' in-
college years. Second, we can likely rule out the FFWS offer generating large increases in
students' post-college earnings, but we cannot eliminate the possibility of significant earnings
reductions. However, given the range and significance levels of the two bounds, it seems most
likely that the effect of the FFWS offer on overall post-college earnings is null. Together, the
results in Table 12 provide a useful complement to our main in-state results.


Heterogeneity by Two-Year Institution Type
Our final analysis turns attention to FFWS-eligible students enrolled in two-year institutions. In
particular, we examine whether the effects of the FFWS offer on in-state employment and
earnings differ for students enrolled in Wisconsin technical colleges versus their peers in two-
year UWS colleges. We perform this analysis by estimating a series of regressions--one for each
post-randomization year--that take the form:
                           =  +  +  +  (   ) +  +                                                          (4)
where the outcome of interest, Y, for student i in cohort j is a function of a constant, , and
indicator for receiving an FFWS grant offer  , an indicator for technical college enrollment at


lower bound of the treatment effect simply involves trimming the distribution of the outcome measure at one minus
the quantile used for calculating the upper bound.
20
   We also applied this bounding technique to the sample of students enrolled in two-year institutions. Neither the
lower nor upper bound estimates were statistically significant across any of the eight years, a result perhaps
unsurprising given the estimates in Table 4.

                                                                                                                 30
the time of the offer  , the interaction of those two terms, fixed effects for cohort ( ), and an
error term,  . We estimate this model over the full sample of FFWS-eligible students enrolled
in two-year institutions and use the results to construct estimates of the effect of the FFWS offer
separately for technical college enrollees, two-year UWS college enrollees, as well as an
estimate of the difference between those two estimates. We present these results in Table 13.
                                           [Insert Table 13 about here]
         The employment results, which we present in the left-hand panel of the table,
demonstrate no significant effect of the FFWS offer for either technical college or two-year
UWS college enrollees. Additionally, the differences between the two sets of estimates are
insignificant as well. In short, there is no evidence of heterogeneity in the effect of the FFWS
offer on employment by institution type.
         The earnings results--presented in the right-hand panel of the table--do provide some
evidence of heterogeneity in the effect of the FFWS offer. For technical college enrollees, the
estimated effects of the FFWS offer are positive across the entire time period we analyze, with
the sixth-year estimate statistically significant. In contrast, the estimated effects for UWS
enrollees are uniformly negative, if not consistently significant. These divergent patterns
contribute to a number of the differences between the estimated effects for the two sets of
students achieving statistical significance, as indicated in the final column of the table. Together,
the results make clear that the earnings impact of the FFWS offer was much more positive for
individuals in technical colleges than for individuals in UW System colleges. 21


Discussion and Conclusion
As ever-increasing college costs threaten to put postsecondary education beyond the reach of
many low- and middle-income U.S. students, need-based aid programs can represent a lifeline
that prevents a college degree from slipping away. Indeed, a large literature provides strong
evidence that need-based aid can increase college access, persistence, and completion (e.g.
Castleman and Long 2016; Goldrick-Rab et al. 2016; Angrist et al. 2016; Page et al. 2017; Page
et al. 2018). This paper complements that literature by experimentally estimating the effects of
need-based aid on students' labor market outcomes--their in-state employment and earnings--


21
  It would be interesting to explore if this pattern is consistent with higher GPAs for students at technical colleges,
unfortunately, we do not have the necessary data.

                                                                                                                      31
both during the years they are enrolled in college and during the years where they presumably
transition into the workforce.
       Our results show that, for students in four-year universities, the FFWS grant offer reduces
in-state employment in the two years immediately following the offer as well as in the sixth,
seventh, and eighth years following the offer--the estimated effects are null in the three interim
years. Moreover, we find the aid offer to reduce in-state earnings throughout the full eight-year
period we study, with the magnitude of these reductions typically in the range of five percent of
mean control group earnings. Although the aid offers decreased student employment and
earnings, we also show that it significantly increases student GPA during their time in the UW
System by 0.04-0.06 points. Further analysis provided clear evidence that students are
reallocating time and effort away from employment and toward education, a reallocation
perfectly aligned with the goals of the FFWS program.
       The negative in-state employment and earnings effects in students' post-college years are
less obviously explicable, and perhaps less desirable. Although our experimental design is ideal
for validly estimating the causal effects of the FFWS grant offer, it is less suited to identifying
the specific mechanisms that generated the effects. Still, we propose multiple candidate
mechanisms and conduct a series of analyses that shed light on their plausibility. One candidate
mechanism we examine is offer-induced outstate migration, and the evidence suggests that this
phenomenon could be responsible for some portion of the effect as we show that students offered
the FFWS grant are less likely to be confirmed Wisconsin residents. However, we cannot rule
out the possibility that the FFWS offer simply results in individuals being less likely to
participate in the Wisconsin labor market, thus limiting our ability to confirm their Wisconsin
residency.
       A second potential mechanism we explore is the possibility that the FFWS grant may
provide a degree of financial flexibility that frees students to consider a broader set of labor
market options, including positions with lower pay that may be more desirable on other
dimensions. We show that the FFWS offer reduces students' mean cumulative loan debt by
$2,000-$3,000, which provides students with at least some greater degree of financial flexibility
in their post-college endeavors. Further, we show that, conditional on being employed in
Wisconsin, students offered the FFWS grant exhibit lower earnings in their post-college years



                                                                                                      32
than control group students. Together, though, these results are consistent with the FFWS grant
offer freeing students to take lower paying, yet potentially welfare-enhancing, jobs.
        The effects of need-based aid on in-state employment and earnings are undoubtedly
relevant to policymakers deciding how to allocate limited public dollars, but from a societal
standpoint we are also interested in the effects of the FFWS offer on individuals' overall
earnings, regardless of where they are accrued. Because data limitations prevent us from
estimating this parameter directly, we apply Lee's (2009) bounding technique that provides
lower and upper bounds for the overall effect, based on the observed data. These results provide
evidence that we can rule out the FFWS offer generating large increases in overall earnings, and
that the effect on overall earnings is either negative or null.
        The difference between the clearly negative effects on in-state employment and earnings
among four-year university students with an FFWS offer and the potential null effects on overall
student employment and earnings highlights a tension that policymakers must navigate when
designing need-based aid programs funded with public dollars. In particular, our results show
that policymakers are often tasked with striking a balance in designing an aid program that
maximizes the welfare of the aid recipients versus one that maximizes the welfare of the state
and its taxpayers. Policymakers across the country have taken a wide variety of approaches in
striking this balance. On one end of the spectrum, aid programs in New York and Rhode Island
require aid recipients to maintain residence in the state for a specified number of years following
their postsecondary completion or exit. On the other end, a large number of programs have no
residency or employment conditions attached to aid receipt. Our work does not identify the
optimal response to this tension, but it does provide information that may be useful to
policymakers trying to navigate it.
        This paper focuses primarily on the in-state employment and earnings effects of the
FFWS grant offer for students enrolled in four-year universities, but our results for students in
two-year institutions also have important implications. Although we show the aid offer to have
no effects on in-state employment and earnings for two-year students, these overall results mask
noticeable heterogeneity by institutional type, namely UWS colleges and technical colleges. In
particular, we estimate the effects of the FFWS offer on in-state earnings to be more positive for
students in technical college than for students in UW System colleges, with these differences
significant at p<0.10 in the second, sixth, seventh, and eighth years following the aid offer.

                                                                                                    33
       Our paper is unique in its ability to experimentally estimate the effects of need-based aid
on employment and earnings outcomes up to eight years after the initial aid offer, which covers
the period when many individuals transition into the labor market. However, even these
estimates capture only the very early portion of students' careers, and the longer-run dynamics
could play out very differently. For example, it is possible that the FFWS grant offer induces
individuals to take jobs with lower initial pay, but much greater room for future salary growth.
That would be consistent with established earning growth profiles for college graduates. These
age earnings profiles also differ by major with average highest salaries at ages 41-45 but for
business majors, social sciences, cultural or area studies they peak later. According to the
Chronical of Higher Education (2019), "Although majors in the liberal arts (language or
philosophy, and social sciences or cultural or area studies) were the lowest-paid among 18- to
25-year-olds, their salaries increased at the highest rate, and those in the social sciences or
cultural or area studies caught up well enough that their salaries surpassed those of health-care
majors during much of the latter part of their careers." Or perhaps the FFWS grant offer induces
individuals to go on to graduate education, thus delaying their entry into the labor market. With
the necessary passage of time, we plan to incorporate future educational, employment, and
earnings data to assess whether the medium- and longer-term effects of the FFWS offer differ
from those we present here.




                                                                                                    34
References
Altonji, J. G., Blom, E., & Meghir, C. (2012). Heterogeneity in human capital investments: High
school curriculum, college major, and careers. Annual Review of Economics, 4(1), 185-223.

Anderson, D. M., & Goldrick-Rab, S. (2018). Aid after enrollment: Impacts of a statewide grant
program at public two-year colleges. Economics of Education Review, 67, 148-157.

Angrist, J., Autor, D., Hudson, S., & Pallais, A. (2016). Evaluating Post-Secondary Aid:
Enrollment, Persistence, and Projected Completion Effects. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research (NBER Working Paper No. 23015).

Bailey, M.J. & Dynarski, S. (2011). Inequality in Postsecondary Education. In G.J. Duncan and
R.J. Murnane (eds.), Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children's Life
Chances. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Bartik, T.J., Hershbein, B., and Lachowska, M. (2017). The Effects of the Kalamazoo Promise
Scholarship on College Enrollment, Persistence, and Completion. W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research Working Paper 15-229. Retrieved from
http://research.upjohn.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1246&context=up_workingpapers

Bettinger, E., Gurantz, O., Kawano, L., Sacerdote, B., & Stevens, M. (2019). The Long-Run
Impacts of Financial Aid: Evidence from California's Cal Grant. American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 11(1), 64-94.

Bound, J., Brown, C., & Mathiowetz, N. (2001). Measurement Error in Survey Data. In J.
Heckman and E. Leamer (eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 5. New York: Elsevier Science.

Broton, K. M., Goldrick-Rab, S., & Benson, J. (2016). Working for college: The causal impacts
of financial grants on undergraduate employment. Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis, 38(3), 477-494.

Bruce, D. J., & Carruthers, C. K. (2014). Jackpot? The impact of lottery scholarships on
enrollment in Tennessee. Journal of Urban Economics, 81, 3044.

Carlson, D., Elwert, F., Hillman, N., Schmidt, A., & Wolfe, B. (2018). The Effects of Financial
Aid Offers on Postsecondary Educational Outcomes: New Experimental Evidence from the Fund
for Wisconsin Scholars. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Association for Public
Policy Analysis and Management.

Carruthers, C. K., & zek, U. (2016). Losing HOPE: Financial aid and the line between college
and work. Economics of Education Review, 53, 1-15.



                                                                                              35
Carruthers, C. K., & Welch, J. G. (2019). Not whether, but where? Pell grants and college
choices. Journal of Public Economics, 172, 1-19.

Castleman, B.L. & Long, B.T. (2016). Looking Beyond Enrollment: The Causal Effect of Need-
Based Grants on College Access, Persistence, and Graduation. Journal of Labor Economics,
34(4), 1023-1073.

Chronical of Higher Education. (2019) Average Salaries by Age Group for College Graduates in
Selected Majors, 2016-2018. Almanac. August 18, 2019. https://www-chronicle-
com.ezproxy.library.wisc.edu/article/Average-Salaries-by-Age-Group/246926. Accessed April
20, 2020.

Cohodes, S. R., & Goodman, J. S. (2014). Merit aid, college quality, and college completion:
Massachusetts' Adams scholarship as an in-kind subsidy. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 6 (4), 251285.

Cornwell, C., Mustard, D., & Sridhar, D. (2006). The enrollment effects of merit-based financial
aid: Evidence from Georgia's HOPE Scholarship. Journal of Labor Economics, 24, 761786.

Denning, J. T., Marx, B. M., & Turner, L. J. (Forthcoming) ProPelled: The Effects of Grants on
Graduation, Earnings, and Welfare. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

Dynarski, S. M. (2000). Hope for whom? Financial aid for the middle class and its impact on
college attendance. National Tax Journal, 53 (3), 629661.

Dynarski, S. M. (2008). Building the stock of college-educated labor. Journal of Human
Resources, 43 (3), 576610.

Education Commission of the States. (2019). 50 State Policy Database: Financial Aid. Denver,
CO: Education Commission of the States. Retrieved January 8, 2019 from
https://www.statefinancialaidredesign.org/state-financial-aid-database/

Goldrick-Rab, S., Kelchen, R., Harris, D. N., & Benson, J. (2016). Reducing income inequality
in educational attainment: Experimental evidence on the impact of financial aid on college
completion. American Journal of Sociology, 121(6), 1762-1817.

Hansen, W. L. (1983). The impact of student financial aid on access. In J. Froomkin (Ed.), The
crisis in higher education. New York, NY: Academy of Political Science.

Kane, T. J. (1994). College entry by Blacks since 1970: The role of college costs, family
background, and the returns to education. Journal of Political Economy, 102, 878911.




                                                                                              36
Kane, T. J. (1995). Rising public college tuition and college entry: How well do public subsidies
promote access to college? Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. (NBER
Working Paper No. 5164).

Lee, D. S. (2009). Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on treatment
effects. The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 1071-1102.

Page, L. C., Kehoe, S. S., Castleman, B. L., & Sahadewo, G. A. (2017). More than dollars for
scholars: The impact of the Dell Scholars Program on college access, persistence and degree
attainment. Journal of Human Resources, doi:10.3368/jhr.54.3.0516.7935R1.

Page, L. C., Iriti, J., Lowry, D. J. & Anthony, A. M. (2018). The promise of place-based
investment in college access and success: Investigating the impact of the Pittsburgh Promise.
Education Finance and Policy, https://doi.org/10.1162/edfp_a_00257.

Page, L. C., & Scott-Clayton, J. (2016). Improving college access in the United States: Barriers
and policy responses. Economics of Education Review, 51, 4-22.

Pallais, A. (2009). Taking a chance on college: Is the Tennessee education lottery scholarship
program a winner? Journal of Human Resources, 44 (1), 199222.

Park, R. S. E., & Scott-Clayton, J. (2018). The impact of Pell Grant eligibility on community
college students' financial aid packages, labor supply, and academic outcomes. Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 40(4), 557-585.

Perna, L. W., & Leigh, E. W. (2018). Understanding the promise: A typology of state and local
college promise programs. Educational Researcher, 47(3), 155-180.

Protopsaltis, S., & Parrott, S. (2017). Pell Grants--a Key Tool for Expanding College Access and
Economic Opportunity--Need Strengthening, Not Cuts. Washington, DC: Center for Budget and
Policy Priorities.

Scott-Clayton, J. (2011). On money and motivation: A quasi-experimental analysis of financial
incentives for college achievement. Journal of Human Resources, 46 (3), 614646.

Scott-Clayton, J., & Schudde, L. (2019). The Consequences of Performance Standards in Need-
Based Aid: Evidence from Community Colleges. Journal of Human Resources,
doi:10.3368/jhr.55.4.0717-8961R2

Seftor, N. S., & Turner, S. E. (2002). Back to school: Federal student aid policy and adult college
enrollment. Journal of Human Resources, 37, 336-352.




                                                                                                 37
Zhang, L., & Ness, E. C. (2010). Does state merit-based aid stem brain drain? Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 32 (2), 143165.




                                                                                            38
Tables and Figures

       Table 1. Number of students receiving FFWS grant offer and number of eligible students
       not receiving FFWS grant offer, by cohort
                           4-Year University                       2-Year Institution
       Cohort       FFWS Offer       No FFWS Offer       FFWS Offer         No FFWS Offer
                       500
       2009-10                             3,635               544                 2,188
       2010-11         550                 4,521               600                 2,489
       2011-12         621                 4,204               649                 2,308
       2012-13         625                 3,499               675                 2,178
       2013-14         600                 3,718               700                 2,430
       2014-15         557                 3,588               750                 1,686
       2015-16         540                 3,387               700                 1,365
       2016-17         575                 3,101               200                  321

       Total          4,568                 29,653                4,818                 14,965
       Notes: The sample sizes for two-year students in the 2016-17 cohort are smaller because
       Wisconsin Technical College students were ineligible beginning in that year.




                                                                                                 39
Table 2. Balance between the treatment and control groups on pre-randomization characteristics.
                                 4-Year University                    2-Year Institution
                            FFWS        No FFWS                       FFWS        No FFWS
Characteristics (%)         Offer        Offer         P-Value        Offer        Offer         P-Value
Female                       59.4         57.0          0.003          50.9         52.5          0.091
White                        76.2          76.5          0.735         77.8          78.3          0.919
Underrepresented Race        15.7          15.1          0.337         15.9          15.1          0.670
Other Race                    8.1           8.4          0.468          6.3           6.7          0.280
Ever ELL                      9.0           8.7          0.607          8.4           8.1          0.810
Received SNAP                17.5          17.1          0.938         27.6          25.6          0.191

N                             4,568        29,653                         4,618        14,644
Notes: The table shows the characteristics of the full sample of students (2009-10 through 2016-17
cohorts) with available data on a given variable of interest in the year prior to randomization. "Ever ELL"
indicates a student was labeled as an English language learner at some point during his/her time in a
Wisconsin public school. "Received SNAP" indicates a student's family received Supplementary Nutrition
Assistance Program benefits in the year prior to randomization. The "P-Value" column provides the p-
value from a regression of FFWS offer receipt on the characteristic of interest. These regressions also
included cohort fixed effects.




                                                                                                              40
Table 3. Estimated effect of FFWS grant offer on annual employment, by institution type and
inclusion of baseline characteristics
                        4-Year University                     2-Year Institution
              Control          No                          Control          No
              Group         Covariate      Covariate       Group         Covariate       Covariate
Year           Mean        Adjustment      Adjusted         Mean        Adjustment       Adjusted

Year 1         0.812        -0.023***      -0.024***         0.877         -0.003         -0.003
                              (0.006)        (0.006)                       (0.005)        (0.006)

Year 2         0.828        -0.019***      -0.020***         0.892         -0.003         -0.003
                              (0.006)        (0.006)                       (0.005)        (0.005)

Year 3         0.815          -0.011         -0.013*         0.877          0.000          0.001
                              (0.007)        (0.007)                       (0.006)        (0.006)

Year 4         0.821          -0.008         -0.010          0.863         -0.002         -0.001
                              (0.007)        (0.007)                       (0.006)        (0.006)

Year 5         0.814          -0.004         -0.006          0.853         -0.003         -0.003
                              (0.008)        (0.008)                       (0.007)        (0.007)

Year 6         0.779         -0.020**       -0.020**         0.840          0.000          0.000
                              (0.009)        (0.010)                       (0.008)        (0.008)

Year 7         0.753          -0.022*        -0.023*         0.822         -0.002         -0.002
                              (0.012)        (0.012)                       (0.010)        (0.010)

Year 8         0.731           -0.038**        -0.039**         0.811        -0.004         -0.006
                                (0.015)         (0.015)                     (0.013)         (0.013)
NOTE: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error clustered by student in parentheses
below coefficient estimate. All coefficients in a column from a single OLS regression predicting
annual employment in the state of Wisconsin. Each coefficient is an estimate from an interaction
between the indicator for receiving an FFWS grant offer and an indicator for the respective post-
randomization year. All regressions contain fixed effects for cohort and post-randomization year.
Regressions in covariate adjusted columns also contain measures of student gender, race/ethnicity,
and English learner status in high school. Covariate-adjusted regression for students in 2-year
institution also contains an indicator for technical college enrollment.




                                                                                                      41
Table 4. Estimated effect of FFWS grant offer on annual earnings, by institution type and
inclusion of baseline characteristics
                      4-Year University                      2-Year Institution
             Control          No                           Control          No
             Group         Covariate       Covariate       Group         Covariate       Covariate
Year          Mean        Adjustment       Adjusted         Mean        Adjustment       Adjusted

Year 1       3884.05       -284.64***     -269.06***       6655.07         -131.23        -157.13
                             (58.63)        (60.16)                        (91.94)        (96.72)

Year 2       5896.71       -482.95***     -460.70***       9886.24         -70.17          -80.07
                             (89.52)        (90.84)                       (137.94)        (139.28)

Year 3       7331.31       -404.16***     -379.96***      12669.79         71.54           56.43
                            (124.42)       (126.45)                       (183.96)        (183.26)

Year 4       9095.81        -288.54*        -297.07*      14760.66         116.59          133.03
                            (163.84)        (165.30)                      (226.94)        (225.45)

Year 5      13709.98         -363.53         -390.38      16904.32         262.48          322.36
                            (258.39)        (259.78)                      (281.83)        (281.27)

Year 6      18190.94       -776.91**      -766.267**      19325.17         470.75          493.10
                            (362.37)       (364.43)                       (358.52)        (357.24)

Year 7      20609.22       -1138.05**     -1118.98**      21090.53         -46.62           -6.67
                            (470.84)       (472.73)                       (450.90)        (450.41)

Year 8      22037.94        -1576.17** -1619.62**          22558.73         -406.74         -359.42
                             (656.50)       (660.35)                       (594.27)        (594.22)
NOTE: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error clustered by student in
parentheses below coefficient estimate. All coefficients in a column from a single OLS
regression predicting annual employment in the state of Wisconsin. Each coefficient is an
estimate from an interaction between the indicator for receiving an FFWS grant offer and an
indicator for the respective post-randomization year. All regressions contain fixed effects for
cohort and post-randomization year. Regressions in covariate adjusted columns also contain
measures of student gender, race/ethnicity, and English learner status in high school. Covariate-
adjusted regression for students in 2-year institution also contains an indicator for technical
college enrollment.




                                                                                                      42
Table 5. Estimated effect of FFWS grant offer on FFWS grant take-up and estimated effect of
FFWS grant take-up on annual employment and earnings from two-stage least squares models,
by post-randomization year
                           Employment                             Earnings
                             1st Stage-    2nd Stage-                   1st Stage-    2nd Stage-
                Control      Effect of      Effect of      Control      Effect of      Effect of
                Group        Offer on        FFWS          Group        Offer on        FFWS
Year             Mean        Take-Up        Receipt         Mean        Take-Up        Receipt

Year 1           0.812        0.838***      -0.028***      3884.05       0.838***     -308.20***
                               (0.002)        (0.007)                     (0.002)      (72.040)

Year 2           0.828        0.838***      -0.022***      5896.71       0.838***     -565.64***
                               (0.002)        (0.007)                     (0.002)      (110.170)

Year 3           0.815        0.839***       -0.013*       7331.31       0.839***     -484.97***
                               (0.002)       (0.008)                      (0.002)      (148.450)

Year 4           0.821        0.839***       -0.010        9095.81       0.839***       -354.73*
                               (0.002)       (0.008)                      (0.002)      (194.070)

Year 5           0.814        0.831***       -0.004       13709.98       0.831***       -473.62
                               (0.003)       (0.009)                      (0.003)      (314.290)

Year 6           0.779        0.828***      -0.023**      18190.94       0.828***      -956.17**
                               (0.003)       (0.011)                      (0.003)      (444.490)

Year 7           0.753        0.810***       -0.027*      20609.22       0.810***     -1405.69**
                               (0.004)       (0.014)                      (0.004)      (594.500)

Year 8           0.731          0.847***     -0.045**       22037.94       0.847***     -1853.17**
                                 (0.004)      (0.017)                       (0.004)      (777.130)
NOTE: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error in parentheses below coefficient
estimate. For each outcome, each row presents results from a separate two-stage least squares
regression. The first stage predicts FFWS grant take-up as a function of receiving an FFWS grant
offer, where FFWS take-up is defined as receiving FFWS grant funds in the first eligible semester.
The second stage predicts the respective outcome (employment or earnings) as a function of the
predicted value of FFWS grant take up. All regressions contain cohort fixed effects.




                                                                                                     43
Table 6. Effect of FFWS grant program on student GPA, by inclusion of covariates
                                 First-Year GPA           Last Observed GPA
                                   No                              No
                                Covariate       Covariate      Covariate       Covariate
Parameter                      Adjustment       Adjusted      Adjustment       Adjusted
                                                   Intention-to-Treat
Effect of FFWS Offer             0.047***       0.043***        0.037***       0.034***
                                  (0.014)        (0.014)         (0.013)        (0.013)

                                               Treatment-on-the-Treated
1st Stage-Effect of FFWS         0.851***       0.855***      0.849***         0.853***
Offer on Take-Up                  (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)          (0.002)

2nd Stage- Effect of FFWS         0.055***        0.051***        0.044***        0.040***
Receipt                            (0.016)         (0.016)         (0.015)         (0.015)
Note: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error in parentheses below
coefficient estimate. Top panel of the table presents estimated coefficients for an
indicator for receiving an FFWS grant offer. All regressions contain fixed effects for
cohort. Regressions in covariate adjusted columns also contain measures of student
gender, race/ethnicity, and English learner status in high school. Bottom panel of the
table presents results from a two-stage least squares regression. The first stage predicts
FFWS grant take-up as a function of receiving an FFWS grant offer, where FFWS take-
up is defined as receiving FFWS grant funds in the first eligible semester. The second
stage predicts the respective outcome (first-year or last observed GPA) as a function of
the predicted value of FFWS grant take up. Regressions contain same covariates as listed
for results in the top panel.




                                                                                             44
Figure 1. Estimated Effect of FFWS Offer on the Distribution of Grade Point Average
                   .04
  Effect of Grant Offer on P(GPA>x)
          0        -.02    .02




                                      0   1         2                    3                    4


Notes: The figure plots point estimates (solid line) and 95% confidence intervals (dashed lines) of the effect of
receiving an FFWS offer on the probability that that students' first-year GPA exceeds the value on the x-axis, where
x ranges from 0.1 to 4.0 in increments of 0.1. This results in 40 total regressions. In each regression, we model the
outcome as a function of an indicator for randomly receiving an FFWS grant offer and a cohort fixed effect.




                                                                                                                  45
Table 7. Effect of FFWS grant program on employment and earnings from
federal work study program for students in 4-year institutions
              Work Study Employment                   Work Study Earnings
           Control Group   Coefficient            Control Group   Coefficient
Year           Mean           (S.E.)                  Mean          (S.E.)

Year 1           0.13            -0.016***            $113.11          -$15.43***
                                  (0.005)                                (5.08)

Year 2           0.13            -0.035***            $170.67          -$36.07***
                                  (0.005)                                (5.98)

Year 3           0.12            -0.026***            $188.50          -$30.77***
                                  (0.005)                                (6.63)

Year 4           0.10            -0.018***            $184.72          -$26.55***
                                  (0.005)                                (6.97)

Year 5           0.04              -0.007*            $121.24            -$8.60*
                                   (0.004)                                (4.81)

Year 6           0.01               0.002             $69.77               4.20
                                   (0.002)                                (3.28)

Year 7          0.002               0.000             $46.86              -$1.10
                                   (0.001)                                (1.13)

Year 8          0.002              -0.001**            $51.53            -$2.02***
                                    (0.001)                                (0.64)
NOTE: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error clustered by student
in parentheses below coefficient estimate. All coefficients in a column from a single
OLS regression predicting annual work study employment (left column) or annual
work study earnings (right column). Each coefficient is an estimate from an
interaction between the indicator for receiving an FFWS grant offer and an indicator
for the respective post-randomization year. All regressions contain fixed effects for
cohort and post-randomization year.




                                                                                        46
Figure 2. Estimated Effect of FFWS Offer on the Distribution of Earnings in the Second
Post-Randomization Year




Notes: The figure plots point estimates (solid line) and 95% confidence intervals (dashed lines) of the effect of
receiving an FFWS offer on the probability that that students' earnings in the second post-randomization year
exceeds the value on the x-axis, where x ranges from $1 to $20,000 in increments of $1,000. This results in 20 total
regressions. In each regression, we model the outcome as a function of an indicator for randomly receiving an
FFWS grant offer and a cohort fixed effect.




                                                                                                                  47
Table 8. Effect of FFWS grant offer on cumulative loan debt, by institution type, loan type, and year
after randomization
                        4-Year University                                 2-Year Institution
                           Subsidized     Unsubsidized                       Subsidized      Unsubsidized
Year          All Loans       Loans           Loans          All Loans         Loans            Loans

Year 1        -544.91***       -303.66***       -241.25***          -57.70           -46.69            -11.01
                (86.60)          (56.11)          (34.71)           (89.22)          (60.00)           (29.97)

Year 2       -1034.88***       -579.60***       -455.28***          -116.50           -90.29           -26.22
               (175.18)         (117.01)          (64.65)          (179.09)          (122.48)          (57.85)

Year 3       -1583.73***       -954.46***       -629.28***          -185.42           -134.66          -50.76
               (288.51)         (198.46)          (99.55)          (269.68)          (187.51)          (83.77)

Year 4       -1968.46***      -1239.75***       -728.72***          -409.54           -309.28          -100.26
               (437.63)         (298.13)         (152.12)          (405.10)          (276.54)         (131.13)

Year 5       -2157.04***      -1334.97***       -822.07***          -544.39           -427.17          -117.22
               (582.12)         (391.34)         (205.75)          (544.89)          (365.32)         (183.42)

Year 6       -2122.31***      -1273.69***       -848.61***          -412.43           -328.69          -83.74
               (694.08)         (464.28)         (247.25)          (687.00)          (458.80)         (233.15)

Year 7        -2178.98**       -1338.52**       -840.46***          -734.61           -538.39          -196.22
               (849.95)         (562.48)         (308.28)          (903.03)          (600.98)         (308.13)

Year 8        -3335.34***       -2105.52***      -1229.82***          -384.80           -411.14        26.34
                 (971.82)         (651.63)         (350.99)          (915.83)          (622.78)       (304.80)
Note: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error in parentheses below coefficient estimate. Each
coefficient is from a separate regression and is the estimate for an indicator of receiving an FFWS grant offer.
All regressions contain fixed effects for cohort.




                                                                                                                   48
Table 9. Estimated effect of FFWS grant offer on annual employment and earnings, by year and level
of unmet need
                               Employment                                Earnings
                    High                                      High
                  Unmet        Low Unmet                     Unmet      Low Unmet
Year                Need         Need         Difference      Need         Need        Difference

Year 1             -0.030***        -0.016*           0.015        -299.41***      -224.90**          74.51
                     (0.009)        (0.009)          (0.012)        (82.494)        (87.074)        (119.894)

Year 2             -0.023***         -0.013           0.009        -456.29***      -508.59***         -52.30
                     (0.008)         (0.009)         (0.012)        (126.595)       (133.623)       (183.988)

Year 3              -0.018**         -0.001           0.017        -581.51***        -200.56         380.95
                     (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.013)        (171.047)       (181.146)       (249.058)

Year 4              -0.015            0.003           0.018          -392.55*        -177.30         215.24
                    (0.010)          (0.010)         (0.014)        (223.602)       (237.673)       (326.200)

Year 5              -0.008            0.005           0.013          -553.73         -142.35         411.38
                    (0.011)          (0.011)         (0.016)        (357.951)       (382.624)       (523.721)

Year 6             -0.034***          0.002          0.036*       -1425.05***         29.11        1454.16**
                     (0.013)         (0.014)         (0.019)        (506.781)       (537.147)      (738.102)

Year 7              -0.034**         -0.006           0.028       -1841.29***        -220.00        1621.30*
                     (0.016)         (0.017)         (0.023)        (661.021)       (704.621)       (966.005)

Year 8              -0.046**          -0.026            0.020       -1885.92**         -1116.03        769.89
                     (0.020)          (0.021)          (0.029)       (912.273)        (956.056)      (1321.371)
NOTE: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error clustered by student in parentheses below
coefficient estimate. All coefficients in each from a single OLS regression predicting annual employment
(left panel) or annual earnings (right panel). All regressions contain fixed effects for cohort and post-
randomization year.




                                                                                                                  49
Figure 3. Estimated Effect of FFWS Offer on the Distribution of Earnings in the Seventh
Post-Randomization Year




Notes: The figure plots point estimates (solid line) and 95% confidence intervals (dashed lines) of the effect of
receiving an FFWS offer on the probability that that students' earnings in the seventh post-randomization year
exceeds the value on the x-axis, where x ranges from $1 to $60,000 in increments of $2,000. This results in 30 total
regressions. In each regression, we model the outcome as a function of an indicator for randomly receiving an
FFWS grant offer and a cohort fixed effect.




                                                                                                                  50
Table 10. Estimated effect of FFWS grant offer on enrolling in a postsecondary
institution after earning a bachelor's degree
                                                Post-BA             Post-BA
                                              Enrollment in      Enrollment in
                               Post-BA           4-year              2-year
                              Enrollment       institution         institution
                                                  OLS
Effect of FFWS Offer            0.007*            0.004              -0.0003
                                (0.004)          (0.003)             (0.001)

                                                        Logit
Effect of FFWS Offer               0.115*               0.105                -0.048
                                   (0.063)             (0.079)              (0.203)
                                   [0.011]             [0.006]             [-0.0006]
Notes: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. In the top panel of the table, robust standard
errors clustered by student presented in parentheses below coefficient estimate. Each
coefficient is from a separate OLS regression predicting any post-BA enrollment,
post-BA enrollment in a 4-year institution, and post-BA enrollment in a 2-year
institution, respectively. Each regression contained an indicator for receiving an
FFWS offer and a cohort fixed effect. In the bottom panel of the table, we present
coefficient estimates in the top row, a robust standard error clustered by student in
parentheses in the second row, and the marginal effect in brackets in the third row.
Each coefficient is from a separate logistic regression specified in the same manner
as the OLS regressions described above.




                                                                                        51
Table 11. Effect of FFWS grant offer on confirmed
residence in Wisconsin and annual earnings with
unconfirmed residents coded as missing, by year after
randomization
                               4-Year University
                                               Earnings-
                                              Unconfirmed
                           Confirmed in        Coded as
Year                        Wisconsin           Missing

Year 5                         0.001             -468.49*
                              (0.006)            (272.19)

Year 6                       -0.023***            -358.69
                              (0.009)            (388.79)

Year 7                        -0.018*            -871.91*
                              (0.011)            (503.75)

Year 8                        -0.043***            -442.93
                               (0.014)            (700.95)
Note: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error
in parentheses below coefficient estimate. Each coefficient is
from a separate regression and is the estimate for an
indicator of receiving an FFWS grant offer. All regressions
contain fixed effects for cohort.




                                                                 52
Table 12. Lower and upper bounds for effect of FFWS
offer on overall earnings for students enrolled in four-
year universities, by year
                            Earnings
Year         Lower Bound               Upper Bound

Year 1         -229.58***                -207.11***
                 (58.769)                  (59.945)

Year 2         -492.65***                -435.52***
                (107.804)                  (91.641)

Year 3         -531.69***                -375.26***
                (162.899)                 (129.425)

Year 4         -573.95***                -263.3173
                (209.640)                (173.116)

Year 5          -476.1246                -362.7598
                (446.773)                (288.955)

Year 6          -930.28**                856.1224
                (455.893)                (541.508)

Year 7         -1486.70**                 215.211
                (626.776)                (728.968)

Year 8          -2226.52**                 1977.90**
                  (929.250)                (942.578)
Note: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard
error in parentheses below coefficient estimate. Each row
presents results from a separate application of the
bounding technique proposed by Lee (2009).




                                                            53
Table 13. Estimated effect of FFWS offer on employment and earnings for technical college
enrollees and two-year UW System College enrollees, by year
                         Employment                              Earnings
                              UW                                   UW
             Technical       System                 Technical     System
Year           College      College    Difference    College     College      Difference

Year 1         -0.004         -0.008         0.004         10.33         -246.70       257.04
               (0.007)        (0.010)       (0.012)      (108.856)      (156.736)     (190.332)

Year 2         -0.005          0.001        -0.006        102.75       -470.38**      573.12**
               (0.006)        (0.009)       (0.011)      (164.500)     (236.860)      (287.620)

Year 3         -0.002          0.007        -0.010         93.20         -185.27       278.47
               (0.007)        (0.010)       (0.012)      (214.330)      (326.200)     (389.260)

Year 4         -0.005          0.007        -0.012        162.09         -183.38       345.47
               (0.007)        (0.011)       (0.014)      (265.040)      (405.250)     (483.460)

Year 5         -0.008          0.008        -0.016        446.62         -343.89       790.51
               (0.008)        (0.013)       (0.016)      (329.630)      (514.240)     (610.700)

Year 6          0.007         -0.014         0.021       879.31**        -583.95      1463.27*
               (0.010)        (0.015)       (0.018)      (421.230)      (657.990)     (781.090)

Year 7          0.000         -0.008         0.008        398.91         -1329.65     1728.56*
               (0.012)        (0.020)       (0.023)      (528.390)      (871.380)    (1019.140)

Year 8            0.000           -0.016         0.016         258.38      -2531.92** 2790.31**
                 (0.015)         (0.026)        (0.030)      (691.010)      (1221.770) (1404.140)
Note: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error in parentheses below coefficient
estimate. In each panel of the table, each row presents results from a separate regression
containing an indicator for receiving an FFWS offer, an indicator of technical college enrollment
at the time of the offer, the interaction of those two terms, and a cohort fixed effect.




                                                                                                    54
Appendix Tables and Figures


       Table A1. Estimated effect of FFWS grant offer on annual employment, by institution type
       and inclusion of baseline characteristics
                              4-Year University                            2-Year Institution

                    Control          No                          Control          No
                    Group         Covariate       Covariate      Group         Covariate        Covariate
       Year          Mean        Adjustment       Adjusted        Mean        Adjustment        Adjusted

       Year 1        0.812        -0.024***       -0.026***       0.877          -0.005          -0.005
                                    (0.006)         (0.006)                      (0.005)         (0.006)

       Year 2        0.828        -0.019***       -0.020***       0.892          -0.002          -0.002
                                    (0.006)         (0.006)                      (0.005)         (0.005)

       Year 3        0.815         -0.011*         -0.013*        0.877           0.001           0.001
                                   (0.006)         (0.007)                       (0.006)         (0.006)

       Year 4        0.821          -0.008         -0.010         0.863          -0.001          -0.001
                                    (0.007)        (0.007)                       (0.006)         (0.006)

       Year 5        0.814          -0.004         -0.005         0.853          -0.003          -0.003
                                    (0.008)        (0.008)                       (0.007)         (0.007)

       Year 6        0.779         -0.019**       -0.019**        0.840           0.000           0.001
                                    (0.009)        (0.009)                       (0.001)         (0.008)

       Year 7        0.753         -0.021*         -0.022*        0.822          -0.002          -0.002
                                   (0.011)         (0.011)                       (0.010)         (0.010)

       Year 8        0.731           -0.038**       -0.038**         0.811          -0.004        -0.005
                                      (0.015)        (0.015)                        (0.013)       (0.013)
       NOTE: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error in parentheses below coefficient
       estimate. Each coefficient is from a separate regression and is the estimate for an indicator of
       receiving an FFWS grant offer. All regressions contain fixed effects for cohort and post-
       randomization year. Regressions in covariate adjusted columns also contain measures of student
       gender, race/ethnicity, and English learner status in high school. Covariate-adjusted regression
       for students in 2-year institution also contains an indicator for technical college enrollment.




                                                                                                            55
Table A2. Estimated effect of FFWS grant offer on annual earnings, by institution type and
inclusion of baseline characteristics
                       4-Year University                     2-Year Institution

             Control          No                            Control          No
             Group         Covariate       Covariate        Group         Covariate      Covariate
Year          Mean        Adjustment       Adjusted          Mean        Adjustment      Adjusted

Year 1       3,884.05      -258.42***      -263.39***      6,655.07         -68.45          -51.04
                             (60.43)         (60.87)                        (89.79)        (90.61)

Year 2       5,896.71      -474.27***      -471.09***      9,886.24         -67.46         -60.38
                             (92.42)         (93.13)                       (136.65)       (137.44)

Year 3       7,331.31      -407.11***      -396.44***      12,669.79         35.0           11.9
                            (124.67)         (125.91)                      (181.91)       (181.49)

Year 4       9,095.81       -297.72*       -314.33**       14,760.66        82.92          91.46
                            (162.92)        (164.42)                       (224.47)       (223.59)

Year 5      13,709.98        -393.5          -421.69       16,904.32        251.26         314.56
                            (261.18)        (262.66)                       (278.88)       (278.20)

Year 6      18,190.94      -791.74**       -775.06**       19,325.17        477.83         497.90
                            (368.12)        (370.63)                       (355.56)       (354.70)

Year 7      20,609.22      -1138.43**      -1095.09**      21,090.53        -42.56         -20.43
                            (481.56)         (484.18)                      (452.07)       (450.44)

Year 8      22,037.94       -1570.18** -1599.09**          22,558.73        -405.64         -304.26
                             (658.55)        (663.03)                      (601.42)        (599.33)
NOTE: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error in parentheses below coefficient
estimate. Each coefficient is from a separate regression and is the estimate for an indicator of
receiving an FFWS grant offer. All regressions contain fixed effects for cohort. Regressions in
covariate adjusted columns also contain measures of student gender, race/ethnicity, and English
learner status in high school. Covariate-adjusted regression for students in 2-year institution also
contains an indicator for technical college enrollment.




                                                                                                       56
Table A3. Estimated effect of FFWS grant offer on employment sector, by post-randomization year and sector
Sector                        Year 1    Year 2       Year 3     Year 4      Year 5    Year 6     Year 7    Year 8
Agriculture                  -0.003**    -0.001       0.002      0.000       0.000     0.001      -0.004   -0.005*
                              (0.002)   (0.002)      (0.002)    (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.003)

Mining                       0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000      0.000    0.001*      0.001      0.000
                            (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)   (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)

Utilities                    0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000     -0.001    -0.001     -0.002      -0.002
                            (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)

Construction                -0.002      -0.001       0.002       0.001      0.003     0.003      0.003      0.000
                            (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.005)

Manufacturing                0.004       0.002       0.006      -0.002     -0.007    -0.011*    -0.010      -0.004
                            (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.006)   (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.010)

Wholesale Goods             -0.001      -0.003      -0.005*     -0.004     -0.003     0.000      0.006      0.003
                            (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.006)

Retail                      -0.007      -0.012*     -0.009       0.003     -0.005    -0.002     -0.007      -0.003
                            (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.008)    (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.010)

Transportation              -0.001      -0.001      -0.002     -0.006**    -0.002     0.002     -0.006      -0.007
                            (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.003)   (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.005)

Information                 -0.002       0.001       0.001       0.002      0.002     0.002      0.003    0.013***
                            (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.005)

Finance                    -0.004**    -0.005**     -0.005*      0.000      0.005     0.005     -0.003      -0.011
                            (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.008)

Real Estate                  0.001       0.000       0.000       0.001      0.000    -0.004*     0.000      -0.004
                            (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.003)    (0.003)

Professional                 0.001       0.001      -0.001       0.001     -0.005    -0.001     -0.001      0.002
                            (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.007)

Management                   0.000       0.000      -0.001       0.000      0.000    -0.001      0.003      -0.002
                            (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.004)

Waste Management           -0.008**     -0.007      -0.006      -0.007     -0.008    -0.002     -0.008      -0.004
                            (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)    (0.006)   (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.009)

Education Services          -0.004      -0.001     0.009***      0.000      0.008    -0.001     -0.001      0.006
                            (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.004)    (0.005)   (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.010)



                                                                                                          57
Health Care                     0.004        0.009*         0.002       -0.005        0.005       0.000       0.005       -0.011
                               (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.007)     (0.010)

Arts & Recreation               0.000         0.000         0.003        0.006        0.004      -0.005       0.002       -0.002
                               (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.006)

Food
Service/Accommodations        -0.019***      -0.012        -0.011       -0.013       -0.005      -0.010      -0.007     -0.019**
                                (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.009)     (0.010)

Other                           0.001        -0.005        -0.004       -0.005       -0.002      -0.004      -0.006       -0.008
                               (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.006)

Public Administration          -0.005        -0.004        -0.002       -0.001       -0.003      -0.005      -0.003       -0.001
                               (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.007)

Unclassified                    -0.001       -0.001**       -0.001         0.000     0.000        0.000       0.001        0.000
                               (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)
NOTE: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error in parentheses below coefficient estimate. Each coefficient is
from a separate regression and is the estimate for an indicator of receiving an FFWS grant offer. All regressions for a given year
estimated in a Seemingly Unrelated Regression framework. All regressions contain fixed effects for cohort.




                                                                                                                         58
Table A4. Effect of FFWS grant offer on any loan debt, by
loan type and year after randomization
                           4-Year University
                                 Any               Any
                              Subsidized       Unsubsidized
Year         Any Loans          Loans             Loans

Year 1        -0.038***        -0.044***         -0.071***
                (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.008)

Year 2        -0.029***        -0.033***         -0.063***
                (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.008)

Year 3        -0.030***        -0.032***         -0.061***
                (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.008)

Year 4        -0.025***        -0.025***         -0.052***
                (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.008)

Year 5        -0.024***        -0.025***         -0.052***
                (0.006)          (0.006)           (0.009)

Year 6        -0.023***        -0.024***         -0.050***
                (0.007)          (0.007)           (0.010)

Year 7        -0.030***        -0.032***         -0.044***
                (0.008)          (0.008)           (0.012)

Year 8         -0.028***       -0.030***           -0.042***
                 (0.010)         (0.010)             (0.015)
Note: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error in
parentheses below coefficient estimate. Each coefficient is
from a separate regression and is the estimate for an indicator
of receiving an FFWS grant offer. All regressions contain
fixed effects for cohort.




                                                                  59
Table A5. Effect of FFWS grant offer on cumulative loan
debt, by unmet need level and year after randomization
                         Cumulative Loan Debt

           High Unmet         Low Unmet
Year          Need              Need             Difference

Year 1      -688.61***        -313.78***          374.83***
               54.77             57.81              79.59

Year 2     -1356.29***        -526.919***         829.37***
              104.27             110.06            151.55

Year 3     -2027.61***        -835.11***         1192.50***
              169.54            179.55             246.87

Year 4     -2547.12***        -939.03***         1608.09***
              247.29            262.86             360.76

Year 5     -2737.23***        -1007.22***        1730.01***
              308.28             329.53            451.05

Year 6     -2671.08***        -1020.81***        1650.27***
              361.44             383.10            526.43

Year 7     -2565.88***        -1074.33**          1491.55**
              432.92            461.48             632.67

Year 8      -2780.59***         -1419.28**         1361.31*
               563.63             590.68            816.39
Note: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error
in parentheses below coefficient estimate. Each row presents
results from a separate regression containing an indicator for
receiving an FFWS offer, an indicator for low unmet need,
the interaction of those two terms, and a cohort fixed effect.




                                                                 60
Table A6. Effect of FFWS grant offer on employment and earnings, by gender and year
after randomization
                          Employment                                   Earnings

Year            Male        Female      Difference       Male          Female        Difference


Year 1        -0.036***     -0.018**       0.017        -159.01*     -331.13***        -172.13
               (0.010)       (0.008)      (0.013)       (95.338)      (79.271)        (123.934)

Year 2        -0.026***     -0.016**       0.010      -450.28***     -477.38***         -27.10
               (0.009)       (0.008)      (0.012)      (146.022)      (121.413)       (189.821)

Year 3         -0.018*       -0.009        0.009        -220.09      -510.00***        -290.91
               (0.010)       (0.009)      (0.014)      (196.951)      (164.303)       (256.396)

Year 4          -0.016       -0.005        0.011        -135.44        -415.81*        -280.38
               (0.011)       (0.009)      (0.014)      (256.720)      (214.833)       (334.620)

Year 5          -0.001       -0.008       -0.007        -443.56        -372.77          70.79
               (0.012)       (0.010)      (0.016)      (411.947)      (343.187)       (535.920)

Year 6          -0.013      -0.023*       -0.010        -427.81        -951.33*        -523.53
               (0.015)      (0.012)       (0.019)      (575.809)      (486.428)       (753.370)

Year 7          -0.020       -0.023       -0.003        -1170.33       -967.41         202.92
               (0.018)       (0.015)      (0.023)      (753.227)      (635.208)       (985.145)

Year 8           -0.033      -0.042**       -0.009      -1870.71*       -1239.65         631.06
                (0.023)       (0.019)       (0.030)    (1034.842)      (867.978)       (1350.510)
Note: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error in parentheses below coefficient
estimate. For each panel of the table, each row presents results from a separate regression
containing an indicator for receiving an FFWS offer, an indicator for female, the interaction of
those two terms, and a cohort fixed effect.




                                                                                                    61
Table A7. Coefficient on indicator for receiving an FFWS grant offer after
conditioning on postsecondary enrollment, by post-randomization year
                        Employment                      Earnings
                                      No                               No
                                  Condition on                     Condition on
                                  Enrollment                       Enrollment
                 Condition on        (Main         Condition on       (Main
Year             Enrollment         Results)       Enrollment        Results)

Year 1             -0.022***        -0.023***       -228.40***       -284.64***
                    (0.006)          (0.006)          (59.14)          (58.63)

Year 2             -0.019***        -0.019***       -365.19***       -482.95***
                    (0.006)          (0.006)          (85.33)          (89.52)

Year 3              -0.012*           -0.011        -293.73**        -404.16***
                    (0.007)          (0.007)         (116.53)          (124.42)

Year 4               -0.008           -0.008          -176.57         -288.54*
                    (0.007)          (0.007)         (155.15)         (163.84)

Year 5               -0.004           -0.004          -286.71          -363.53
                    (0.008)          (0.008)         (248.57)         (258.39)

Year 6             -0.019**         -0.020**        -809.50**        -776.91**
                    (0.009)          (0.009)         (357.07)         (362.37)

Year 7              -0.022*          -0.022*        -1103.00**       -1138.05**
                    (0.011)          (0.012)          (469.45)         (470.84)

Year 8             -0.038**         -0.038**        -1586.65**       -1576.17**
                    (0.015)          (0.015)          (656.00)         (656.50)


NOTE: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error clustered by
student in parentheses below coefficient estimate. All coefficients in a column
from a single OLS regression predicting annual employment (left panel) or
earnings (right panel) in the state of Wisconsin. Each coefficients is an estimate
from an interaction between the indicator for receiving an FFWS grant offer and
an indicator for the respective post-randomization year. All regressions contain
fixed effects for cohort and post-randomization year. Regressions in condition on
enrollment columns also contain an indicator for enrollment in a UW System
institution.




                                                                                     62
Table A8. Coefficients and standard errors for interaction between FFWS offer indicator and student
characteristic from OLS model predicting confirmed Wisconsin residency, by student characteristic and
year
                                                                     FFWS X Gross
                   FFWS X ACT       FFWS X BA          FFWS X BA         Family
                    Composite       Degree- UW         Degree- Any      Income/         FFWS X UW
                       Score           System           Institution     $10,000          System GPA

Year 5                   -0.002             -0.003              -0.009             0.003               -0.009
                        (0.002)            (0.012)             (0.012)            (0.003)             (0.008)

Year 6                   -0.002             -0.008              -0.005             0.004               -0.016
                        (0.002)            (0.018)             (0.017)            (0.004)             (0.011)

Year 7                   -0.003             -0.014              -0.024             0.003            -0.040***
                        (0.003)            (0.022)             (0.022)            (0.005)            (0.014)

Year 8                   -0.002              -0.023             -0.037               0.004           -0.054***
                        (0.004)             (0.029)            (0.028)              (0.007)           (0.017)
Note: ***p<0.10, **p<0.05, *p<0.01. Robust standard error in parentheses below coefficient estimate. Each
coefficient is from a separate regression and is the estimated coefficient for an interaction between an indicator
for receiving an FFWS grant offer and the student characteristic listed in each column header from an OLS
model predicting confirmed Wisconsin residency. All regressions contain fixed effects for cohort.




                                                                                                                     63
