                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE MACROECONOMICS OF AUTOMATION:
                        DATA, THEORY, AND POLICY ANALYSIS

                                         Nir Jaimovich
                                      Itay Saporta-Eksten
                                          Henry E. Siu
                                       Yaniv Yedid-Levi

                                      Working Paper 27122
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27122


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We thank Adrien Aucert, Zsofia Barany, Gadi Barlevy, Larry Christiano, Max Dvorkin, Ester
Faia, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Zvi Hercowitz, Chad Jones, Joseba Martinez, Gabriel Mathy, Pete
Klenow, Gianluca Violante, and numerous seminar audiences for helpful comments. Siu thanks
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada for support. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, Henry E. Siu, and Yaniv Yedid-Levi. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Macroeconomics of Automation: Data, Theory, and Policy Analysis
Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, Henry E. Siu, and Yaniv Yedid-Levi
NBER Working Paper No. 27122
May 2020
JEL No. E24,E25,E61

                                         ABSTRACT

During the last four decades, the U.S. has experienced a fall in the employment in middle-wage,
"routine-task-intensive," occupations. We analyze the characteristics of those who used to be
employed in such occupations and show that this type of individual is nowadays more likely to be
out of the labor force or working in low-paying occupations. Based on these findings, we develop
a quantitative, general equilibrium model, with heterogeneous agents, labor force participation,
occupational choice, and investment in physical and automation capital. We first use the model to
evaluate the distributional consequences of automation. We find heterogeneity in its impact
across different occupations, leading to a significant polarization in welfare. We then use this
framework as a laboratory to evaluate various public policies such as retraining, and explicitly
redistributive policies that transfer resources from those who benefit from automation to those
who bear the brunt of its costs. We assess the tradeoffs between the aggregate impact and welfare
distributional consequences of such policies.

Nir Jaimovich                                   Henry E. Siu
Department of Economics                         Vancouver School of Economics
University of Zurich                            University of British Columbia
Office: SOF H-16                                6000 Iona Drive
Zurich, Switzerland                             Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4
nir.jaimovich@uzh.ch                            CANADA
                                                and NBER
Itay Saporta-Eksten                             hankman@mail.ubc.ca
The Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University                             Yaniv Yedid-Levi
P.O.B. 39040                                    Interdisciplinary Center (IDC)
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 6997801                   Herzliya
itaysap@post.tau.ac.il                          8 University St.
                                                Herzliya
                                                Israel
                                                yaniv.yl1@gmail.com
1.     Introduction

Advances in automation technologies have left an indelible mark on the labor market of the U.S. and other
industrialized economies over the past 40 years. An important literature demonstrates that these economies
have experienced a significant drop in the fraction of the population employed in jobs in the middle of
the occupational wage distribution (see, for instance, Autor, Katz and Kearney (2006), Goos and Manning
(2007), Goos, Manning and Salomons (2009), Acemoglu and Autor (2011)). This hollowing out of the
middle is linked to the decline of employment in routine occupations--those focused on a limited set of
tasks that can be performed by following a well-defined set of instructions and procedures. The routine
nature of these tasks makes them prime candidates to be performed by automation technologies (see Autor,
Levy and Murnane (2003), and the subsequent literature).
     This paper contributes to our understanding of this phenomenon along three dimensions. First, while the
literature has reached a near-consensus about the decline in routine employment and its link to automation,
there is much less discussion about where workers who used to hold routine jobs end up working nowa-
days. To address this deficiency, we apply machine learning techniques that enable us to document that the
likelihood of workers with "routine occupational characteristics" to work in routine occupations has fallen
significantly. Instead, they are now either non-participants in the labor force or working at occupations
that tend to occupy the bottom of the wage distribution. Our second contribution is to probe the quanti-
tative distributional welfare impact of automation. To do so, we develop a rich, yet tractable, quantitative
heterogeneous agent general equilibrium model. Given the significant role of labor force participation and
occupation switching, the model endogenizes labor force participation, occupational choice, unemployment,
and features endogenous investment. Our third contribution is to employ our new framework as a "labo-
ratory" to evaluate various public policy proposals. Given the general equilibrium emphasis of the model,
each of the policies we consider must be financed through increased government distortionary taxation.
     In what follows, we discuss these three parts in detail. In Section 2, we survey the recent employment
and occupation trends. We then proceed with our empirical analysis, using data from the Current Population
Survey (CPS) during the "pre-polarization" period of 1984-1989, to train a machine learning algorithm to
classify individuals into occupations in an agnostic manner. This mapping enables us to track the evolution
of individuals with such "routine" characteristics over time. We then ask what has happened to the type of
workers who would otherwise be employed in routine occupations during the "post-polarization" era. Our
key finding is that the probability of such routine-type individuals working in routine occupations declined
by about 16% between the pre-polarization era and the post-polarization one. We find that instead of work-



                                                      2
ing in routine occupations, about two-thirds of such individuals have ended up as non-participants in the
labor force, with the remaining one-third employed in non-routine manual occupations (which cluster at
the bottom of the occupational wage distribution). Interestingly, we find that the unemployment rates for
such workers remained roughly unchanged. We complement this analysis using the National Longitudinal
Survey of the Youth (NLSY) 1979 and 1997 to demonstrate that similar patterns are observed for young low
cognitive ability workers (as measured by AFQT scores), who formerly worked in routine occupations in
the late 1980s.
  These findings guide the setup and calibration of our general equilibrium model presented in Section
3. The model is developed with two goals in mind: first, to assess the distributional effects of advanced
automation; and second, to quantify the effects of various policy reforms. In what follows we briefly describe
below the structure of the model and the main welfare and policy results.
  Since occupational employment is central to our analysis and empirical findings, we consider a model
with three occupations: (i) non-routine cognitive (NRC), (ii) routine (R), and (iii) non-routine manual
(NRM), that represent high, middle, and low paying jobs, respectively.1 In the model, individuals with
routine occupational characteristics (i.e. those who cannot work as NRC) vary in terms of their work abil-
ity in R and NRM occupations. Based on their abilities and equilibrium wages, workers optimally decide
whether or not to participate in the labor force and, conditional on doing so, sort into occupations. Firms
in the model invest optimally in two types of capital: non-automation physical capital, and automation cap-
ital that is substitutable with R occupational labor. Thus, any channel that affects firms optimal adoption
of automation capital affects the return to be working in a R vs. NRM occupation and the return to labor
force participation. Labor force participants are either employed or unemployed due to search-and-matching
frictions (Diamond (1982), Mortensen (1982) and Pissarides (1985)). Given our interest in policy analysis,
we introduce labor market frictions since certain interventions are targeted at the unemployed, while others
affect the relative value of unemployment versus other labor market statuses. All government programs are
financed with labor income and profit taxation.
  We characterize the model equilibrium and in Section 4 and discuss its calibration in Section 5. In Section
6 we study the welfare impact of automation, which features significant heterogeneity in its welfare impact;
workers who formerly labored in R occupations suffer a significant decline in their wages, and thus in
their welfare. On the other hand, due to complementarity with automation technology, and to the capital
ownership structure in the economy, NRC workers enjoy large increases in their welfare.
  As such, in Section 7, the model is used as a laboratory to evaluate the aggregate and distributional effects
  1 See   for instance, Autor, Katz and Kearney (2006), Goos and Manning (2007), and Jaimovich and Siu (2012)).



                                                               3
of various policies. We consider two sets of them, each is funded by distortionary taxation. First, we study
the effect of an "occupational retraining" policy that is aimed at counteracting the effects of automation.
The program targets labor force non-participants, and seeks to improve their ability in NRM work. It lures
them back into the labor market, and improves their welfare. However, it harms others: a displacement
effect implies that newly trained workers compete with those who already selected, prior to the retraining
program, into NRM work, pushing down their wages, employment, and welfare.
     The second set of policies is explicitly redistributive. It transfers resources from high-wage workers
(who, as the model shows, significantly benefit from automation) to middle- and low-wage workers. In
these experiments, the unemployment margin plays a critical role.
     We consider: (i) raising unemployment insurance benefits, (ii) introducing a universal basic income, (iii)
increasing transfers to labor force non-participants, and (iv) making the tax system more progressive. While
(i) modestly succeeds at improving the average welfare of all group, policies (ii) and (iii) impose large
welfare losses on high-wage workers and are very costly in terms of aggregate income. In contrast, (iv)
demonstrates that a (much) more progressive tax system, with a reduction in the taxes levied on low-earners
and balancing the budget by increasing the taxes on high-earners, can achieve much of the redistribution
gains without lowering aggregate output. It also leads to much smaller welfare losses for high-income
earners.
     Finally, Section 8 concludes the paper, while the different Appendices discuss various robustness checks,
both empirically and theoretically.


2.      Employment and occupation trends

An important literature documents the changes in the task content of work, its relation to the decline in the
cost of industrial robotics, computing, and information technology, and its implications for the structure of
occupational employment and wages (see for example Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003), Acemoglu and
Autor (2011), Autor and Dorn (2013) and Atalay et al. (2018)). An emerging literature has also begun to
empirically evaluate the impact of automation and robotics on routine employment. For example, looking
across countries, Michaels, Natraj and Van Reenen (2014) find that the larger the increase in ICT investment
(at the industry-country level) is, the larger the increase in the high-skilled labor share and the decrease
in the middle-skill share of labor income is (with insignificant effects on the least-skilled group). Graetz
and Michaels (2018) use panel data of robot adoption across industries-country pairs, and find that robot
penetration raises labor productivity, and have little effect on overall employment. Acemoglu and Restrepo



                                                       4
(2019) consider variation across US commuting zones and find negative labor market effects given industry
specific robotic penetration. Finally, Gaggl and Wright (2017) and Tuzel and Zhang (2019) use tax reforms
in the U.K (the former) and the U.S. (the latter) that increase the incentives of ICT investment; both papers
find that the increase in ICT reduces the number of workers who perform R tasks while rewarding workers
engaged in non-routine, cognitive-intensive tasks.
   While near-consensus exists in this literature about the drop in routine employment and its link to au-
tomation, less discussion has ensued about where workers who used to hold jobs with "routine occupational
characteristics" in the 1980s (pre-polarization) end up working in recent years. Are they employed in other
occupations? Are they unemployed more frequently? Are they likelier to have left the labor force altogether?
These essential questions require answers from a policy perspective.
   Cortes, Jaimovich and Siu (2017) take a step towards answering this question. They look at the evolu-
tion of routine employment within different pre-determined demographic groups and demonstrate that the
decline in routine manual employment was concentrated among high school dropout men of all ages, and
older high school graduate men. They show that in an accounting sense, men in this demographic group
end up instead in low paying non-routine manual jobs, or not working at all. However, Cortes, Jaimovich
and Siu (2017) pre-determined the specific demographic groups they analyzed, a major shortcoming of their
research. Moreover, their analysis is limited to evolution within these pre-determined demographics groups.
As such, in the analysis below we answer the question of where workers with 1980s "routine characteristics"
end up, in an aggregate sense, without having to pre-determine the specific groups as in Cortes, Jaimovich
and Siu (2017). To do that, we use a machine learning (henceforth ML) approach to classify individuals
according to their likelihood of employment in various occupational groups based on their observed char-
acteristics during the late 1980s. This mapping between characteristics and specific occupations enables
us to track the actual employment and occupational choices of individuals with "routine characteristics" as
automation advances.2
   We classify prime-aged individuals (25-64 years of age) from the CPS into types based on their like-
liest occupation in the pre-polarization era. This occupational classification draws distinctions based on
task intensity according to two factors.3 The first is whether an occupation is routine or non-routine. The
   2 An   alternative approach would have been to use panel data and follow specific individuals from the late 1980s for three
decades. This approach has two major drawbacks. First, such an exercise only follows a single cohort (or small number of
cohorts) of individuals, and would be uninformative of the impact of automation on others cohorts, such as young workers entering
the labor market at the turn of the 21st century. Second, the long-run labor market transitions of individuals over three decades
confound macroeconomic effects with life-cycle effects--for example, the fact that individuals are more likely to get "promoted"
to managerial occupations later in life, independent of advances in automation.
   3 To obtain such a classification, we apply a random forest algorithm using age, education, gender, and race as observable



                                                               5
second relates to whether the task intensity is "cognitive" versus "manual" in task intensity. We thus end
up with four categories of occupations: non-routine-cognitive (NRC); routine-cognitive (RC); non-routine-
manual (NRM); and routine-manual (RM). Our occupation classification follows Jaimovich and Siu (2012)
(see details in Appendix A.1). We use cross-sectional data on employed individuals using their current
occupation, and unemployed individuals using their most recent occupation of employment. We do this dur-
ing the pre-polarization period (defined as 1984-1989) to train the ML algorithm to associate occupations
to individual-level characteristics, where we pick 1989 as the benchmark year for comparisons, since per
capita routine employment peaked during it (see for example Cortes, Jaimovich and Siu (2017)). We then
apply the algorithm to assign individuals to occupations in the remaining CPS subsamples. Doing so en-
ables us to predict participation and occupational choices for all individuals had no changes in the economy
occurred. We aggregate the results to two occupational types: NRC and non-NRC (i.e., RC, RM, and NRM).
For the sake of exposition, we refer to these as high-skill and low-skill types, respectively.4 The ML algo-
rithm suggests that the strongest predictor for occupation choice in the late 1980s is a worker's educational
attainment.5
   Columns (1) and (2) of Table A4 reveal the fraction of men, which were classified as likely to work non-
NRC (low-skilled) in labor force non-participation, unemployment, and employment in NRC, NRM and R
occupations comparing 1989 and 2017. Three important points emerge from this analysis. First, consistent
with the findings in existing literature, we observe a large 10 percentage points (p.p) decline in employment
in routine occupations within the low-skilled (non-NRC) group. Second, we observe no increase in the
propensity of the low-skilled to participate in high-paying non-routine cognitive occupations. By contrast,
the probability of non-participation in the labor force (NLF) increased dramatically from 0.17 to 0.24, and
the probability of employment in NRM occupations increased from about 0.11 to 0.15. These two propensity
characteristics in a flexible manner. We use the ranger implementation in R
   4 We choose this delineation for substantive reasons as well: predictive power is high and classification errors are small at this

level of aggregation, allowing for the minimization of noise in the type-specific series for employment and occupational choice.
Appendix A.2.1 discusses ML classification errors, while Appendix A.2.2 discusses our algorithm for recovering "clean" aggregate
series from data with ML classification errors. Moreover, as documented in Cortes (2016) and Cortes, Jaimovich and Siu (2017),
large differences in characteristics exist between high- and low-skill worker types, whereas routine (cognitive and manual; simply
R hereafter) and NRM types are much more similar. This motivates previous theoretical analysis (such as the static, labor market
models of Autor, Katz and Kearney (2006) and Cortes, Jaimovich and Siu (2017)) as well as our modeling choice below.
  5 See Figure A1 in the Appendix, which displays a heat map of the probability of men in a specific education-age cell to be

classified as high-skill. Lower educated men (with high-school diplomas or less) are always classified as low-skill, while those
with more education (college graduates) are always classified as high-skill. For men with intermediate levels of education (some
post-secondary), there is a gradient by age: younger men tend to sort to non-NRC occupations, older men toward NRC. Race
(averaged within each cell) does not play an important role.


                                                                 6
changes account for the entire fall in R employment. Roughly two-thirds of the decline can be traced to the
increase in NLF, and the rest by the increase in NRM employment. This is a key takeaway of our analysis:
on average, low-skill types leaving R employment relocate into labor market statuses that are associated
with lower income.6 Third, the low-skilled experienced no obvious change in the unemployment rate, or in
their unemployment-to-population ratio.7 These three findings guide us in constructing and calibrating the
model presented in the next section.
   In Appendix A.3, we discuss the changes in employment and in occupational composition for women and
for those classified as high-skilled. With respect to women, we find that their empirical patterns for women
resemble those identified for men, but start later, around the year 2001 for reasons discussed in Appendix
A.3. For the high-skilled, we encounter little evidence of an increase in non-participation or in employment
in NRM, which suggests that the patterns observed for the low-skilled are linked to the routine employment
decline.
   A shortcoming of the ML approach is that it relies on workers' observed educational attainment--a vari-
able that is potentially endogenous to the automation forces under consideration. We address this concern
by using respondent's AFQT score as measured in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY); the
AFQT measure is arguably a more direct and exogenous proxy for cognitive ability. The NLSY sample is
too small for our ML approach, so we revert to a different method in the spirit of Cortes, Jaimovich and Siu
(2017).8 Looking at men in NLSY 1979, we recognize that the propensity to work in routine or non-routine
manual occupations (the equivalent of our "low-skilled" in the CPS) is highest for those in the second to
fourth deciles of AFQT (82% of employed). Table A7 compares the labor market status and occupational
composition for workers in these deciles during 1989-1990 (using the NLSY79) and 2012-2013 (using the
NLSY97). The changes in participation and occupational choice for these men (of approximately 30 years
of age) are consistent with the pattern from the ML approach using the CPS (for all prime working ages).
There is a large decline in the likelihood of R employment (of 16% as in the CPS analysis above), accom-
panied by greater the likelihood of non-participation and NRM employment. The split between these two
channels is roughly half-half. That there is greater movement into NRM in the NLSY is not surprising; this
sample of low-skill men is younger than the CPS sample, and so displays greater labor force attachment.
   6 Leaving   the labor force is likely to be accompanied by increased dependency on transfer payments, while a transition to NRM
is likely to be accompanied by a fall in wages and earnings (see, for instance, Autor and Dorn (2013)).
     7 Moreover, using high frequency CPS data we find that within each occupation, both the unemployment rate and exit rates show

no low frequency trend over time. Unemployment exit rates were constructed from the outgoing rotation groups in the CPS and
are calculated for three types of workers - Routine (R), Non-Routing Manual (NRM) and Non-Routine Cognitive (NRC) based on
their last occupation prior to the unemployment spell.
   8 See Appendix A.4 for a detailed discussion about the NLSY analysis



                                                                 7
3.      Model

In this section, our goal is to setup a model environment for analyzing the heterogeneous welfare effects of
automation and evaluating the impact of a wide set of policies meant to assist those ill-affected by automa-
tion.
     Motivated by the findings of Section 2, which indicate a sharp distinction between NRC and non-NRC
types, our model has two types of agents. We refer to these as high-skill (NRC) and low-skill (non-NRC)
agents for simplicity. There are three distinct occupations: non-routine cognitive (NRC), routine (R), and
non-routine manual (NRM). The low-skilled are heterogeneous as each worker is endowed with two ability
parameters (productivity draws from a distribution)--one for occupation R and one for occupation NRM.
Given their abilities in each occupation, individuals decide whether to participate in the labor force or not,
and conditional on participation, in which occupation to search for employment. The occupational labor
markets for low-skill workers are subject to a search and matching friction as in Diamond (1982), Mortensen
(1982) and Pissarides (1985). Hence, the low-skill occupation and participation choices depend on job find-
ing probabilities and the equilibrium compensation in each job when employed. While Section 2 indicates
no change in unemployment across the pre- and post-polarization eras, we model this labor market state
since incentive effects on job search and vacancy creation come into consideration in the policy experiments
we consider below.
     Capital inputs in the forms of automation capital and non-automation capital are used in final produc-
tion. Both capital stocks are owned by perfectly competitive, final good producers who make investment
decisions. In the model therefore, the degree of automation capital accumulation is endogenous.
     For tractability, we assume that high-skilled workers are identical, work only in the NRC occupation,
and participate in a frictionless labor market. Moreover, again for tractability reasons, we assume that these
workers are "capitalists" and own all firm equity in the economy; low-skilled workers are excluded from
asset/credit markets and are "hand-to-mouth," with current consumption equal to current income.9 This
assumption regarding asset ownership, while simplistic, has empirical traction. For example, the Survey of
Consumer Finances (SCF) reports median household net worth by the educational level of household heads.
Over the period of 1989-2016, median net worth of college graduates are more than 12 times as large as high
school dropouts, and more than 4 times as large as high school graduates. Thus, highly educated individuals,
who are empirically NRC worker types (as documented in Section 2), own the vast majority of assets in the
     9 Allowing all workers to hold assets introduces a number of technical complications.   This includes the need to keep track of the
marginal owner in the firm's discount factor, the inclusion of wealth in low-skill workers' dynamic problems, and the need to track
the distribution of firm ownership/capital holdings.


                                                                  8
U.S.
  Finally, to allow for analysis of various government policies, we include the following taxes and transfers:
a proportional tax on firms' profits, a proportional progressive tax on labor income, unemployment benefits,
and transfers to labor force non-participants.
  Our modelling approach is related to the recent contributions by Eden and Gaggl (2018) and vom Lehn
(2019). These papers consider representative agent frameworks where labor supply is inelastic and the la-
bor choice is along the margin of which occupation to work in, without a labor force participation or an
unemployment margin. By contrast, given our interest in welfare and policy analysis, we consider a het-
erogeneous agent economy with an empirically realistic distribution of income: high-skill individuals own
capital and firms and low-skill individuals earn labor income and receive government transfers. Moreover,
individuals in our model are not assumed to work and may find themselves employed, unemployed, or out
of the labor force.
  These elements are crucial for the following reasons. First, the empirical analysis referenced above
suggested that labor force participation is the key margin of employment adjustment for the routine-type
workers. Second, allowing for heterogeneity in the economy, as well as labor force participation and unem-
ployment, is critical for the welfare analysis if one is to consider the implications of policy changes, such as
the effects of transfer payments to labor force non-participants, unemployment insurance, or employment
subsidies. Finally, in our framework all government insurance and redistribution programs (e.g., unemploy-
ment insurance and recent proposals for "universal basic income") must be financed through progressive
labor and capital/profit taxation. This permits us to use the model as a laboratory for policy evaluation.


3.1.    Final good producers

Perfectly competitive, final good firms produce a final good, Y with a constant returns to scale produc-
tion function, F (), using five inputs: intermediate goods (or service flows) produced using NRC, R, and
NRM labor denoted YNRC , YR , and YNRM , respectively; service flows from automation capital, XA , and non-
automation "physical capital" such as structures, K . Thus, the constant returns to scale production function
for the final good is:
                                             Yt = F (Kt , XA,t , YNRC,t , YR,t , YNRM,t )                                          (1)

  Final good producers accumulate physical and automation capital (which depreciate at rates K and A ,
respectively) and purchase the three intermediate goods from competitive markets at prevailing prices.10
The relative price of investment in non-automation capital is denoted K and the relative price of automation
  10 The model is isomorphic if we assume that the final good firm also rents the capital from intermediate capital services producers.



                                                                  9
capital is A , where the final good is the numeraire (PY = 1). Hence, denoting by the "prime notation" a next
period's variable, the firm's per-period profit is:

                 = Y - PRYR - PNRMYNRM - PNRCYNRC - A XA - (1 - A )XA - K K - (1 - K )K

with the prices of intermediate goods given by PR , PNRC , PNRM . The firm accumulates physical and automa-
tion capital and its dynamic problem is then given by

                              V (K , XA , ) =           max              (1 - T )  +  V K , XA , 
                                                 K ,XA ,YR ,YNRM ,YNRC

where T is a tax rate on firms' profits,  is the discount factor, and  = {K , A , T , PR , PNRM , PNRC } is
a vector that contains all the state variables that the representative firm takes as given, which are either
exogenously specified or determined in equilibrium.11 Moreover, since our analysis below is across steady
states we already impose the stochastic discount factor being equal to  .12


3.2.     Intermediate goods production

3.2.1.    Routine intermediate good producers

Intermediate good producers produce the routine intermediate good, YR and sell it to the final good firm. To
do so, they recruit routine workers in a frictional labor market. As we discuss below, each low-skill agent is
endowed with a pair of idiosyncratic productivity parameters, R and NRM , drawn from a joint distribution
 (R , NRM ); R (NRM ) denotes the idiosyncratic ability of the worker if employed in production of the R
(NRM) intermediate good. We assume that the labor markets for the low-skilled are frictional and fully
segmented by good i and ability  . That is, there is full information about worker abilities, which enables
unemployed workers and vacancies to meet in occupation-and-ability-specific matches.
   To avoid cluttered notation, we introduce the firm decision problem assuming steady state wages, thus
using R,R and R,NRM to represent wages paid for R workers with ability R and for NRM workers with
ability NRM respectively.13
  11 Because   profits are taxed net of investment costs, there are no equilibrium effects on optimal capital demand. For a a similar
approach see Abel (2007).
  12 In writing the firm's problem this way we already impose consistency conditions such that the optimal choice is identical

across firms and therefore represents the aggregate. As we show below, prices of intermediate goods are determined by the optimal
demand and therefore by aggregate quantities of the intermediate goods.
  13 Generally, this setup implies that within each occupation, wages are specific for each combination of  and 
                                                                                                           R     NRM . However,
as discussed in Section (4), our quantitative analysis will focus on steady state equilibrium, implying that there are no transitions
across occupations (only between employment and unemployment states within an occupation). Thus, in this case, the bargained
wage of an individual, within a given occupation, is not a function of her productivity in the other occupation.


                                                                   10
   Hence, hiring low-skill workers with idiosyncratic ability R (if these individuals endogenously decide
to work in the R occupation in equilibrium) to produce routine intermediate goods requires a firm to post
vacancies, vR , at flow cost of R per vacancy. A constant returns to scale matching function, M (vR , uR ),
determines the number of new matches given vacancies and the number of unemployed job searchers (uR )
                                                                                                                                vR
in this good-ability-specific market. As is standard in the literature, firms take the tightness ratio, R                       uR ,
and the vacancy filling probability q (R,R ) as given.
   A matched firm and worker (with ability R ) produce yR = fR R units of the R good, where fR is an
identical productivity parameter across all matches irrespective of R . This intermediate good is sold to the
final good producer at the competitive price PR per unit. The firm pays a bargained wage R,R to the worker.
Thus the flow profit from a match is PR fR R - R,R .
   Let xR denote the number of employed R workers with idiosyncratic productivity R . To derive the
optimality condition for vacancy creation, we assume--for expositional clarity--that there exists a repre-
sentative good-ability-specific firm that chooses vR to solve:

                        J (xR , ) = max (1 - T ) [xR (PR fR R - R ) - R vR ] +  J xR ,                            ,
                                         vR

subject to the law of motion:

                                                    xR = (1 -  ) xR + vR q (R ) .

Here  is the exogenous match separation probability (that is common across good-ability-specific matches).14
The quantity of efficiency-weighted R labor input is then given by:
                                                             NRM (R )
                           YR = fR (1 - PopNRC )                        ERR R  (R , NRM )d NRM d R ,                             (2)
                                                       R    -

where PopNRC denotes the population share of high-skilled workers,  (R , NRM ) denotes the density func-
                                                                       R            x
tion associated with the distribution function, , and ERR =                  denotes the employment rate (per
                                                                   (xR +uR )
labor force participant) for a given ability level, R (recall that xR denotes the measure of individuals with
ability R that are working while uR denotes the measure of individuals with ability R who are unemployed).
  14 The   first order condition implies the optimality condition for vacancy posting:

                                                 R                              R
                                                      =  PR fR R - R + (1 -  )               .
                                               q (R )                          q R

As with the case of capital taxation, because firm profits are taxed net of vacancy costs, there are no equilibrium effects of profit
taxation on low-skilled job creation. Moreover, the use of a representative firm is for convenience only. An identical optimal
condition can be derived when assuming a Bellman value for an open vacancy, a Bellman value for a filled job, and a zero profit
condition.


                                                                  11
  As shown in Section 4.2, the economy is characterized by an ability cutoff in the R and NRM occupa-
tional abilities as well as a function that determines in which occupation a worker works conditional on
                                                            denotes the cutoff ability in R such that all those
participating in the labor force. In Equation (2) the term R
with lesser ability do not work in R; the function NRM (R ) denotes the cutoff in ability NRM for each R
value such that below it, workers choose to work in R and not in NRM.
  The labor market for the NRM occupation is identical in structure to the R occupation and obeys the same
optimality principles. We do not repeat the exposition for brevity.


3.2.2.   Non-Routine Cognitive intermediate good producers

Since our primary interest is in the low-skilled labor market, we assume for simplicity's sake that the high-
skilled labor market has no matching frictions. High-skill workers make no occupational choice, work only
in NRC production, and are identical in ability (normalized to unity). The problem of the NRC intermediate
good producer is static:
                                      max fNRC PNRC xNRC - NRC xNRC ,
                                      xNRC

taking productivity, fNRC , and competitively determined prices, PNRC and NRC as given. This gives rise to
the simple marginal revenue product equals wage condition in equilibrium.


3.3.     Workers

In this subsection, we describe the dynamic optimization problem of high-skill and low-skill workers. All
workers are infinitely-lived and discount the future at rate 0 <  < 1.


3.3.1.   Non-Routine Cognitive workers

The results of Section 2 indicate that the high-skilled experience very low unemployment, unchanged over
time. Given this, we abstract from search-and-matching frictions. Our ultimate interest is in accounting
for the general equilibrium effects of various policy proposals, that must be financed through (progressive)
distortionary income taxation. We therefore opt to capture these distortions in the simplest way; specifically,
we model a labor supply margin of hours worked choice by the high-skilled that responds to variation in the
distortionary tax rate.
  Formally, an exogenously specified fraction of workers are high-skill (NRC) workers, with preferences
over consumption, CNRC denoted by the utility U (CNRC ), and derive disutility from hours spent working,




                                                      12
LNRC denoted by G (LNRC ).15 They earn NRC per hour worked and are taxed on labor income at the rate
TNRC . High-skill workers save in the form of an asset that represents claims to profits of intermediate goods
firms. Let BNRC denote the beginning of period value of such claims (the sum of dividends and resale value)
that are traded at price p. Then, NRC workers solve:

                          VNRC (BNRC , ) = max U (CNRC ) - G (LNRC ) +  VNRC BNRC , 
                                               CNRC ,B
                          s.t.: CNRC + pBNRC = LNRC NRC (1 - TNRC ) + pBNRC


3.3.2.      Routine and Non-Routine Manual workers

Let (R , NRM ) denote a worker's (constant) idiosyncratic ability draw pair. Given these draws an unmatched
low-skill worker simultaneously chooses whether to participate in the labor market or not and, conditional
on participating, in which occupational labor market to search. Let Ve,R ,NRM () denote the value of being
an employed R worker for a worker with the productivities (R , NRM ) where we remind the reader that
 = {K , A , T , PR , PNRM , PNRC }, denotes the collection of aggregate state variables that workers take para-
metrically; for simplicity's sake we denote the chosen occupation for such an individual by the first subscript
of the two productivities draw. Then, similarly, Vu,R ,NRM () denotes the value of being an unemployed R
worker for such an individual, Ve,NRM ,R () the value of being an employed NRM worker for this individ-
ual, and Vu,NRM ,R () is the value of being an unemployed NRM worker for this individual. Let the value of
labor force non-participation be VO (), The value of being employed as an R worker is then given by:

            Ve,R ,NRM () = U (Ce,R ) +   max Vu,R ,NRM  , Vu,NRM ,R  , VO                                 +

                                 (1 -  ) max Ve,R ,NRM  , Vu,R ,NRM  , Vu,NRM ,R  , VO                                .

Current period consumption, Ce,R , must satisfy the budget constraint:

                                                    Ce,R = R (1 - TR ) ,

where R denotes the wage (low-skill workers supply one unit of labor inelastically when employed), and
TR is the income tax rate.
  Routine matches separate with exogenous probability  . If the match separates, the worker chooses
whether to leave or remain in the labor force in the following period; in the latter case, the worker also
chooses whether to search for employment in the R or NRM occupation. If the match does not separate, the
  15 For   exposition clarity we assume separability in consumption and leisure as we assume this formulation in our quantitative
work.



                                                                13
worker has the choice of remaining matched in the following period, leaving to unemployment, or leaving
the labor force. Given our interest in steady state comparison, an employed worker will never switch from
employment in one sector to another.
  An unemployed worker searching for a match in the R occupation meets a vacancy with probabil-
ity µ (R ). Upon meeting, the worker chooses whether to match and become employed, remain un-
matched/unemployed, or leave the labor force. The dynamic problem of an unemployed worker is:

       Vu,R ,NRM () = U (Cu,R ) +  (1 - µ (R )) max Vu,R ,NRM  , Vu,NRM ,R  , VO                      +

                         µ (R ) max Ve,R ,NRM  , Vu,R ,NRM  , Vu,NRM ,R  , VO                     ,

subject to:

                                                Cu,R = bR ,

where b denotes the (net of tax) unemployment insurance replacement rate for a worker with R ability,
R . The problem for workers who are employed in the NRM occupation, or unemployed and choose to
search in this occupation, is identical in structure to that just described, except with R-subscripts replaced
by NRM-subscripts and vice versa.
  A worker who is out of the labor force chooses whether to remain a non-participant, or become unem-
ployed in either R or NRM. We assume that the transfer to labor force non-participants is constant and
independent of ability. Hence, the dynamic problem is:

                 VO () = U (CO ) +  max Vu,R ,NRM  , Vu,NRM ,R  , VO                       ,

subject to:

                                                  CO = bo .

Here, bo denotes (net of tax) government transfers to non-participants. Although non-participants receive
the same income, they have different abilities,  , and face differing likelihoods of labor force participation
following a change in the economy.


3.4.   Wage bargaining

A match between an intermediate good firm and a worker generates a positive surplus that must be split.
As is common in the literature, we assume the Nash bargaining solution to surplus division. We present the
Nash bargaining problem for an R match; the exposition for an NRM match is analogous.

                                                     14
  The surplus for a firm is the marginal value of employing an additional worker:

                       J (xR , )                                        J xR , 
                                 = (1 - T ) ( fR R PR - R ) + (1 -  )                         .
                          x R                                              xR

The surplus for an employed worker with idiosyncratic ability R is:

                   ~R () = Ve,R ,NRM () - [max {Vu,R ,NRM () , Vu,NRM ,R () , VO ()}] .
                   V

The worker's outside option is the optimal choice between searching for a new match in either the R or
NRM occupation, or labor force non-participation.
  Denoting the worker's bargaining weight by  and the firm's by 1 -  , the wage for a worker employed
in R with ability R is the solution to:
                                                                   J (xR , )   1-
                                              ~R ()
                                          max V                                     .                         (3)
                                           R                          xR

In Section 4 we impose functional form assumptions that allow for an analytic solution for the resulting
wage function.


3.5.     Government budget constraint

Total unemployment insurance transfers to low-skill workers searching for NRM employment is given by:
                                                       R (NRM )
                 UINRM = (1 - PopNRC )                            URNRM bNRM  (R , NRM )d R d NRM ,
                                             NRM -

                                       uNRM
where URNRM = 1 - ERNRM =          (xNRM +uNRM )       is the unemployment rate at ability level NRM . Similarly,
transfers to unemployed R workers is:
                                                      NRM (R )
                    UIR = (1 - PopNRC )                          URNRM bR  (R , NRM )d NRM d R ,
                                             R        -

                               uR
where URR = 1 - ERR =       (xR +uR ) .   Letting NLF denote the measure of low-skill workers outside the labor
force:
                                                  R    NRM
                                  NLF =                       (R , NRM )d NRM d R ,
                                               - -

total government transfers to this group is NLFbo .
  Government revenues are derived from labor and profit taxation. Labor taxes collected from employed
NRM and R workers is given by:
                                                      R (NRM )
             RevNRM = (1 - PopNRC )                              ERNRM TNRM NRM  (R , NRM )d R d NRM ,
                                           NRM -


                                                                 15
and :
                                                   NRM (R )
                   RevR = (1 - PopNRC )                       ERR TR R  (R , NRM )d NRM d R ,
                                            R     -

respectively. Labor taxes collected from NRC workers is:

                                       RevNRC = PopNRC LNRC NRC TNRC .

  Revenue from the tax on profits of intermediate producers in the NRM and R occupations is given by:
                                       R (NRM )
RevNRM = (T ) (1 - PopNRC )                       [xNRM ( fNRM NRM PNRM - NRM ) - NRM vNRM ]  (R , NRM )d R d NRM ,
                               NRM -

                                           NRM (R )
         RevR = (T ) (1 - PopNRC )                    [xR ( fR R PR - R ) - R vR ]  (R , NRM )d NRM d R .
                                       R   -

Tax revenue from the final good producer is given by:

        Rev = T Y - PRYR - PNRMYNRM - PNRCYNRC - A XA - (1 - A )XA - K K - (1 - K )K                        .

  The government does not borrow or save, so that at each point in time the following budget constraint
holds:
               NLFbo + UINRM + UIR = RevNRC + RevR + RevNRM + Rev + RevR + RevNRM .                             (4)


3.6.     Equilibrium

To summarize the structure of the model, an exogenously specified fraction of workers are high-skilled.
They supply their labor in a frictionless labor market to the the NRC intermediate good and receive a market
wage equal to their marginal revenue product.
  Each low-skill agent is endowed with a pair of idiosyncratic productivity parameters, R and NRM , drawn
from a joint distribution  (R , NRM ). The labor markets for the low-skilled are frictional and fully seg-
mented by good i and ability i , for i = {R, NRM }.
  Unemployed low-skill workers choose whether to search in the R or NRM labor market or to leave
the labor force. Low-skill workers work for profit-maximizing intermediate producers. Producers decide
whether to maintain vacancies and, if so, in which good-and-ability specific market. Given equilibrium
prices, outside options, and government policies, intermediate good firms choose vacancies optimally. Free
entry implies zero lifetime profits.
  Hence, formally, given productivities, {Z , K , A fR , fNRM , fNRC }, the distribution of low-skill abilities,
(R , NRM ), and the population fraction of high-skill workers, PopNRC , a symmetric stationary equilibrium
with Nash bargaining is a collection of:

                                                          16
   · intermediate good prices, {PNRC , PR , PNRM }, and prices on equity claims { p};

   · wages {NRC } and {R , NRM } for all R , NRM ;

   · tightness ratios, {R , NRM }, and vacancies, {vR , vNRM }, for all R , NRM ;

   · worker quantities, {CNRC , LNRC , BNRC , Co } and {Ce,R , Cu,R , Ce,NRM , Cu,NRM } for all R , NRM ;

   · labor input, xNRC and {xR , xNRM } for all R , NRM ;

   · firm quantities, {Y , YNRC , YR , YNRM , K , XA }; and

   · policy, {T , TNRC , b, bo } and {TR , TNRM } for all R , NRM

such that

   · final good and intermediate good firms are profit maximizing (and in particular, physical capital ac-
      cumulation, automation capital accumulation, and vacancy creation are optimal),

   · workers are utility maximizing (specifically, high-skill workers are making saving and labor supply
      decisions, and low-skill workers are making participation and occupational choices optimally),

   · R and NRM wages solve their respective Nash bargaining problems,

   · the final good market clears:
                                                      NRM (R )
      Y = PopNRCCNRC + 1 - PopNRC                                ERR Ce,R + URR Cu,R + R vR  (R , NRM )d NRM d R
                                                R    -
                                     R (NRM )
                          +                     ERNRM Ce,NRM + URNRM Cu,NRM + NRM vNRM  (R , NRM )d R d NRM
                              NRM -
                               R    NRM
                          +               Co  (R , NRM )d NRM d R + A XA - (1 - A )XA + K K - (1 - K )K
                              - -


   · labor market of the three factors of production clears,

   · the equity market clears: B = 1, and

   · the government's budget constraint is satisfied.




                                                          17
4.      Construction of steady state equilibrium

In this section we characterize the steady state equilibrium. We highlight a set of sufficient assumptions that
imply that unemployment rates do not vary as automation capital prices fall. These conditions allow us to
match the empirical unemployment patterns documented in Section 2. The three conditions are: (i) a con-
stant relative risk aversion (hereafter CRRA) function, U (.), (ii) vacancy costs, R , NRM for all R , NRM ,
that are proportional to productivity, and (iii) income for low-skill labor force participants that is propor-
tional to their wage (i.e., unemployment benefits specified as a replacement rate relative to the wage when
employed) as modelled above. When turning to the policy analysis in section 7 we remove this last assump-
tion when relevant so that unemployment can respond to policy changes. We refer the reader to Appendix
A.5 for the derivations of the expressions in this section.


4.1.     Wages and tightness ratios

Recall the bargaining problem characterizing the R occupation, equation (3). As we show in Appendix A.5,
the resulting wage for an R worker with ability R is:
                                        1-     U (Ce,R ) - U (Cu,R )
                       R = fR R PR -                                        + R R
                                          U (Ce,R ) (1 - TR ) - U (Cu,R ) b
This is an increasing function of the worker's marginal revenue product, fR R PR , as well as labor market
tightness, R , which reflects the outside option for the worker. Unlike the standard DMP model with risk
neutrality, the wage is also affected by the utility and marginal utility differences between employed and
unemployed workers.
     As shown in Appendix A.5, given our sufficient set of assumptions, the equilibrium tightness ratio in the
R market (similar expressions hold for the NRM market as well) is independent of productivities and capital
prices and it implicitly solves:
                                                       
                                                                (1- )
                             1 -    (1 -  )       R             (1- )
                                            +    (1- )
                                                        0 =            , R .                               (5)
                                 q (R )       1+     (1- )   1 + (1- )       (1- )

where 0 > 0 is an exogenous parameter. Thus, the model yields a constant tightness ratio for each oc-
cupation in steady state, even as automation technology changes, making it consistent with the empirical
patterns of the unemployment rate discussed in Section 2. It then follows that the wage function (6) results
in a simple and tractable expression that is linear in worker ability, R
                                               1
                                     R =           - )
                                                         [ fR + R,R fR 0 ] R PR .                          (6)
                                           1 + ((1
                                                 1- )


                                                         18
4.2.   Productivity cutoffs

In Appendix A.6 we show that the steady state values of unemployment can be expressed as:

                                              ( fR PR R )1-
                              Vu,R ,NRM =                         R (R ),
                                                   1-
                                              ( fNRM PNRM NRM )1-
                              Vu,NRM ,R =                                    NRM (NRM ),
                                                      1-
for all R , NRM where    R (R )   and   NRM (NRM )      are functions of exogenous parameters. This permits us
to establish the following results. Recall that transfers to labor force non-participants are independent of
                                                                                                           and
ability, so the value of non-participation is independent of ability. We can thus solve for cutoff values R
NRM such that a worker with ability  = (R , NRM ) below both cutoffs prefers labor force non-participation.
These cutoffs are given by:
                                                                    1
                                                  1          bo    1-
                                          R   =                         ,
                                                fR PR         R
                                                                              1
                                                    1                  bo    1-
                                        NRM   =                                   .
                                                fNRM PNRM              NRM

  Those who draw  above either cutoff (or both) choose to participate in the labor market. Which occu-
pation the worker searches in is determined by the values of unemployment, Vu,R and Vu,NRM . Specifically,
               ) there exists an 
for each R (> R                  ^NRM such that for NRM < ^NRM , the worker chooses unemployment in R,
and for NRM  ^NRM the worker searches in NRM. This cutoff is the solution to:

                              ( fR PR R )1-          ( fNRM PNRM NRM )1-
                                                R=                                    NRM ,
                                   1-                        1-
implying a linear function of the form:
                                                                   1
                                                         R
                                                                  1-      fR PR
                                   ^NRM (R ) =
                                                                                 R .
                                                     NRM               fNRM PNRM
This result is important from a computational perspective since it implies that the bounds of the various
integrals in the model are linear. That, together with tightness ratios being constant, implies that we can
solve for the equilibrium allocations and perform welfare calculations exploiting these closed form results,
even though the model features curvature in utility and production, and frictions in the labor market.


4.3.   Welfare

What does a decline in the price of automation capital mean for welfare? A direct effect of this increased
productivity is greater aggregate output. At the same time, depending on the substitutability of workers of

                                                             19
different types with automation capital, it can result in "winners and losers." In this section we show that,
despite the rich model heterogeneity, our assumptions enable us to derive simple closed form solutions that
characterize the changes in welfare due to the impact of advances in automation technology. The discussion
centers on welfare changes for previously routine workers,
     Consider those who choose the routine occupational market both pre- and post-automation. As we show
in Appendix A.7, their ratio of post- to pre-automation welfare is given by:
                                                             NEW
                                                            PR
                                             ROLD RNEW =      OLD
                                                                  ,
                                                            PR
In other words, the change in welfare is exactly the change in prices that final goods producers pay for routine
labor input; these prices are translated 1-to-1 to routine worker wages, their consumption, and (consumption
equivalent) welfare.
     Welfare change derivations for those who switch occupations or labor force status result in the simple
expressions that follow (details are provided in Appendix A.7). First, the welfare change due to automation
for those who switched form R to NRM is given by
                                                                   R     OLD NRM NEW
                                                       NEW E (
                                                 fNRM PNRM    NRM )
                              ROLD NRMNEW =                          OLD NRM NEW
                                                        OLD E ( )R
                                                    fR PR      R
                       OLD NRM NEW
where where E (R )R                  denotes the average ability In R of those who switch from R to NRM,
and equivalently E (NRM )   ROLD NRM NEW   denotes the average ability In NRM of those who switch from R to
NRM.
     Finally, the average change in welfare for R workers who leave the labor force is given by
                                                             ,R    OLD
                                                             R
                                      ROLD NLF NEW =             OLD NLF NEW
                                                       E (R )R
     Similar expression holds for labor force participants in the NRM occupation and for those out of the labor
force participants who enter into the labor force (either in the R or NRM occupation). These closed form
solutions, described in Appendix A.7, greatly simplify the calculation of welfare and how it change across
steady states.


5.      Calibration

In this section we calibrate the model economy, which targets, in general, pre-automation moments. Based
on this calibration we evaluate below the impact of different policies in the face of advancing automation
technology. This section begins with a discussion of model parameterization. Table 1 lists the various
parameters and their values.

                                                       20
                                          Table 1: Calibration
         Parameter               Value    Target
    Ability Distribution
            µNRM                    1
                                          Normalization
             µR                     1
           NRM                   0.9803
                                          Occupations allocations and variance of observed wages
             R                   0.7436
           R,NRM                    0     See text for details
        Preferences
                                 0.9957   Monthly frequency; rannual = 0.05
                                    1     log utility
Labor Frisch Elasticity (NRC)      0.5    Chetty et al. (2013)
  Labor Market Frictions
                                  0.02    Monthly exit rate 1989
    elasticity of matches to v    0.5     Pissarides and Petrongolo (2001)
    Taxes and Transfers
           bNNRC                  0.5     Maximum allowed, US 1989
             bo                  .0813    Marginal worker indifferent between NLF and unemployment
           TNRM                  0.137
             TR                  0.137    Average group tax rates
            TNRC                 0.267
    Depreciation Rates
           K                     0.0051
                                          see Eden and Gaggl (2018)
            A                    0.0174
      Prices of Capital
             K                      1
             A                    0.77    Eden and Gaggl (2018)
            2017
            A
            1989
            A
                                 0.3244   Fall in ICT prices 1989-2017 (see Eden and Gaggl (2018))
   Production Function:
   Shares and Elasticities
                                  .1099   Labor share, Routine Labor Share, ICT capital In-
                                 0.8154   come share, 1989; and consistency restriction (see
             fR                  0.3022
                                          Equation 8)
                                   0.98
                                  0.31    Physical capital income share (see Eden and Gaggl (2018))
                                  0.46
                                          Split of R workers between NLF and NRM and  XA
             1                    -1.1                                                A




                                                   21
Ability distribution We assume the work ability distribution,  (R , NRM ), to be jointly log normal.
Hence, there are five parameters to specify: two standard deviations, two means, and one correlation. Let
R (µR ) be the standard deviation (mean) of the R ability, NRM (µNRM ) be the standard deviation (mean)
of the NRM ability, and R ,NRM be the correlation between abilities. We note that the model is "scale free":
the means of the distribution are irrelevant and we normalize them to unity. The correlation between the two
abilities cannot be identified in the data. As such, we solve the model for various values of the correlation,
R ,NRM . Quantitatively, all of the results that we present here and in the policy experiments are virtually
identical for different values of  . As such we proceed with a benchmark value of R ,NRM = 0 and present
robustness results in Appendix A.8
  We identify the standard deviations, R and NRM , iteratively as follows. Given initial guesses for these
                                              and  
two parameters, we find the ability cutoffs, R    NRM , such that the model delivers the observed shares

of low-skill workers (as identified in Section 2) in the routine and non-routine manual occupations in 1989
(with the share in labor force non-participation simply the residual).
  Then, given the linearity of the wage and integral bounds in ability, R , discussed in Section 4, the log of
the routine wage can be written as:
                                          logR = logD + log(R ),

where D denotes a costant that is identical for all R . This implies that the log wage is distributed:

                                        log R  N (µR + log D, R ) ,

and thus, the variance of observed wages is given by:
                                                                                      
                    Var (log R,R | log R > log R ) = Var (log D + log R | log R > log R )

Since that D is a constant, this results in a truncated bivariate log normal variance:
                                                                  
                                         Var (log R | log R > log R ),

with a similar expressions for the variance of observed NRM wages. We iterate on the guesses of the standard
deviations until the resulting truncated wages in the model match those in the data (the standard deviation of
the log observed wages for Routine workers in the data in 1989 is 0.487, while that for NRM equals 0.492).


Preferences The model is calibrated to a monthly frequency. We set  = 0.9957, targeting an average
                                                                         C1-
annual risk free interest rate of 5%. We assume CRRA flow utility        1- ,   and set  = 1 so that preferences
are logarithmic in consumption. Finally, recall that NRC/high-skill workers supply labor along the intensive
margin. Their separable preferences over hours worked feature a Frisch labor supply elasticity of 0.5 (see
Chetty et al. (2013)).

                                                      22
Frictional labor market parameters We set the exogenous monthly separation rate,  , equal to the 1989
rate of 0.02; this is the monthly transition rate from employment to unemployment in the CPS for workers
whose last occupation was R or NRM. We assume a Cobb-Douglas matching function in each occupation-
ability-specific market, with symmetric elasticity with respect to vacancies and unemployed, equal to 0.5
(e.g., Pissarides and Petrongolo (2001)). Without loss of generality, we assume an identical matching ef-
ficiency across all markets equal to 1. We calibrate the vacancy cost parameter, 0 such that the resulting
employment rate across the low-skill workers matches the evidence in Table A4 of 0.95; this implies a
monthly job finding rate of 0.38 in all markets in the steady state. The calibration of  , the bargaining power
of the worker, is detailed below with the discussion of the production function parameters.


Government transfers There are two types of transfers in the model to low-skill workers: unemployment
insurance, specified as a replacement rate of occupation-and-ability specific earnings, and transfers to labor
force non-participants. We set the replacement rate for all workers types to 0.5 which is the maximum
allowed value in the U.S. The transfer to non-participants is set internally to ensure that, when calibrated
                                                                      ,  
to match the 1989 shares of workers in R, NRM, and NLF, the marginal (R NRM ) worker is indifferent

between participating in the labor force and being unemployed.16


Taxes Government transfers are funded by taxes on profit and labor income. The labor tax schedule is
progressive. We set the tax on unemployment and non-participant transfer income to zero. The tax rate
on NRM and R labor income is set at TR = TNRM = 0.137, approximately the average tax rate across the
second to fourth quintiles of income, while for high-skill/NRC tax rate is set at TNRC = 0.267 which is the
average federal tax rate for the fifth quintile of income. These tax rates are based on the estimates in the
Congressional Budget Office distribution of household income in 2015.                       17



Relative prices of automation capital Our measure of advances in automation technology is how much
the relative price of automation capital fell between 1989 and 2017 (or, equivalently, the increased productiv-
ity in transforming final goods into automation capital, 1/A ). Given our quantitative goal, we need to focus
on a tangible measure of automation and its technological progress. In the literature there are two strands:
  16 To   put this into context, the resulting value of steady state consumption of the least able worker is equal to 0.37 of the average
R wage.
  17 At each calculation of a steady state equilibrium (before and after the decline in automation capital price) we allow the profit

tax rate, T , to adjust such that it balances the government budget constraint. Since investment is fully deducted in the model,
this change has no effect on the economy. For all policy experiments we keep this tax rate constant and balance the budget with
distortionary labor taxation on the NRC group.


                                                                   23
one that concentrates on information-and-communication-technology (ICT) capital, which has been shown
to capture various aggregate trends when embedded into a macroeconomic model (e.g., shares in overall in-
vestment and labor shares of national income; see Eden and Gaggl (2018)).The second focuses on robotics
(see Graetz and Michaels (2018)).
   What has happened to the relative prices of both of these series? With respect to ICT capital, the ICT
                                                                                                 2017 =
price, over our period of interest and based on the estimate in in Eden and Gaggl (2018) fell to A
      1989 .18 Interestingly, similar magnitudes are seen in the changes of robot pricing. Specifically,
0.3244A
Graetz and Michaels (2018) show that the unit price of robots in the US has declined by about 60% between
1990 and 2005 (see their Figure 1). So both measures suggest a similar degree in the change of automation
capital.
   The specific parameters of the production function we use below are based on the ICT data because, to
carry out our quantitative exercise, we need to calibrate (i) automation capital depreciation rates, and (ii)
production function parameters to match income shares. This data is available for ICT data, but to the best
of our knowledge, is non-existent for Robotics. Finally, based on Eden and Gaggl (2018), we set the relative
price of non-automation physical capital to K = 1.


Depreciation rates We use the specific annual capital depreciation rates estimated by Eden and Gaggl
(2018). They imply a monthly depreciation rate of A = 1.74% for automation capital, and K = 0.51% on
non-automation capital.


Production function parameters Sspecifications suggested in the polarization empirical literature, such
as Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003) and Autor and Dorn (2013), and in the recent optimal robot's tax policy
analysis as in Guerreiro, Rebelo and Telels (2019), form the basis of our assumptions that automation capital
is a substitute for the R labor input and a relative complement to NRC workers. As such, we assume that
(XA , YR ) form a composite good, which is then aggregated with the remaining factors.19 Specifically, we
assume aggregate output is produced via
                                                                                             (1- )(1- )
                                                                                         1
                                            (1- )             1                                 1
                               Yt = Kt YNRM,t       (1 -  ) YNRC ,t +  XA + YR,t
                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                 (7)
  18 We   note that the estimates in Eden and Gaggl (2018) end in 2013. We extrapolate both the price series and capital series until
2017 based on the median growth rate in these two series in the post Great Recession period. As a robustness check we note that dur-
ing period they overlap the relative chained price index of private fixed investment in information processing equipment and software
behave in an almost identical way to the Eden and Gaggl (2018) series. See https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/B679RG3Q086SBEA.
  19 An alternative CES specification is one where the the composite good is formed between automation capital and NR workers.

See for example Krusell et al. (2000) and Eden and Gaggl (2018)


                                                                   24
where  governs the degree of substitution between R labor and automation capital, and 1 governs the
elasticity of substitution between the (XA , YR ) composite and NRC labor. We also assume that aggregate
production is Cobb-Douglas with respect to non-automation capital, K . Moreover, Eden and Gaggl (2018)
demonstrate that the NRM labor share of national income has not changed during our period of interest. As
such, we assume that NRM input, YNRM , is also Cobb-Douglas in production.
     The parameters  ,  , fR , fNRM ,  also determine various income shares. We normalize fNRM = 1. The data
moments we match to identify the remaining four parameters are the shares of total labor income, Routine
labor income, ICT capital income in GDP, and the fact that, when calibrated to 1989, pre-polarization values,
the ratio of ability cutoffs must satisfy:
                                                                                    1
                                                 NRM   PR fR                       1-
                                                                             R
                                                   = P                                  ,                                        (8)
                                                 R    NRM f NRM            NRM

in steady state equilibrium.20
     The remaining two parameters cannot be identified from first moments in the data:  , which controls the
elasticity of substitution between automation capital and R labor services, and 1 , which controls the elas-
ticity of substitution between YNRC and the (XA , YR ) composite. To calibrate them, we feed in the observed
automation capital price fall and iterate over  and 1 such that we match two moments: (i) the percentage
change in in automation capital (i.e. we match the elasticity of automation capital to its relative price), and
(ii) our Section 2 result of the 0.63/0.37 split between NLF and NRM in accounting for the decline in R
employment propensity among the low-skilled.


6.     The welfare impact

What are the welfare implications of advances in automation technology? And what welfare and allocational
effects do different policies have? To come to an answer to the first question we calculate the welfare impact
of the drop in the relative price of automation capital; in the next section we evaluate different policies.
     To quantify the change in consumption equivalent welfare we proceed as follows: we first simulate a
billion low-skill individuals, drawing abilities from the calibrated joint log normal distribution. Given the
                                        ,NEW     ,NEW
post-automation equilibrium cutoffs for R    and NRM  we then calculate the new steady state measures
of NLF, R, and NRM as:

                                                    ,NEW        ,NEW
                                     NLF NEW = I R  R    I NRM  NRM
  20 This   is akin to an RBC model where the disutility scaling parameter on labor supply is calibrated to match a given fraction of
time spent in market activity in steady state.


                                                                  25
                                                                        ,NEW
                          NRM NEW = I (log(mnew ) + log(R )  log(2 )) I NRM   NRM
                                                                          ,NEW
                              RNEW = I (log(mnew ) + log(R ) > log(2 )) I R     R
                                                          ,NEW
                                                          NR
where I (.) is an indicator function and mnew =           ,NEW   . We identify those low-skill individuals who choose to
                                                          R
remain in their original occupation, and those who switch occupations or leave the labor force. In particular,
as we discuss below, the model, following the automation capital price change, predicts three groups of
switchers: (i) those used to be R and become NLF, (ii) those who used to be R and become NRM, and (iii)
those who used to be NLF and become NRM. Based on the welfare expressions of the different groups in the
economy discussed in Section 4.3, we calculate the percentage change in consumption-equivalent welfare
due to automation for each group separately.


Impact of automation Before discussing the welfare impact, we find it instructive to consider the effects
of the automation capital price drop on the economy as, naturally, they underlie the welfare impact. These
results are summarized in Table 2.
   Overall, aggregate output increases by slightly more than 10 percent. This output rise masks the distribu-
tional consequences of the price decline of automation capital. Specifically, with respect to the magnitude
of the fall in R, we find that the model economy reduces the likelihood of the low-skilled working in R by
7.85p.p.21 This transition away from R into NRM and NLF is fueled by a deterioration in the relative return
for working as R. Specifically, the model generates a a fall of 7.4% in the wage per efficiency unit of routine
labor, R , and an increase of 4.2% in the wage per efficiency units of NRM labor, NRM .22 Overall, the fall
in "quantities" (fall in likelihood of working in R) coupled with the decline in "prices" (wages), results, as
in the data, in the share of GDP accruing to R declining, while the share of income accruing to NRC labor
increases by more than double the drop in aggregate labor.23
  21 As   discussed in Section 2, and shown in Tables A4 - A5, unconditionally, the fall in the likelihood was 16 p.p. between 1989
and 2017. Thus, the model, when driven by the ICT price change, accounts for about half of this fall.
  22 These efficiency measures, of course, are not the empirically observed measures. As such, using the equilibrium efficiency

wages, cutoffs, and employment rates, we construct the average wages (conditional on working in the economy), E (R ), and
E (NRM ). Indeed one of the stylized facts associated with job polarization is the decline in the wage gap between middle-class
routine jobs and low-wage non-routine manual jobs. Based on CPS outgoing rotation group data, the relative average hourly wage
of R to NRM workers fell by about 10 percent during our period of interest. A similar fall, of approximately 12 percent, is observed
in average hourly wages constructed from the March annual earning supplement of the CPS. We are grateful to Paul Gaggl for
sharing this data with us.
  23 Similar patterns are observed in the empirical analysis in Eden and Gaggl (2018).




                                                                 26
                                        Table 2: Model Performance
                                                                                 Data     Model
              Employment
              % change in routine share (out of N-NRC)                            -16     -7.85

              Income Shares (% of GDP)
              p.p. change: Total                                                 -4.30    -2.39
              p.p. change: Routine                                               -9.51    -6.00
              p.p. change: Non-Routine Cognitive                                 4.17      3.50
              Wages
              % change in avg. wage gap: Routine/Non-Routine-Manual             -10.00    -3.60


   Notes: All changes are between 1989 and 2017; see Eden and Gaggl (2018) for income shares by occupation.


Welfare of previously routine workers There are three groups of interest among individuals who previ-
ously labored as R workers: those who remain working in R and those who switch out of R to either NLF or
NRM. The bottom panel of Column 1 in Table 3 reports the welfare effects of these three different groups
in response to the decline in the price of automation capital.
  First, recall from the discussion in Section 4.3 that for those who remain working in R, the change in
welfare is exactly the change in prices that final-good producers pay for routine labor input; these prices are
translated 1-to-1 to routine worker wages, their consumption, and (consumption-equivalent) welfare. These
workers who remain in R suffer a 6.5% drop in welfare (see bottom panel of Column 1, Table 3).
  How does the welfare of those who switch occupations or labor force status change? Some R workers
have relatively high NRM abilities; post-automation, they switch into NRM (as opposed to remaining R or
leaving the labor force). Yet these workers experience an average decline in welfare as well (though less of
one than those who remain R); it amounts to 1% in consumption-equivalent terms. Other formerly R have
relatively low NRM ability. After the return to R employment drops, they choose to exit the labor force.
This group suffers an average welfare deterioration of 4% as reported in the bottom panel of Column 1,
Table 3.


All other workers Since NRM labor input complements automation capital, the return to working (and
searching) in that occupation rises. In the new steady state, all those previously in NRM choose to stay in it.
Welfare increases by 5% for the average NRM remainer.
  For most low-skill individuals out of the labor force, the automation capital price decline does not affect



                                                      27
their participation choice. Since government transfers, bo , are unchanged, their welfare is as well. But
those with sufficiently high NRM ability respond to the higher return to NRM labor by switching to and
participating in the NRM occupational market. The average welfare of this group goes up 3.2%.
     Finally, high-skill workers benefit the most from the advances of automation technology. Their consumption-
equivalent welfare improves by 22%. This is not surprising since NRC labor input complements automation
capital in production and since they are the "capitalists" who hold all firm equity in the economy.


7.      Policy experiments

Having ascertained that automation produces an important quantitative welfare impact, we use our model
economy as a laboratory to consider a variety of government policy responses to it and their consequences
for equilibrium allocations and welfare.
     We consider two sets of policies. First, we study the effects of a retraining program aimed at improving the
work ability (in a distributional sense) of the low-skilled. Second, we look at a broader set of redistribution
policies that target transfers to the low-skilled. A number of these, such as reforms to the unemployment
insurance system and the introduction of a universal basic income, have been discussed in the context of
ameliorating inequality and aiding those most negatively affected by automation.24


7.1.      Retraining program

Our first policy experiment changes the ability distribution of low-skill workers in the face of automation.
We consider a change in the marginal distribution of NRM ability (leaving the marginal distribution of R
unchanged), which captures the idea of training low-skill workers to do non-routine manual work.25 In this
                                                                                                         ,NEW
retraining policy, we target those who are out of the labor force (i.e. whose ability below both cutoffs R
    ,NEW
and NRM  ) in the 2017, post-automation steady state.26
  24   Before proceeding, we note that it is possible to completely undo all of the equilibrium effects of the fall in A , through the
introduction of a tax on purchases of automation capital, A . Increasing A to exactly offset the fall in A , leaving the effective
automation price unchanged, would return the economy to its pre-automation steady state values.
  25 The closest existing federal program would be the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program assisting workers in firms

hurt by foreign trade. Among other benefits, this program pays for retraining. See for example the 2015 TAA benefits page:
https://www.doleta.gov/tradeact/benefits/2015-amendment-benefits.cfm
   26 We view this as an empirically relevant exercise based on Card, Kluve and Weber (2018) who conduct a meta analysis of

training programs, and find that training programs generally affect employment over longer horizons, with larger effect for the
long-term unemployed (see, for example, Tables 3 and 9). These latter individuals are the most similar to the targeted individuals
in our model analysis.



                                                                  28
                                                Table 3: Policy Experiments


                                                   Automation Capital          Retraining        UI        UBI        NLF       Taxation
                                                        Change                                                       Benefits
        Cutoffs
1)        R                                                  6.70                 -0.22         -3.95     10.77        26.37      -9.66
2)          
          NRM                                               -4.84                 4.00          -4.51     9.45         26.66     -10.24
         Labor states
3)         NLF                                              2.19                  -2.21        -2.20        5.84       15.12     -5.18
4)        R                                                 -3.82                  0.27         1.57       -4.69      -11.52      3.81
5)         NRM                                              1.64                   1.94         0.64       -1.15       -3.60      1.37
6)         Emp. Rate R                                      0.95                  0.95         0.945       0.946        0.95     0.95
7)         Emp. Rate NRM                                    0.95                  0.95         0.945       0.946        0.95     0.95
8)        YNRC                                               1.23                 0.37          0.13      -13.87       -8.03     -2.06
9)        YR                                                -3.72                  0.60        -0.11       -5.03      -12.37      3.13
10)       YNRM                                               7.14                 5.02         -0.75       -4.01      -13.18     3.90
11)      GDP                                                11.98                  1.02         -0.06     -10.42      -10.04     0.29
12)      NRC labor tax                                       0.00                 -1.51         -0.50     35.19        25.00     9.98
         Wages
13)       R                                                 -6.70                 0.22           0.14      -7.22        3.42     -4.19
14)       NRM                                                4.84                 -4.00         0.70       -5.90        3.14     -3.61
15)       NRC                                               23.24                 0.83          -0.30       7.50       -3.79     4.45
16)       NRC : after tax                                   23.24                 0.85          0.11      -12.80      -10.64     -2.82
Welfare: Consumption Equivalence
17)     : ROld  RNew                                        -6.48                  1.23         1.75        6.23        3.48     10.13
18)     : ROld  NRM New                                     -0.95                  NA           2.56      11.69         NA       10.45
19)     : ROld  NLF New                                     -4.01                  NA           NA        26.25        16.69      NA
20)     : NRM Old  RNew                                      NA                   -1.17         NA          NA          3.33      NA
21)     : NRM Old  NRM New                                   4.96                 -3.25         2.43        7.43        3.18     10.78
22)     : NRM Old  NLF New                                   NA                   -1.99         NA         27.12       16.64      NA
23)     : NLF Old  RNew                                      NA                    0.00         2.24        NA          NA        5.79
24)     : NLF Old  NRM New                                  3.17                  9.23          2.51        NA          NA       6.09
25)     : NLF Old  NLF New                                  0.00                  0.00          0.00       34.05       34.71     0.00
26)     : NRCOld  NRCNew                                    22.64                 1.98          0.07      -21.89      -22.99     -4.98

      Notes: (i)  denotes percentage point change; (ii)  denotes percentage change; (iii) the reference point for the first
      column is the steady state beofre the automation capital price decline; (iv) the reference point for columns 2-6 is the
      steady state after the automation capital price decline.



                                                                29
   Starting from the post-automation steady state (described in Column 1 of Table 3), we "offer" an additive
increase in NRM ability to non-participants. For those with relatively high NRM , the increase would improve
their ability sufficiently to induce them to join the labor force and seek employment in the NRM occupation;
such workers would optimally select into the "retraining" treatment. Others with low NRM would not.
We search for the NRM ability increase that returns low-skilled labor force participation to its 1989, pre-
automation value. We find that, to prod labor force participation back to its pre-automation level, an increase
in NRM that equals about a quarter of the standard deviation of NRM ability is required. This entices about
10% of non-participants to select into treatment.27
   This experiment increases GDP by slightly more than 1%, via two effects. First, since labor force partic-
ipation and NRM ability both rise (for those who transition from outside the labor force into NRM occupa-
tions), there is a direct effect on labor input and, hence, output. Second, given the complementarity of NRM
labor with automation capital, the return to investment increases, leading to jumps in both types of capital
stock and adding to output growth.
   In terms of welfare, the main beneficiaries, naturally, are non-participants who, through retraining, move
into the NRM occupation. Their consumption equivalent welfare goes up just over 9%. The second group
to most benefit is the high-skilled, who experience a 2% increase in welfare. First, transfers to labor force
non-participants fall, which reduces their labor tax rate by about 1.5 p.p. Second, the NRC wage rises by
almost 1 percent since they are complements in production to both NRM labor and automation capital.
   With respect to the low-skill, those already working in NRM prior to the experiment see a deterioration
in their welfare. A displacement effect is responsible: the increase in the supply of NRM abilities lowers the
efficiency price of their labor and leads to an exit from the labor force of workers with NRM abilities near
the pre-retraining threshold.28 Still others are induced to switch to the R occupation. The most ill-affected
are those with sufficiently high NRM that remain in the occupation, and suffer from the fall in their wages,
income, and welfare. Finally those who were working in R prior to retraining observe a small increase in
welfare, since their labor is complementary to NRM labor.


Cost-benefit analysis Since the existing literature provides little guidance regarding the appropriate "pro-
duction function" (and hence cost structure) of retraining programs, our analysis abstracts from the policy
  27 Since   the experiment results in an ability distribution that is no longer log normal, we cannot rely on closed form solutions of
the bivariate log-normal distribution. Rather we rely on numerical simulation of one billion individuals and calculate the resulting
equilibrium.
  28 Note that this experiment treated roughly ten percent of the NLF, which is about 3 percent of the population. Yet NLF went

down by only 2.2 p.p. Thus, there is an inflow into the NLF from the NRM due to the displacement effect of about 0.8 p.p.



                                                                  30
experiment's cost. Yet, it is instructive to provide a proxy in terms of cost-benefit analysis. This retraining
induced an inflow from outside the labor force of approximately 10% (i.e., about 3% of the population) and
resulted in an output increase of about 1%. This means that as long as the various per-participant cost chan-
nels of the program (i.e., labor, capital and potential increases in tax distortions) amount to less than about
one-third of per capita GDP, the retraining program has a positive return from an aggregate perspective.


7.2.     Redistributive transfers

In this subsection we consider four redistributive policies that transfer resources from high-wage workers
(who, as discussed above, in the context of our model, significantly benefit from automation) to middle-
and low-wage workers. The four policies are: (i) unemployment insurance (UI) system reform; (ii) the
introduction of a universal basic income (UBI); (iii) increased transfers to those outside the labor force; and
(iv) changes in the labor taxes levied on the low-skilled.
   Given the general equilibrium emphasis of the model, each policy must be financed through increased
government taxation. Our approach is to do so via higher labor income taxes on high-skill (NRC) workers,
those who have benefited most from automation. It is to be done consistent with our interest in analyzing
the effects of programs targeted at those most adversely affected, in the model, by automation. It implies
increasing the distortion on the labor supply of high-skill workers.


7.2.1.      Unemployment insurance benefits

We begin with a change to the UI, with workers receiving an additional transfer while unemployed. The
size of this transfer is calibrated so that, as in the Section 7.1, retraining program, the low-skilled labor force
participation rate returns to its 1989, pre-automation level. For comparability, we keep the "dollar value" of
transfers per recipient fixed across the four redistributive experiments.29
   Specifically, we consider an increase in the generosity of UI benefits whereby an additional transfer,
UI > 0, is provided to each unemployed worker. This is in addition to the existing unemployment benefit
modelled as a replacement rate relative to the worker type's wage. As an example, consumption of an
unemployed routine worker of type R becomes Cu,R = bR + UI .                         30

  29 The    qualitative effects across programs remains the same irrespective of the specific value we consider.
  30 This    additive term in the budget constraint (present also in the UBI analysis below) means that the linearity of the solution
approach discussed in Section 4 is no longer applicable. As a result: (i) each labor market (segmented by R and NRM for R and
NRM occupations, respectively) features a different tightness ratio, and (ii) the equilibrium cutoffs are no longer linear functions of
ability. Solving for the equilibrium requires additional numerical computation (e.g., numerical integration, spline approximation).
Additional details are available upon request.


                                                                  31
                                                 Figure 1: UI policy




Notes: The x-axis depicts different UI transfers; a value of 0.3 matches the ratio of the UI transfer to the wage of the
marginal Routine worker in our economy prior to the introduction of the program. Each line in the four different
panels shows the response to changes in UI in a simple version of the model with no heterogeneity in production, no
taxes, and no curvature in production. The % deviation in wages in the top-left panels are vis-a-vis the wage prior to
the introduction of the increased UI benefits.


An illustrative simplified model What is the effect of increased unemployment benefits on the economy?
Before discussing it within the context of our GE model, we find it useful to consider the impact such a policy
change has within a simplified search-and-matching model with CRRA preferences, though one without: (i)
heterogeneity in production; (ii) taxes; and (iii) curvature in production (i.e., a constant productivity in
production). Specifically, we consider an individual who, prior to any UI policy change, is indifferent about
                                                                                 ). This simplified model
being unemployed or being outside the labor force (i.e. the individual with R = R
will help us emphasize the role of search frictions in driving the effect of the policy change on wages,
unemployment, and the labor participation decision. Figure 1 depicts the key outcomes of this simplified
model.
   Given concavity in preferences, a more generous UI system reduces the difference in utility between
being employed and unemployed (see bottom left panel of Figure 1), a key object in the Nash bargaining


                                                           32
problem. As a result, the bargained wage increases as the top left panel depicts.31 Since the worker's
productivity does not change, this increase in the wage must lower, via the free entry condition, in a fall in
vacancy creation, and in the tightness ratio, which manifests itself in a fall in the job finding rate in the top
right panel. Taken together, as the lower right panel depicts, the value of unemployment increase vs. the
value of non-participation (which is unaffected by change in the UI system). Hence, a more generous UI
system increases the value of participating in the labor force.


The full GE model What are the effects in our full GE model? The third column in Table 3 reports the
results of a more generous UI system within our full model economy.
   First, as discussed above, the increase in UI benefits increases the value of being unemployed, while the
value of being outside the labor force is not affected. This leads to an increase in the value of participating
in the labor force as can be seen in the third row.32
   While labor force participation increases, as in the simplified model above, the increase in UI benefits
affects the wage and job finding rates. Hence, in the context of this UI experiment, quantitatively, a key
channel through which these policies operate is via the bargaining problem and its impact on the wage
and vacancies posting by firms. To discipline our analysis we require the model to match the elasticity of
unemployment duration to unemployment benefits (see Appendix A.9 for a discussion).
   Figure 2 depicts the heterogeneous equilibrium effects on the wage and on the job finding rate of the
more generous UI policy in our full GE model. The left panel displays the ratio of the new post-policy
wage to the pre-policy (and post-automation) wage, for each routine ability level, R . As discussed above
in the simplified version of the economy, the increase in the UI transfer leads to an increase in the wage.
Figure 2 suggests that the wage increases at each ability (ranging from approximately 0.3% to 1.2%), though
proportionately more at low ability levels as the additional transfer is a larger fraction of income and has a
bigger effect on the bargaining problem.
   The wage increase reduces the job finding rate as shown in the right panel of Figure 2. For reference, the
job finding rate was 0.38 at each ability level prior to the policy change. This decline in the job finding rate
manifests itself as a higher unemployment rate, more so at lower ability levels.
   Overall, as row 11 in Table 3 reports, the introduction of the UI policy leaves aggregate output essentially
unchanged (it falls by less than one-tenth of one percent), despite the increased labor force participation,
  31 The   effect discussed here will also naturally be present in models with linear utility.
  32 Quantitatively,  we look for the value of the UI transfer that leads the labor force participation of the low-skilled to return to its
1989 allocation. We find this value to be 25.7 percent of the average UI transfers in the economy. This value, which will also be
used in the rest of the transfer experiments below, is equivalent to about 420 dollars per month in 2017.



                                                                    33
                    Figure 2: UI policy: Effects on the relative wage and job finding rates




                                                                                                     cutoff
Notes: The x-axis for both panels is log(R ). The support includes productivity to the right of the R


since the unemployment rate also rises. That is, the greater generosity of the UI program implies that,
conditional on participating in the labor force, there is a drop in the employment rate (see sixth and seventh
row in Table 3). So the change in the job-finding rate due to higher UI essentially offsets the rise in labor
force participation, leading overall to a minuscule fall in the supply of R and NRM labor input (observable
in the ninth and 10th rows). The reduced labor tax levied on NRC workers (see the 12th row and below for a
discussion) slightly boosts their labor input (eighth row) and results, overall, in output essentially remaining
the same.
   In terms of welfare, the UI policy has relatively modest effects, at least relative to the other experiments
reported in Table 3. With respect to the low-skilled, the increase in the UI benefits, and its equilibrium
effects on wages, dominate the increase in the unemployment rate; consumption equivalent welfare rises by
about 2%, with small differences across groups as can be seen in rows 17-25.
   Interestingly, as row 26 details, high-skill workers see essentially no change in their welfare: it rises by
about 0.1%. While transfers to the unemployed increase, this is offset by reduced transfers to those outside
the labor force. As a result, the after-tax wages of the high-skilled are almost unchanged.
   To summarize, the increase in UI generosity is found to be welfare-improving for all groups, though
somewhat modest at the level required to match our labor force participation target. Moreover, at this level,



                                                         34
the majority of low-skilled workers enjoy an increase in welfare only about half as great as the welfare loss
they experienced due to the automation capital price drop.33


7.2.2.    Universal basic income

Our next experiment introduces a universal basic income transfer program. We model the UBI as an identical
lump sum transfer, UBI > 0, to each individual, irrespective of her skill or labor force status. To make the
policy experiments comparable, we keep the transfer per person the same as in the UI policy case. As an
example, the budget constraint for a routine worker of type R becomes Ce,R = R (1 - TR ) + UBI .34
   The UBI program reduces GDP by over 10 percent (fourth column of Table 3) as labor force participation,
the employment of low-skilled workers, and the labor input of high-skilled workers decline. What explains
such a difference relative to the previous UI case? The UBI program (see below), because of its budgetary
implications, requires a steep increase in the labor tax rate of the NRC group. This increase lowers the
supply of hours they work, which alters the return to labor force participation for low-skilled workers in the
economy.


An illustrative simplified model Again, using a simplified model is helpful in disentangling the channels
through which the policy affects the economy. Figure 3 depicts the results from two simplified models.
   First, consider the simplified model used in the UI policy example, referred to as Equilibrium/DMP in
Figure 3. Under it, individuals receive a transfer not conditional on their employment state. This induces a
change in the value of employment, of non-participation, and of being unemployed. Due to the concavity
of preferences, the difference between being unemployed and employed falls, as in the UI case (bottom left
panel). This strengthens the worker's bargaining position and results both in an increased bargained wage
(upper left panel) and in a reduced job-finding rate (upper right panel). Overall, this increase in the value
of unemployment increases the value of participation. However, in contrast to the UI case, the value of
non-participation in the case of UBI climbs at the same time. Which force dominates? The bottom right
panel of Figure 3 shows that, in this Equilibrium/DMP case, the value of unemployment minus the value of
non-participation goes up, implying that the DMP forces would be fuelling an increase in participation.
   However, the UBI transfers to everyone in the economy naturally need to be financed. As evident in
  33 Given   the model's inherent non-linearity, it is an open question as to how welfare would change for larger UI policy interven-
tions.
   34 As with the case of the UI policy, having an additive term in workers' budget constraints means that the linearity of the solution

approach discussed in Section 4 is no longer applicable. We follow the same solution approach in Section 7.2.1. Moreover, this
policy experiments adds a new expenditure term to the government budget constraint, eq. 4.



                                                                  35
our full model below, this financing requirement profoundly increases the distortionary taxation NRC work-
ers face and causes their labor input to decline. Because NRC workers are complements to R and NRM
workers, the plunge in the NRC labor input causes the wages of R and NRM workers to fall. To mimic
this drop in productivity (shown below in our full model economy) in this simplified version, we repeat the
Equilibrium/DMP exercise with a single change: we feed in a decrease in worker productivity that matches
the percentage decline in R productivity from our full GE model economy (about 6 percent), depicted as
the "Equilibrium/DMP + Prod Fall" in Figure 3. In this case, the wage drop is enough to overturn the re-
sults discussed above, and the value of non-participation increases vis-Ã¡-vis the value of being unemployed
(and participating). This discussion highlights the importance of analyzing the effects of UBI within a GE
model with government budget constraints. Without considering the budgetary needs of financing the UBI
program, its introduction would have increased labor force participation.


The full GE model The overall effects in our full model economy are presented in the fourth column in
Table 3. The relative values of being unemployed or outside the labor force mentioned above are reflected
in the ability cutoffs for participation in the labor force rising( first two rows in Table 3). As discussed
above, all else equal, even though workers receive the UBI both when they are unemployed and employed,
the curvature in the utility implies that, conditional on labor force participation, the increase in the value
of unemployment versus employment improves the worker's outside option in the Nash bargaining: wages
rise, job creation falls, and unemployment goes up (as in the previous UI experiment).
  However, as rows 13-14 in Table 3 indicate, there is no increase in R and NRM in equilibrium. As
discussed above, this is because the primary effect of the UBI is its fiscal burden. Financing this transfer to
all individuals requires a stark increase in taxation levied on the NRC workers; it has to increase by 35 p.p.
in order to fund the UBI payment (see row 12). This leads to an obvious fall in NRC labor input of about
13% as the eighth row report. Since NRC labor input is complementary to routine and non-routine manual
work, the large fall in high-skill labor supply reduces the marginal product of low-skilled labor. As in the
simplified model discussion above, this reduces the value of labor force participation being reflected in the
increase in NLF as reported in the third row.
  Figure 4 illusrates the effects on the wage and job-finding rate of a more generous UBI system within
our full model economy. The left panel details the ratio of the new equilibrium wage to the pre-UBI one for
each routine ability level, R . Post-UBI, the wage declines for each ability, by about 6 to 7 percent, less for
the lower ability. The productivity drop of R workers due to the supply decline of NRC workers is common
to all R workers (and similar for NRM workers). But for lower ability (and low-skill) workers, the UBI



                                                      36
                                                 Figure 3: UBI policy




Notes: The x-axis depicts different UBI transfers; a value of 0.3 matches the ratio of the UBI transfer to the wage of
the marginal Routine worker in our economy prior to the introduction of the program. The Equilibrium/DMP line
shows the response to changes in UBI in a simple version of the model with no heterogeneity in production, no taxes,
and no curvature in production. The Equilibrium/DMP+Prod Fall is similar to the Equilibrium/DMP model, but
where we feed a fall in the worker's productivity that matches the percentage fall in the worker's productivity due to
the fall in NRC labor input in our full model.


transfer amounts to a bigger fraction of income and thus strengthens their bargaining position more relative
to higher ability low-skill workers.
   This productivity drop of R workers lowers the job-finding rate (right panel of Figure 4 ) where we remind
the reader that prior to the UBI policy change, the job-finding rate was 0.38 for each ability. Since wages fall
relatively more for higher ability low-skill workers, their job-finding rates decline by less relative to lower
ability low-skill workers. Overall, this reduction in the job-finding rates for R workers manifests as a higher
unemployment rate, more so at the lower ability levels (rows six and seven of Table 3).
   Overall then, the introduction of the UBI program leads to an increase in the value of non-participation,
drawing workers out of the labor force. This effect is several times larger than the effect of automation itself.
   In terms of welfare, the UBI program's effects are heterogeneous. Although high-skill workers receive a


                                                          37
                   Figure 4: UBI policy: Effects on the relative wage and job finding rates




                                                                                                      cutoff
Notes: The x-axis for both figures is log(R ). The support includes productivity to the right of the R


UBI transfer, it is exceeded by the drop in their after-tax labor income and equity income (as the economy's
firm owners). As the last row reveals, they experience a 22% consumption-equivalent loss of welfare, similar
in absolute magnitude to their welfare gain due to automation!
   By contrast, the low-skilled, especially those who choose to remain in, or transition toward, labor force
non-participation, enjoy significant welfare gains. The welfare of even the low-skilled who continue to work
improves (although their wages fall) due to the mere fact that the UBI transfer is large enough vis-Ã¡-vis
their wage to represent a significant component of their income. Overall, for most unskilled workers, their
UBI gains in welfare exceed their losses associated with automation.


7.2.3.   Transfers to non-participation

The next policy experiment increases transfers to those not longer participating in the labor force. As before,
the increase for each non-participant is the same in dollar terms as previous ones.
   Not surprisingly, this program leads to lower labor force participation (fifth column in Table 3); non-
participation rises by 15 p.p (see the third row). To finance the program, the distortionary tax rate on high-
skill labor increases by 25 p.p (see the 12th row), leading to a fall in NRC labor input (see the eighth row).
As a result of the decrease in both low- and high-skilled labor, aggregate output falls by 10%.


                                                         38
  As with the UBI policy, the high-skilled suffer a major loss in after-tax labor income and equity income.
Their welfare falls by 23% (last row). For the low-skilled, the greatest beneficiaries are those who choose
labor force non-participation. These individuals enjoy greater welfare, as in the UBI case. For those who
remain in the labor force, the exit from it by those of lower ability increases their welfare modestly, via the
equilibrium effect on their wages; overall this group's welfare increases by about half of the extent in the
UBI case.


7.2.4.   Progressivity of taxation

The policy experiments of Sections 7.2.2 and 7.2.3 suggest that there is much room for redistribution. How-
ever, such transfer programs come at a dramatic cost, in terms of aggregate output and distortionary welfare
losses for high-skill workers. Here, in our last experiment, we explore an alternative way to redistribute
resources that involves smaller output and welfare losses for the high-skilled.
  Specifically, we consider a more progressive tax system, where we reduce the labor tax rate, TNRM = TR ,
that low-skill workers pay. To keep results comparable to those above, we reduce the average tax receipt
from each worker by the same dollar value as the per recipient transfer of Sections 7.2.1 through 7.2.3. To
accomplish this, the tax rate falls to essentially zero and for simplicity, we set TNRM = TR = 0. Maintaining
government budget balance requires an increase in the labor tax rate levied on high-skill workers.
  The sixth and final column in Table 3 reports the effect of this policy. First, in equilibrium, as the 12th
row reports, this policy requires an increase in the tax rate levied on the high skilled of 10 p.p., which is
markedly smaller than those of Sections 7.2.2 and 7.2.3.
  Eliminating income taxation on low-skill workers naturally increases their value of participation, resulting
in an approximately 5 p.p increase in their labor force participation. By contrast, the tax increase on the high-
skilled reduces their labor supply (eighth row), but by less than in the cases of the UBI and transfers to the
NLF policies. These offsetting changes in employment and labor supply are reflected in the pre-tax wage
rates earned in R, NRM, and NRC occupations. They also imply that there is essentially no impact on
aggregate output.
  Overall, the increase in the supply of low-skilled and the decrease in the supply of high-skilled labor
reduces low-skilled wages (rows 13 and 14). But the after tax wages of the low-skilled skilled go up by
about 10 percent.
  This rise in after-tax wages implies that, in terms of welfare, this policy experiment delivers similar
welfare gains to the low-skilled who participate in the labor market as the UBI experiment does. But the
gains are not reaped disproportionately by those out of the labor force (who see no increase in their welfare


                                                       39
in this tax reform case). Making taxation more progressive favors those who remain in, and elect to join,
the labor force, and increases labor force participation. Finally, this experiment also results in much smaller
welfare losses for the high-skilled relative to the UBI or increasing transfers to non-participants policies.


7.2.5.    Summary and program comparison

To summarize, we use the model to evaluate the macroeconomic and distributional effects of various public
policy proposals. A retraining policy aimed at restoring labor force participation by improving the ability
of workers in NRM occupations succeeds at doing so at a relatively low back-of-the-envelope cost. It also
increases aggregate income. But it crowds out other low-skill workers, and it is unclear whether such a
retraining program can operate in practice on such a large scale.
     A policy that makes UI benefits more generous is also able to restore labor force participation rates to
pre-automation levels. It raises unemployment, has little impact on aggregate income, and is mildly welfare-
improving for all. Most low-skilled workers enjoy an increase in welfare equal to about half of the welfare
loss they suffered due to the decline in the automation capital price.
     By contrast, the introduction of a UBI or an increase in the generosity of transfers to labor force non-
participants reduce labor force participation, labor supply, and aggregate income. Moreover, while increas-
ing welfare to the low-skilled (in the UBI case this welfare increase is bigger in absolute value than the
welfare loss due to automation), they impose large welfare costs to the high-skilled.
     Finally, making the tax system more progressive has strong redistributive effects, raises labor force par-
ticipation, has little impact on aggregate income, and imposes relatively small welfare losses on the high-
skilled. The low-skilled who remain in the labor force enjoy an increase in their welfare greater than the
loss they experienced due to the fall in automation capital prices.


8.       Conclusions

We consider the dramatic change in the occupational composition of employment--specifically, the disap-
pearance of employment in middle-wage routine occupations--observed over the past 35 years. We develop
a heterogeneous agent macroeconomic model with investment in automation capital, labor force partici-
pation and occupational choice, and government policy. We use this model to study the aggregate and
distributional impact of various public policy proposals; our experiments are redistributive in nature as gov-
ernment budget balance is maintained through increased taxation of the high-skilled. While a number of
programs--including retraining, and unemployment insurance and labor taxation reforms--are promising,



                                                       40
proposals such as universal basic income are highly costly. We view our framework as useful for the evalu-
ation of many other policies that can differ in implementation, intensity, and redistributive focus in the face
of automation.




                                                      41
References

Abel, Andrew. 2007. "Optimal Capital Income Taxation." NBER Working paper 13354.

Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011. "Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employment
  and earnings." In Handbook of labor economics. Vol. 4, 1043­1171. Elsevier.

Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2019. "Robots and Jobs: Evidence from US Labor Markets."
  Journal of Political Economy.

Altonji, Joseph G, Prashant Bharadwaj, and Fabian Lange. 2012. "Changes in the characteristics of
  American youth: Implications for adult outcomes." Journal of Labor Economics, 30(4): 783­828.

Atalay, Enghin, Phai Phongthiengtham, Sebastian Sotelo, and Daniel Tannenbaum. 2018. "New tech-
  nologies and the labor market." Journal of Monetary Economics, 97: 48­67.

Autor, David H., and David Dorn. 2013. "The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of the
  US labor market." American Economic Review, 103(5): 1553­97.

Autor, David H, Frank Levy, and Richard J Murnane. 2003. "The skill content of recent technological
  change: An empirical exploration." The Quarterly journal of economics, 118(4): 1279­1333.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2006. "The Polarization of the U.S. Labor
  Market." American Economic Review, 96(2): 189­194.

Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand. 2016. "The Great Reversal in the Demand for
  Skill and Cognitive Tasks." Journal of Labor Economics, 34(S1): 199­247.

Card, David, Jochen Kluve, and Andrea Weber. 2018. "What Works? A Meta Analysis of Recent Active
  Labor Market Program Evaluations." Journal of the European Economic Association, 16(3): 894­931.

Chetty, Raj. 2008. "Moral Hazard versus Liquidity and Optimal Unemployment Insurance." Journal of
  Political Economy, 116(2): 173­234.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andrea Weber. 2013. "Does Indivisible Labor Explain the
  Difference between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of Extensive Margin Elasticities."
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 27: 1­56.




                                                  42
Cortes, Guido Matias, Nir Jaimovich, and Henry E. Siu. 2017. "Disappearing routine jobs: Who, how,
  and why?" Journal of Monetary Economic, 91: 69­87.

Cortes, Guido Matias, Nir Jaimovich, and Henry E. Siu. 2018. "The End of Men and Rise of Women in
  the High-Skilled Labor Market."

Cortes, Matias. 2016. "Where Have the Middle-Wage Workers Gone? A Study of Polarization using Panel
  Data." Journal of Labor Economics, 34(1): 63­105.

Diamond, Peter A. 1982. "Wage determination and efficiency in search equilibrium." The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 49(2): 217­227.

Eden, Maya, and Paul Gaggl. 2018. "On the Welfare Implications of Automation." Review of Economic
  and Dynamics, 29: 15­43.

Gaggl, Paul, and Greg C. Wright. 2017. "A Short-Run View of What Computers Do: Evidence from a
  U.K. Tax Incentive A Short-Run View of What Computers Do: Evidence from a U.K. Tax Incentive."
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(3): 262­294.

Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons. 2009. "Job Polarization in Europe." American
  Economic Review, 99(2): 58­63.

Goos, Maarten, and Alan Manning. 2007. "Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of Work in
  Britain." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(1): 118­133.

Graetz, Georg, and Guy Michaels. 2018. "Robots at work." Review of Economics and Statistics,
  100(5): 753­768.

Guerreiro, Joao, Sergio Rebelo, and Pedro Telels. 2019. "Should Robots be Taxed?"

Jaimovich, Nir, and Henry E Siu. 2012. "The trend is the cycle: Job polarization and jobless recoveries."
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Krusell, Per, Lee E. Ohanian, JosÈ-Victor RÌos-Rull, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2000. "Capital-Skill
  Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis." Econometrica, 68(5): 1029­1054.

Meyer, Bruce D. 1990. "Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells." Econometrica, 58(4): 757­
  782.



                                                   43
Michaels, Guy, Ashwini Natraj, and John Van Reenen. 2014. "Has ICT polarized skill demand? Evi-
  dence from eleven countries over 25 years." Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1): 60­77.

Mortensen, Dale T. 1982. "The matching process as a noncooperative bargaining game." In The economics
  of information and uncertainty. 233­258. University of Chicago Press.

Pissarides, Christopher A. 1985. "Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment, Vacancies, and
  Real Wages." The American Economic Review, 75(4): 676­690.

Pissarides, Christopher A., and Barbara Petrongolo. 2001. "Looking into the Black Box: A Survey of
  the Matching Function." Journal of Economic Literature, 39(2): 390­431.

Tuzel, Selale, and Miao Ben Zhang. 2019. "Economic Stimulus at the Expense of Routine- Task Jobs."
  Working Paper.

vom Lehn, Christian. 2019. "Labor market polarization, the decline of routine work, and technological
  change: A quantitative analysis." Journal of Monetary Economics.

Yedid-Levi, Yaniv. 2016. "Why does employment in all major sectors move together over the business
  cycle?" Review of Economic Dynamics, 22: 131­156.




                                                   44
A.       Appendix

A.1.     Occupation classification

We adopt the occupational classification system used in Jaimovich and Siu (2012) that affords ease of data
access and replication. The classification is based on the categorization of occupations in the 2000 Stan-
dard Occupational Classification system. Non-routine cognitive workers are those employed in "manage-
ment, business, and financial operations occupations" and "professional and related occupations". Routine
cognitive workers are those in "sales and related occupations" and "office and administrative support occu-
pations". Routine manual occupations are "production occupations", "transportation and material moving
occupations", "construction and extraction occupations", and "installation, maintenance, and repair occupa-
tions". Non-routine manual occupations are "service occupations". Detailed information on 3-digit occupa-
tional codes are available from the authors upon request.


A.2.     Machine learning details

A.2.1.    Classification errors

Our ML approach classifies each person (at each point in time) into one of the four "likely" occupational
groups (NRC, RC, NRM, and RM). However we present our main results aggregating to two workers types
­ NRC and non-NRC, hence Tables A1 and A2 show the confusion matrices for those two categories,
separately for men and women respectively. In each matrix we add the precision (share of correctly classified
objects within a predicted category) and recall (share of observed that were picked up by the prediction
within a category) values.




                                                     45
        Table A1: Confusion Matrix - Men
                       Classified
                   NRC      non-NRC     Precision
         NRC      506,002   294,252        63.23%
True
       non-NRC    242,256   1,213,131      83.35%
        Recall    67.62%    80.48%


       Table A2: Confusion Matrix - Women
                       Classified
                   NRC      non-NRC     Precision
         NRC      342,362   150,507        69.46%
True
       non-NRC    241,376   1,167,622      82.87%
        Recall    58.65%    88.58%




                      46
                               Probability
                              Figure        of Non-Routine
                                     A1: Probability         Cognitive
                                                     of Non-Routine     by Cell
                                                                    Cognitive by Cell



      60




      50

                                                                                                          1.00
                                                                                                          0.75
age




                                                                                                          0.50
                                                                                                          0.25
                                                                                                          0.00
      40




      30




             1: HS dropouts       2: 12 or HS        3: 1-2 col      4: 3-4 col         5: 5+ col
                                                 year of schooling

Notes: The probability of men in a specific education-age cell to be classified as non-NRC by the random forest
algorithm.




                                                          47
A.2.2.   Recovering true series from series with errors

The classification errors discussed in A.2.1 imply that we do not have "clean" series for the dynamics of
NRC and non-NRC type persons. However, we show now that while we cannot recover perfectly correct
the classification a the individual level, it is possible to correct the aggregate series of interest. Suppose
that we are interested in recovering the share or persons of NRC and non-NRC types in specific labor force
status, and call these xNRC , and xNNRC . Define our observed values from the classifier as x
                                                                                            ^NRC , and x
                                                                                                       ^NNRC ,
and define the classification outcomes in terms of the following shares (with the convention STrue|Classi f ied )
as in Table A3:


                                     Table A3: Classification Definitions
                                                            Classified
                                                        NRC         non-NRC
                                           NRC        SNRC|NRC      SNRC|NNRC
                                True
                                        non-NRC      SNNRC|NRC     SNNRC|NNRC




We can then write the observed values as a function of the true values and the share as follows

                                ^NRC = SNRC|NRC xNRC + SNNRC|NRC xNNRC
                                x

                              ^NNRC = SNRC|NNRC xNRC + SNNRC|NNRC xNNRC
                              x

Thus if we know the shares in A3, we are left with a simple two-equation two-unknown linear system that
will allow us to recover xNRC and xNNRC . The first way to recover the shares in A3 is to use the classification
errors from the training, reported in section A.2.1. The second approach is to use the restrictions implied by
nature by some of the series. For example, the series or true values of employment share in R occupations for
the NRC type during the training period, should be roughly zero. While the second approach is appealing,
it can only be applied to the occupation series, and not to the NLF series, for which we apply the first
approach. It is important to note that both approaches require the assumption that the classification errors
are not correlated with the labor market status and occupation choice in the post-training period.


A.3.     Machine Learning: Detailed Results

As discussed in section 2, we use an ML approach to classify prime-aged individuals (25-64 years of age)
from the CPS into types based on the occupation they would most likely have been employed in the pre-

                                                       48
      Table A4: Labor market status and occupation composition changes for men, 1989-2017 by type
                                                           Low-skill          High-Skill
                                                          (1)     (2)         (3)       (4)
                                                         1989    2017        1989      2017
                         Population Weight               0.65     0.52       0.35      0.48
                         Fraction in R                   0.67     0.57       0.02      0.06
                         Fraction in NRM                 0.11     0.15        ~0       0.01
                         Fraction in NRC                 0.01      ~0        0.99      0.90
                         Fraction in NLF                 0.17     0.24        ~0       0.03
                         Fraction in Unemployment        0.05     0.04        ~0       0.01
                         Unemployment rate               0.06     0.06        ~0       0.01

Notes: The first row of the table reports the share of the population in the non-NRC and NRC groups for men aged
25-64 in 1989 and 2017. Rows 2-6 report the fraction of men in 5 labor market states: Employed in routine occupation
(R); Employed in non-routine manual occupation (NRM); Employed in non-routine cognitive occupation (NRC); Not
in the labor force (NLF); and unemployed. The last row reports the unemployment rate. The categorization into non-
NRC and NRC groups was done using a random forest algorithm (see text for more details). CPS weights are applied
in all calculations.


polarization era, before the rise of automation. In this Appendix we provide the detailed results from this
analysis.
   Table A4 summarizes our findings. As discussed in the text, columns (1) and (2) display the of the
fraction of workers in--or their propensity to select into--labor force non-participation, unemployment,
and employment in NRC, NRM and R occupations for low-skill men. In the late-1980s, the fraction of
low-skill types employed in routine occupations was about 0.67; by 2017 this had dropped to approximately
0.57, a 10 p.p. or 16 log point fall. This decline is accounted for by the increase in non-participation and in
participation in employment in NRM occupations.
   Employment and occupation dynamics for the high-skilled (NRC)                    Are these increases in NLF and
NRM propensity unique to the low-skilled or are these an economy-wide phenomena? Columns (3) and
(4) of Table A4 summarize the changes in labor force and occupational employment statuses for high-skill
men. This group has seen a decrease in NRC employment propensity (see Cortes, Jaimovich and Siu (2018)
for analysis of the divergent gender trends in the high-skilled labor market.) But there is very little decline
in labor force participation, no change in employment in NRM occupations, and a slight increase in R
employment (see Beaudry, Green and Sand (2016) for a model with "crowding in" of high-skilled workers

                                                        49
           Table A5: Labor market status and occupation composition changes for non-NRC types
                                                                     female                 male
                                                                  (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)
                                                                 2001     2017         2001      2017
                             Population Weight                   0.68      0.55         0.58     0.52
                             Fraction in R                       0.39      0.30         0.64     0.57
                             Fraction in NRM                     0.17      0.21         0.12     0.15
                             Fraction in NRC                     0.07      0.06         0.01       ~0
                             Fraction in NLF                     0.34      0.40         0.19     0.24
                             Fraction in Unemployment            0.03      0.03         0.04     0.04
                             Unemployment rate                   0.05      0.06         0.05     0.06

Notes: The first row of the table reports the share of the population in the non-NRC and NRC groups for men aged
25-64 in 1989 and 2017. Rows 2-6 report the fraction of men in 5 labor market states: Employed in routine occupation
(R); Employed in non-routine manual occupation (NRM); Employed in non-routine cognitive occupation (NRC); Not
in the labor force (NLF); and unemployed. The last row reports the unemployment rate. The categorization into non-
NRC and NRC groups was done using a random forest algorithm (see text for more details). CPS weights are applied
in all calculations.


into middle-paying R occupations). This suggests that the changes for the low-skilled are particularly linked
to the decline of R occupations.
   Employment and occupation dynamics for women                         Women display similar patterns as those of men,
but over a different time period. As is well known, the 1960-2000 period saw a pronounced increase in
female labor force participation. But since the turn of the twenty-first century, this has plateaued and begun
to fall even among the prime-aged. As such, the period since the turn of the century is more indicative of
female occupational dynamics. Columns 1 and 2 of Table A5 present the same information as in Table A4
but for low-skill women, 2001­2017. There has been a pronounced fall in the likelihood of employment in
R occupations, with no increase in the propensity for NRC employment or unemployment.35 Instead, they
have seen offsetting increases in both the likelihood of non-participation and NRM employment; this split is
again roughly two-thirds toward NLF, one-third toward NRM. This is the same split observed for low-skill
men over the the 1989­2017 time period, and, as Columns 3 and 4 of Table A5 show, during 2001­2017 as
well.
  35 Though   not displayed, these dynamics are not observed for high-skill women as in the case of high-skill men.




                                                                50
A.4.   Classifying workers using cognitive ability measures (AFTQ Scores)

In the last part of Section 2, we discuss an alternative approach to the ML, using cognitive ability measures
from the NLSY to classify workers. We provide here more details about this approach. For comparability
of scores between the 1979 and 1997 NLSY surveys, we use the standardized measure provided by Altonji,
Bharadwaj and Lange (2012). Our analysis begins with the NLSY79, where we divide the sample into
terciles of cognitive ability using the AFQT score and analyze the employment outcomes during 1989-1990,
when individuals in this sample are around the age of 30. Given the trends in female participation referred to
above, we focus our analysis on men. We drop the lowest decile of the AFQT distribution from the analysis,
because men in this decile have an extremely low employment rate (below 60% around age 30).
  Table A6 indicates that, conditional on employment, there are large differences in the propensity to work
in non-NRC occupation (i.e R or NRM occupations) across AFQT scores. In the first tercile, 82% of workers
were employed in a non-NRC occupation. While less formal, this simple approach classifies men with lower
cognitive ability as "low skill." Table A7 compares the labor market status and occupational composition for
the low-skilled between 1989-1990 (using the NLSY79) and 2012-2013 (using the NLSY97). The results
from this table are discussed in the text.


Table A6: Share of 1979 NLSY men working in Routine or non-Routine Manual occupations in 1989-1990

                                                                      AFQT Deciles
                                                                     2-4    5-7    8-10
                                                                     (1)    (2)     (3)
                        Average share in NRM or R (non-NRC)         0.82   0.68    0.47

Notes: The table uses NLSY 1979, to report the share of workers in NRM or R (non-NRC) occupations by deciles
of cognitive ability as measured by the AFQT score. For comparability of scores between the 1979 and 1997 NLSY
surveys, we use the standardized measure provided by Altonji, Bharadwaj and Lange (2012)




                                                      51
       Table A7: Labor market status and occupation composition changes for low cognitive ability men

                                                             1989-1990    2012-2013
                             Fraction in R                     0.600         0.502
                             Fraction in NRM                   0.114         0.177
                             Fraction in NRC                   0.157         0.134
                             Fraction in NLF                   0.096         0.120
                             Fraction in Unemployment          0.033         0.060
                             Average age                       29.35         29.69
                             Observations                       437            553

Notes: The table uses NLSY 1979 and NLSY 1997, to report the fraction of workers in the second to fourth decile of
cognitive ability in 5 labor market states in 1989-1990 and then again in 2012-2013: Employed in routine occupation
(R); Employed in non-routine manual occupation (NRM); Employed in non-routine cognitive occupation (NRC); Not
in the labor force (NLF); and unemployed.


A.5.       Wage function derivations

Taking the first order condition with respect to wages we have


             J (xR,R , )                                                                   ~R, () (1 - T )
                           U (Ce,R, ) (1 - Te,R, ) - U (Cu,R, ) (1 - Tu,R, ) bR, = (1 -  ) V
                xR,R

  or

              ~R, () = U (Ce,R, ) (1 - Te,R, ) - U (Cu,R, ) (1 - Tu,R, ) bR,           1  J (xR,R , )
              V
                                                                                1 -  1 - T   xR,R
                         1  J (xR,R , )
              =
                  1 -  1 - T   xR,R

  Where   [U (Ce,R, ) (1 - Te,R, ) - U (Cu,R, ) (1 - Tu,R, ) bR, ]. Substituting for the marginal value of
workers, and using the first order condition one period ahead, we can right the left hand side as

            ~R, () = U (R, (1 - Te,R, )) - U (bR, R, (1 - Tu,R, )) +  (1 -  - µ (R,R )) V
            V                                                                           ~R,  =
                                                                   1  J (xR,R , )
            = U (Ce,R, ) - U (Cu,R, ) +  (1 -  - µ (R,R )) 
                                                            1 -  1 - T     xR,R

  Substitute for the marginal value of the firm we can write the right hand side as follows:



                                                        52
                                1  J (xR,R , )
                                               =
                         1 -  1 - T   xR,R
                                1                                          J xR,R , 
                                    (1 - T ) ( fR R PR - R,R ) + (1 -  ) 
                         1 -  1 - T                                           xR,R

  Therefore we have


                                                                     1  J (xR,R , )
            U (Ce,R, ) - U (Cu,R, ) +  (1 -  - µ (R,R ))                            =
                                                             1 -  1 - T        xR,R
                   1                                                J (xR,R , )
                             (1 - T ) ( fR R PR - R,R ) + (1 -  ) 
            1 -  1 - T                                                 xR,R
            
                                                          1  J (xR,R , )
            U (Ce,R, ) - U (Cu,R, ) -  µ (R,R )                          =
                                                   1 -  1 - T   xR,R
               
                    ( fR R PR - R,R )
              1-
            
            1- 1                                             1  J (xR,R , )
                     (U (Ce,R, ) - U (Cu,R, )) -  µ (R,R )                  =
                                                           1 - T   xR,R
            fR R PR - R,R

            
                               1- 1                                             1  J (xR,R , )
            R,R = fR R PR -         (U (Ce,R, ) - U (Cu,R, )) +  R,R q (R,R )
                                                                              1 - T   xR,R

  where we substitute the relationship µ (R,R ) = R,R q (R,R ). Finally, we can use the steady state version
                                                                         J xR, ,
                                                                              R
of the first order condition for vacancies (1 - T ) R,R = E  q (R,R )       xR,    . This yields the general
                                                                              R

wage function


                               1- 1
                R,R = fR R PR -         (U (Ce,R, ) - U (Cu,R, )) + R,R R,R =
                                  
                           1-               U (Ce,R, ) - U (Cu,R, )
                 fR R PR -                                                         + R,R R,R
                             U (Ce,R, ) (1 - Te,R, ) - U (Cu,R, ) (1 - Tu,R, ) bR,

                                                          C1-
  When we assume a CRRA utility function U (C) =          1-    and that there are no lump sum transfers to
workers who are in the labor force then we can simplify further:




                                                     53
                          U (Ce,R, ) - U (Cu,R, )
                                                                  =
            U (Ce,R, ) (1 - Te,R, ) - U (Cu,R, ) (1 - Tu,R, ) bR,
                            (Ce,R, )1- (Cu,R, )1-
                               1-        -1-
                                                                =
            (Ce,R, )- (1 - Te,R, ) - (Ce,R, )- (1 - Tu,R, ) bR,
              1                (R,R (1 - Te,R, ))1- - (bR, R,R (1 - Tu,R, ))1-
                                                                                               =
            1 -  (R,R (1 - Te,R, ))- (1 - Te,R, ) - (bR, R,R (1 - Tu,R, ))- (1 - Tu,R, ) bR,
                         1-
              1 (R,R )       (1 - Te,R, )1- - (R,R )1- (1 - Tu,R, )1- b1 -
                                                                        R,
                                                                             =
            1 -  (R,R )- (1 - Te,R, )1- - (R,R )- (1 - Tu,R, )1- b1     -
                                                                       R,
                      1-
              1 (R,R )   (1 - Te,R, )1- - (1 - Tu,R, )1- b1 -
                                                           R,
                                                              =
            1 -  ( )- (1 - T         1-
                                        - (1 - Tu,R, )1- b1 -
                  R,R          e,R, )                     R,
             1
               R,R
            1-

  and as a result the wage function simplifies to


                                                                  1- 1
                                R,R = fR R PR + R,R R,R -              R,R
                                                                    1-
                                
                                                  1
                                R,R =             1- 1
                                                         [ fR R PR + R,R R,R ]
                                             1+     1-

Armed with this wage function we move to the optimality condition for vacancies


                                 R,R                                 R,R
                                        =  fR R PR - R,R + (1 -  )
                               q (R,R )                            q (R,R )

  Substituting the wage function we have


                  R,R                      1                                     R,R
                         =  fR R PR -    1 - 1
                                               [ fR R PR + R,R R,R ] + (1 -  )
                q (R,R )                    
                                      1 +  1-                                  q (R,R )

  and once we add the assumption that hiring cost if proportional to productivity we get




                                                         54
   0                1                             0
         =  1-    1 - 1
                        [1 + R,R 0 ] + (1 -  )
q (R,R )             
               1 +  1-                         q (R,R )
                                  1- 1
   0                                1- - R,R 0
         (1 -  (1 -  )) = 
q (R,R )                            1 + 1- 1
                                          1-
                                              1- 1
    1 -  (1 -  )              R,R               1-
0                +                      =  
      q (R,R )             1 + 1- 1
                                 1-         1 + 1- 1
                                                  1-
                 1-   1
                1-
            1+1-  1
                      1-
0 =   1- (1- )             
                        R,R
       q(R,R )
                 +  1+ 1- 1
                                 1-




                                      55
A.6.   Productivity cutoffs

Denote the value of staying out of the labor force by Vo, , a constant number in steady state.
  The value of employment in occupation R with idiosyncratic productivity R is


                     (R,R (1 - Te,R,R ))1-
           Ve,R, =                         +  (1 -  ) Ve,R, +   Vu,R,
                            1-
                                                                               1-
                                                                                    
                                        fR R PR
                                      1+ 1- 1     [1 + R,R 0 ] (1 - Te,R,R )
                          1       
                                            1-
                                                                                         
           Ve,R, =                                                                  +             Vu,R,
                                                                                    
                     1 -  (1 -  )                       1-                           1 -  (1 -  )
                                  



  where we substituted the explicit wage function under the assumption of proportional hiring costs.
  The value of unemployment in occupation R with idiosyncratic productivity R is


                  (bR,R R,R (1 - Tu,R,R ))1-
        Vu,R, =                              +  (1 - µ (R,R )) Vu,R, +  µ (R,R ) Ve,R,
                            1-
                                                                    1-
                                                                       
                                fR R PR
                         bR,R 1+ 1- 1 [1 + R,R 0 ] (1 - Tu,R,R )               
                                    1-
        Vu,R, (1 -  ) =                                                         +  µ (R,R ) [Ve,R, - Vu,R, ]
                                                                               
                                          1-                                   


  Note that the first order condition of the bargaining problem implies that


                                                              1  J (xR,R , )
                                  Ve,R, - Vu,R, = 
                                                       1 -  1 - T   xR,R
  and the first order condition with respect to vacancies implies that


                                        J (xR,R , ) (1 - T ) 0 PR fR R
                                                   =
                                           xR,R          q (R,R )
  Substituting, we have


                                                                                         1-
                                                                                              
                                           bR,R 1+fR R PR
                                                   1- 1     [1 + R,R 0 ] (1 - Tu,R,R )        
                                                      1-
                       Vu,R, (1 -  ) = 
                                                                                              
                                                                 1-
                                                                                              
                                                                                              

                                
                       +R,R       0 PR fR R
                               1-

                                                       56
  Now we can substitute for  , taking into account the CRRA assumption



                     = U (Ce,R, ) (1 - Te,R, ) - U (Cu,R, ) (1 - Tu,R, ) bR,

                    = (R,R )- (1 - Te,R, )1- - (1 - Tu,R, )1- b1
                                                               R,
                                                                 -

                                                              -
                             fR R PR
                    =                [1 + R,R 0 ]                    (1 - Te,R, )1- - (1 - Tu,R, )1- b1
                                                                                                      R,
                                                                                                        -
                          1 + 1-  1
                                 1-

  Therefore


                                                                                     1-
                                                                                          
                                    bR,R 1+fR R PR
                                            1- 1     [1 + R,R 0 ] (1 - Tu,R,R )           
                                               1-
        Vu,R, (1 -  ) = 
                                                                                          
                                                          1-
                                                                                          
                                                                                          

                                                -
                 fR R PR                                                                                
        +                [1 + R,R 0 ]                  (1 - Te,R, )1- - (1 - Tu,R, )1- b1
                                                                                        R,
                                                                                          -
                                                                                            R,R           0 PR fR R
              1 + 1-  1
                     1-
                                                                                                       1-

                                                                      1-
                                                                                                                 
                                         1+R,R 0
                                    bR,R 1+ 1- 1     (1 - Tu,R,R )                                               
                                              1-
                                                                           +
                                                                                                                 
                     1-                         1-
                                                                                                                 
        = ( fR PR R )                                                                                            
                                                     -                                                           
                                    1 + R,R 0
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                          
                                                          (1 - Te,R, )1- - (1 - Tu,R, )1- b1 -
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                           R,  R,R          0
                                    1 + 1- 1
                                          1-
                                                                                                         1-

  or


                                                                           1-
                                                                                                                      
                                             1+R,R 0
                                        bR,R 1+ 1- 1      (1 - Tu,R,R )                                               
                                                  1-
                           1-       
                                                                                 +
                                                                                                                      
                 ( fR PR R )        
                                                       1-
                                                                                                                      
       Vu,R, =                                                                                                        
                      1-                                  -                                                           
                                        1 + R,R 0
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                               
                                                               (1 - Te,R, )1- - (1 - Tu,R, )1- b1 -
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                R,  R,R          0
                                        1 + 1- 1
                                              1-
                                                                                                              1-

  Note that the term in brackets is constant in steady state because it is a combination of exogenous parame-
ters and the tightness ratio, which we have shown to be independent of the productivity parameters. Defining
the term in brackets by        R   and the analogue for NRM by            NRM   we can express the values of unemployment
in both occupations as




                                                                57
          ( fR PR R )1-
Vu,R, =                   R
               1-
          ( fNRM PNRM NRM )1-
Vu,R, =                         NRM
                  1-




                58
A.7.    Derivation of change in welfare by group

We explain here the derivation of welfare changes discussed in section 4.3. Consider first those who choose
the routine occupational market both pre- and post-automation. Recall that the steady state value of being
unemployed, with ability R , and searching for employment in the R occupational market is given by:

                                                        ( fR PR R )1-
                                        Vu,R ,NRM =                         R.
                                                             1-

The steady state value of being employed is given by:

                                           (1- (1-µ (R )))
                                                                            
                                                                      b1-
                                                 1-               R - 1-
                           Ve,R ,NRM =                                       ( fR PR R )1- .
                                                      µ ( ,R )

Hence, the expected or average welfare of a labor force participant, with ability R , who selects into the R
occupation is a weighted average, with weights given by the unemployment and employment rates:

                                 VR ,NRM = URR Vu,R ,NRM + ERR Ve,R ,NRM .

Substituting in from above, the consumption equivalent value of utility is naturally given by:
                                                                                        1
                                                      (1- (1-µ (R )))
                                                                                 1-
                                                                                       1- 
                                                                                b
                                    R                         1-            R - 1-
                   CR = URR             + ERR                                                fR PR R .
                                 1-                                µ (R )

  Then, those who choose the routine occupational market both pre- and post-automation, the ratio of post-
to pre-automation welfare, denoted by ROLD RNEW , is given by:
                                                                         1
                                           (1- (1-µ (R )))       b1-    1-
                                                1-            R - 1-               NEW E ( )R
                                                                                                OLD RNEW
                     URR 1-R + ERR                  µ (R )                     fR PR      R
                                                                                                                NEW
                                                                                                               PR
       ROLD RNEW =                                                       1                                 =     OLD
                                                                                                                     ,
                                           (1- (1-µ (R )))       b1-    1-                                     PR
                                                 1-           R - 1-               OLD E ( )R   OLD RNEW
                      URR 1-R + ERR                 µ (R )                     fR PR      R


              OLD RNEW
where E (R )R            denotes the average ability of those who remain in R.
  We apply a similar approach to calculate welfare ratios for the other transitions. The welfare change due




                                                             59
to automation for those who switched form R to NRM is given by
                                                                                              1
                   
                         UNNRM         NRM
                                                                                   1-
                                           +                                      
                      EMPNRM + UNNRM 1 - 
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                               1 -            1 -           NEW E (     ROLD NRM NEW
                                        (1- (1-µ (NRM )))     bNRM (1-Tu,NRM )
                                                                  
                                                                                      fNRM PNRM    NRm )
                                                                                  
                                                            -
                                                                                  
                         EMPNRM
                                                                                  
                   
                   
                                              1-          R          1-
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                   
                                                                                  
                      EMPNRM + UNNRM                  µ ( ,NRM )
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  

ROLD NRMNEW =                                                                             1
                            
                                  UNR        R
                                                                                     
                                                                                      1-
                                                 +                                   
                               EMPR + UNR 1 - 
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                 1 -         OLD E ( )ROLD NRM NEW
                                                                      1- 1-T         
                                             (1 - (1 -   ( R )
                                                            ))      b R (   u,R )        fR PR
                                                                                     
                                                       µ                                            R
                                                                  -
                                                                                     
                                 EMPR
                                                                                     
                            
                            
                                                    1-          R         1-
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                               EMPR + UNR                     µ ( ,R )
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                     




which given our calibration targets can be simplified to
                                                                   R        OLD NRM NEW
                                                       NEW E (
                                                 fNRM PNRM    NRm )
                               ROLD NRMNEW =                         OLD NRM NEW
                                                        OLD E ( )R
                                                    fR PR      R

where we note that in the numerator we draw the NRM abilities for these individuals that transitions to NRM.
  The average change in welfare for R workers who leave the labor force is given by
                                                                        1
                                                       1  1
                                                      1- 1-       (bO ) 1-
   OLD        =
  R    NLF NEW                                                                     1
                      UNR        R
                                                                          
                                                                           1-
                                     +                                    
                   EMPR + UNR 1 - 
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                     1 -          OLD E ( )ROLD NLF NEW
                                                          1- 1-T          
                
                                 (1 - (1 - µ ( R )
                                                ))      b R (   u,R )     
                                                                              fR PR      R
                                                      -
                                                                          
                     EMPR
                                                                          
                
                
                                        1-          R         1-          
                                                                          
                   EMPR + UNR                     µ ( ,R )
                                                                         
                                                                          
                                                                          




  Note that by definition, there is an individual who is indifferent between participating in the labor force
and not. Then, since the value of being outside of the labor force does not change in this analysis, we can
rewrite the above expression as
                                                             ,OLD
                                                             R
                                       ROLD NLF NEW =             OLD NLF NEW
                                                        E (R )R

  The average change in the consumption equivalence for those who worked in Non-Routine Manual oc-
cupations, and continued working in Non-Routine Manual occupations is given by
                                                                    NEW
                                                                   PNRM
                                           NRMOLD NRMNEW =          OLD
                                                                   PNRM



                                                        60
  The average change in consumption equivalent welfare for those who were outside the labor force and
started working in Non-Routine-Manual occupations post-automation is given by


                                                                                       1
                
                       UNNRM         NRM
                                                                                   1-
                                         +                                        
                    EMPNRM + UNNRM 1 - 
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                                             NLF OLD NRM NEW
                                                                                  
                                                                              1 -                NEW E (
                                                                                                        NRM )
                                                               1 -                         fNRM PNRM
                                      (1- (1-µ (NRM )))       bNRM (1-Tu,NRM )
                                                                  
                                                                                  
    OLD     NEW =
                                                            -
                                                                                  
NLF     NRM                                                                                                        1
                       EMPNRM
                                                                                  
                                                        NRM          1-                               1   1 b    1-
                                            1-                                                       1- 1- ( O )
                 
                 
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                    EMPNRM + UNNRM                     µ ( ,NRM )
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  




  As above, given the cutoff value of those individuals who are outside the labor force we can rewrite this
expression as
                                                              NLF   OLD NRM NEW
                                                  NEW E (
                                                 PNRM    NRM )
                              NLF OLD NRMNEW =
                                                          OLD  ,OLD
                                                         PNRM NRM




                                                    61
A.8.     Alternative calibration of 


                                      Table A8: Alternative calibration with  = 0.5


                                            Automation Capital          Retraining        UI         UBI         NLF             Taxation
                                                 Change                                                         Benefits
 Labor states
   NLF                                              2.091                 -2.149        -2.133       5.751      14.743            -5.013
  R                                                 -3.896                 0.526        1.584       -4.673      -11.279            3.709
   NRM                                              1.805                  1.623        0.550       -1.078       -3.464            1.304
   Emp. Rate R                                      0.950                   0.95        0.945        0.945        0.950            0.950
   Emp. Rate NRM                                    0.950                   0.95        0.944        0.944        0.950            0.950
  YNRC                                              1.200                 0.379          0.119     -14.439       -7.858           -2.163
  YR                                                -4.155                 1.316        0.302       -4.648      -11.965            2.973
  YNRM                                               9.664                 4.144        -0.438      -3.548      -12.495            3.784
  GDP                                               12.140                 1.327        0.282       -9.920       -9.748           0.195
  NRC labor tax                                      0.00                 -1.524        -0.449      35.500       24.587          10.355
 Wages
  R                                                 -6.154                -0.093        0.516       -7.142        3.240           -4.112
  NRM                                               2.149                 -3.129        0.730       -6.139        2.747           -3.590
  NRC                                               23.373                0.901         0.001        8.108       -3.587           4.451
  NRC : after tax                                   23.373                0.766         0.157      -11.240       -9.151           -2.606
 Welfare: Consumption Equivalence
   : ROld  RNew                                      -6.60                  0.80         1.96        6.18         3.29            10.20
   : ROld  NRM New                                   -1.70                  NA           2.34        9.09          NA             10.50
   : ROld  NLF New                                   -3.60                  0.20         NA          26.50        16.50            NA
   : NRM Old  RNew                                    NA                   -1.00         NA           NA          3.04             NA
   : NRM Old  NRM New                                 2.50                 -2.50         2.15         6.77         2.78           10.80
   : NRM Old  NLF New                                 NA                   -1.60         NA          27.08        16.27            NA
   : NLF Old  RNew                                    NA                    NA           2.28         NA           NA              5.83
   : NLF Old  NRM New                                 1.90                 10.44         2.39         NA           NA             6.10
   : NLF Old  NLF New                                 0.00                  0.00         0.00        34.60        34.66            0.00
   : NRCOld  NRCNew                                  22.30                 2.05          0.72       -21.70       -22.50           -5.30

       Notes: (i)  denotes percentage point change; (ii)  denotes percentage change; (iii) the reference point for the first
       column is the steady state beofre the Automation capital price decline; (iv) the reference point for columns 2-6 is the
       steady state after the Automation capital price decline.




                                                                 62
                                 Table A9: Alternative calibration with  = -0.5

                                        Automation Capital           Retraining         UI         UBI         NLF             Taxation
                                             Change                                                           Benefits
Labor states
  NLF                                            2.258                 -2.186        -2.356        6.202      15.624            -5.626
 R                                               -3.742                 0.373        1.628        -4.897      -11.877            4.089
  NRM                                            1.484                  1.733        0.723        -1.308       -3.837            1.533
  Emp. Rate R                                    0.950                   0.95        0.946         0.946        0.950            0.950
  Emp. Rate NRM                                  0.950                   0.95        0.946         0.946        0.950            0.950
 YNRC                                            1.232                 0.237          0.179      -13.886       -8.249           -1.882
 YR                                              -3.335                 0.053        -0.291       -5.671      -13.349            2.942
 YNRM                                             5.458                 6.160        -0.666       -4.868      -14.480            4.457
 GDP                                             11.894                 0.733        -0.256      -10.422      -10.900           -0.095
 NRC labor tax                                    0.00                 -1.281        -0.650      35.290        25.816           9.664
Wages
 R                                               -7.231                 0.091        -0.303       -7.447        2.917           -4.788
 NRM                                             6.434                 -5.453         0.443       -5.604        3.529           -4.406
 NRC                                             23.224                0.696         -0.435        6.972       -4.443           4.241
 NRC : after tax                                 23.224                0.796          0.145      -14.375      -12.314           -3.051
Welfare: Consumption Equivalence
  : ROld  RNew                                   -7.00                   1.42          1.78        6.24         3.65            10.00
  : ROld  NRM New                                -0.40                   NA            3.00       15.04         3.87            10.21
  : ROld  NLF New                                -4.30                   NA            NA         25.70         16.30            NA
  : NRM Old  RNew                                 NA                    -1.62          NA           NA           NA              NA
  : NRM Old  NRM New                              6.64                  -4.35          2.50         7.99         4.10           10.43
  : NRM Old  NLF New                              NA                    -2.55          NA          26.82        16.90            NA
  : NLF Old  RNew                                 NA                     0.90          2.16         NA           NA              5.71
  : NLF Old  NRM New                              4.00                   9.96          2.51         NA           NA              5.98
  : NLF Old  NLF New                              0.00                   0.00          0.00        33.60        33.60            0.00
  : NRCOld  NRCNew                               22.46                  1.81           0.00       -22.50       -24.00           -5.30

   Notes: (i)  denotes percentage point change; (ii)  denotes percentage change; (iii) the reference point for the first
   column are relative to the steady state before the Automation capital price decline; (iv) the reference point for columns
   2-6 is the steady state after the Automation capital price decline.




                                                              63
A.9.    Elasticity of unemployment duration to unemployment benefits

In the context of the UI and UBI experiment, a key channel through which these policies operate is via the
bargaining problem and its impact on the wage and vacancies posting by firms. To discipline our analysis we
required the model to match the elasticity of unemployment duration to unemployment benefits; different
values of this elasticity have vastly different implications for the impact of different policy reforms. As such
we require our model to match an elasticity value of 1, which is within the range of the empirical counterpart
(see for example Meyer (1990) and Chetty (2008)).
   To match this elasticity in the model we solve for the labor market equilibrium for different individuals
and for different values of unemployment transfers. We then estimate the aggregate resulting tightness ratio
and job finding rates, from which we calculate the elasticity of unemployment duration to unemployment
transfers. We follow the approach in Yedid-Levi (2016) that allows us to match the elasticity of unem-
ployment duration to unemployment benefits, while maintaining log preferences. In this modification we
introduce an additional parameter that links the bargaining power of the worker with labor market tightness,
in a way that tames the response of wages to changes in UI benefits. Formally, the bargaining power  is
now expressed as  ( ) =                 0
                                          .36ss 
                                 0 +(1-0 )( 
                                       )
   Importantly, this implies that this alternative parametrization of the model does not affect any of the
results presented until Section 6 since the value of  is not changed as long as the tightness ratio does not
deviate from its steady state value. Indeed in Section 5 following the Automation capital price change the
tightness ratio is not altered.
   To identify  we repeat the discussed above analysis and reestimate the elasticity of unemployment
duration to unemployment benefits until the model matches the micro elasticity, converging on a value of
 = 20.
   Thus to summarize, until section 6, given that the unemployment rate is constant, the elasticity of un-
employment duration to unemployment benefits is quantitatively an irrelevant moment. In Section 6 where
unemployment reacts to the changes in UI and UBI, we verify that the model matches the observed micro
elasticity of unemployment duration to unemployment benefits.




  36 Note   that when  = 0 then the model converges to the benchmark case with constant bargaining power.


                                                               64
