                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          WHAT KEEPS STABLECOINS STABLE?

                                       Richard K. Lyons
                                    Ganesh Viswanath-Natraj

                                      Working Paper 27136
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27136


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




For detailed comments we thank Nic Carter, Barry Eichengreen, Alex Ferreira, Pierre-Olivier
Gourinchas, Bob Hodrick, Roman Kozhan, as well as seminar participants at the University of
Warwick Economics and Finance brownbags, and the London Empirical Asset Pricing
Workshop. We thank Siravit Rattananon, Arijit Santra, Morgan Kidd, and Ying Chen for valuable
research assistance, and the Berkeley Haas Blockchain Initiative for a research grant. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. No additional disclosures. The funding we received from UC
Berkeley's Haas School of Business, the Blockchain Initiative, came with no strings attached and
no impact on research design, analysis, writing, or otherwise.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Richard K. Lyons and Ganesh Viswanath-Natraj. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Keeps Stablecoins Stable?
Richard K. Lyons and Ganesh Viswanath-Natraj
NBER Working Paper No. 27136
May 2020
JEL No. E02,E4,E5,F3,F4,G12,G14,G15,G2,O16,O33

                                           ABSTRACT

We take this question to be isomorphic to, "What Keeps Fixed Exchange Rates Fixed?" and
address it with analysis familiar in exchange-rate economics. Stablecoins solve the volatility
problem by pegging to a national currency, typically the US dollar, and are used as vehicles for
exchanging national currencies into non-stable cryptocurrencies, with some stablecoins having a
ratio of trading volume to outstanding supply exceeding one daily. Using a rich dataset of signed
trades and order books on multiple exchanges, we examine how peg-sustaining arbitrage
stabilizes the price of the largest stablecoin, Tether. We find that stablecoin issuance, the closest
analogue to central-bank intervention, plays only a limited role in stabilization, pointing instead
to stabilizing forces on the demand side. Following Tether's introduction to the Ethereum
blockchain in 2019, we find increased investor access to arbitrage trades, and a decline in
arbitrage spreads from 70 to 30 basis points. We also pin down which fundamentals drive the
two-sided distribution of peg-price deviations: Premiums are due to stablecoins' role as a safe
haven, exhibiting, for example, premiums greater than 100 basis points during the COVID-19
crisis of March 2020; discounts derive from liquidity effects and collateral concerns.


Richard K. Lyons
Haas School of Business
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
lyons@haas.berkeley.edu

Ganesh Viswanath-Natraj
Warwick Business School
The University of Warwick
Coventry CV4 7AL
UK
ganesh.viswanath-natraj@wbs.ac.uk
Introduction and Motivation
    Benefits of cryptocurrencies include ubiquitous ledgers and transparent updating, where
payments are verified and recorded without need for centralized settlement. A major drawback
is their volatility, with Bitcoin (BTC) volatility relative to the US dollar (USD) being roughly 10
times that between the major national currencies (Yermack, 2015). This led to the introduction
of stablecoins, most of which peg to the USD. By maintaining a collateralized peg, this category
of cryptocurrency is much less volatile, and is used as a store of value and medium of exchange
in the digital-asset economy. The role of stablecoins has risen dramatically in the last two years,
with estimates of total trading volume between Bitcoin and Tether, the stablecoin in largest
supply, exceeding the trading volume of Bitcoin/USD in 2019.1
    At first glance, it is not clear why there is so much demand for stablecoins as a vehicle
currency given that the dollar itself could serve directly for rebalancing portfolios. There are
institutional features, however, that induce investors to use stablecoins. The first is added
intermediation costs when trading cryptocurrencies for dollars. On some exchanges, for exam-
ple, there are longer processing lags for dollar withdrawals. Fees are also often imposed when
dollar withdrawals are frequent or large.2 A second institutional feature favoring stablecoins is
their usability across a greater cross-section of crypto exchanges: Of the exchanges that have
"trusted volume" according to a report filed with the SEC, two of them, Binance and Poloniex,
do not provide investors with any on-ramp for trading dollars, and only accept stablecoins as a
medium of exchange.3
    Exchange-rate pegs have a long history both in practice and in exchange-rate economics.
A example is the Hong Kong dollar (HKD) peg to the USD managed through a currency-
board system since 1983 by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. The large literature on
national-currency pegs addresses whether they are vulnerable to attack depending on, for ex-
ample, macroeconomic fundamentals such as interest rates and inflation, and whether the peg
is sufficiently backed by reserves.4 A key lesson in this literature is the importance of the insti-
tutional/policy regime for ensuring credibility, in part through management of foreign exchange

1
  https://econ.st/2NSR5Q6.
2
  For more information, refer to the following announcements by Bitfinex: https://bit.ly/2NEzITW and
  https://www.bitfinex.com/posts/311. Bitfinex states it takes investors 7 to 15 days to make dollar with-
  drawals from their platform in order to comply with intermediation procedures. Bitfinex has also introduced a
  transaction cost of 3% for investors who make more than two dollar withdrawals a month, or for withdrawals
  of more than $1 million in a given month.
3
  For a report on trusted exchanges, see https://www.sec.gov/comments/sr-nysearca-2019-01/
  srnysearca201901-5164833-183434.pdf.
4
  Note our use of the adjective "national-currency" rather than "fiat." We dislike the term fiat for describing
  national currencies when contrasting them with cryptocurrencies. Wikipedia, for example, offers a two-part
  definition of a fiat currency as being i) without intrinsic value and ii) established as money often by government
  decree. Bitcoin is certainly fiat with respect to the first of these defining dimensions, so calling the USD fiat
  and BTC not fiat is misleading.

                                                         2
reserves.
    There are currently two types of stablecoin depending on the backing collateral: national-
currency backed and cryptocurrency backed.5 The two types employ different systems for
maintaining the peg. Here we focus on the design of national-currency-backed stablecoins, and
focus specifically on Tether (USDT), the most liquid and heavily traded of the stablecoins, with
a market cap of $4.1 billion in late 2019, accounting for nearly 80 percent of the total market
cap of the stablecoin market.
    A key difference between a national-currency peg and a stablecoin peg is that the distribution
of stablecoin price deviations is two-sided (Figure 1).6 While typically national currencies
pegged to the dollar trade at a discount due to the risk of mismanagement by the central bank,
it is more difficult to rationalize why stablecoins so frequently trade at a premium.


             Figure 1: Tether/USD Deviations from Peg and Histogram of Deviations
                    Deviations from Peg: USDT_USD                         Deviations from Peg: USDT_USD
            0.04                                                  140
            0.02                                                  120
            0.00                                                  100
                                                          Frequency




            0.02                                                   80
      USD




            0.04                                                   60
            0.06                                                   40
            0.08                                                   20
            0.10                                                     0
                   5 9 1 5 9 1 5 9 1 5                            0.06   0.04   0.02   0.00 0.02   0.04   0.06
                7-0 7-0 8-0 8-0 8-0 9-0 9-0 9-0 0-0 0-0
             201 201 201 201 201 201 201 201 202 202                                     USD
                                   Date
Note: Figure plots the deviations of the Tether/USD price from parity (left panel). A positive deviation indicates
Tether/USD trades at a premium. The right panel indicates a histogram of deviations of the Tether/USD peg.
Data from Coinapi. Sample is April 2017 to March 2020.


    We develop a model of stablecoin prices that generates a two-sided distribution and examine
its other testable implications. In the framework, an investor chooses to invest in a risky
cryptoasset using dollars, stablecoins, or both. The investor's relative demand for each vehicle
currency is dependent on the relative ease with which they can transact in cryptocurrency.
By imposing an increased intermediation cost for using dollars, the model describes how the
stablecoin trades at a premium due to its relative benefit as a vehicle. The model also includes
arbitrageurs who trade against peg deviations, which in turn stabilizes prices around the peg.
For example, if the stablecoin trades at a premium then they have an incentive to buy stablecoins
from the primary-market issuer at parity, and sell them in the secondary market for a profit.

5
  A third type is not backed at all by collateral. We omit this type from our analysis ­ they are viewed skeptically
  by academics and industry analysts alike; see Eichengreen (2019) for more details.
6
  Plots of peg-price deviations for other major stablecoins are provided in the appendix C.

                                                          3
      We then test the model predictions empirically. The first question we answer is how national-
currency-based stablecoins maintain stability of the peg. In a conventional fixed-exchange-rate
regime, a central bank stands ready to use its foreign reserves to exchange for domestic currency
in the event there are persistent deviations from the peg. When the domestic currency's value
trades below the peg, the central bank reduces the supply of domestic currency by selling foreign
reserves. The stability mechanism is thus supply driven in the case of a central-bank-managed
peg. Empirically, we do not find evidence of this stabilizing mechanism on the supply side; it is
the demand side instead, the trades of apparent arbitrageurs, that stabilizes price around the
peg.
      In the case of Tether, each unit is purportedly backed fully by USD reserves.7 In the event
of a mass Tether liquidation, the Tether Treasury would be able in principle to draw down its
reserves and still maintain the peg. Under this system, Tether supply would be dependent on
investor demands, with supply increasing when investors decide to deposit USD with Tether Inc,
and falling when investors reclaim dollar deposits, which withdraws Tether from circulation.
To illustrate how arbitrage trading maintains the peg, suppose the Tether/USD price in the
market falls below the peg at 1. Private investors can buy Tether at that price and sell those
Tether to the Tether Treasury at the rate of 1 Tether/USD. Both legs of this arbitrage put
endogenous, upward pressure on the Tether price toward the one-to-one parity. (The selling of
Tether to the Treasury is a reduction of the supply in circulation.) If alternatively the Tether
price of USD rises above 1, private investors can sell USD to the Tether Treasury, obtaining in
return Tether at one-to-one, which they then sell into the market at the prevailing higher rate.
Again, both legs put pressure on the market price toward parity, in this case downward. For
stablecoins to remain stable, they depend on these mechanisms to operate when the market
rate deviates from the target peg.
      We test these mechanisms in two ways. First, to obtain data on Tether issuance we use
data from the two platforms Omni Explorer and Etherscan, which contain an entire history of
transactions, and classify transactions between senders and recipients of Tether. Transactions
are classified as "simple send" (transactions between two wallets), "grants" (creation of new
tokens)," or "revokes" (redemptions of tokens). We use this to construct net flows from the
Tether Treasury to the secondary market. The second dataset is Coinapi, which provides
transaction and order-book data on stablecoin currency pairs with respect to the USD for
multiple crypto exchanges. This dataset provides the timestamp of each trade, together with
the price and amount of the underlying Tether in each trade, and a true-or-false variable taker
side sell which we use to sign each transaction according to the direction of the trade's initiator.
Using this rich dataset, we construct issuance flow using recorded trades between the Tether
7
    This is similar to the operation of the Hong Kong Currency Board, in which the central bank maintains dollar
    reserves to match every Hong Kong dollar in circulation.

                                                        4
Treasury and investors.
    To test our hypothesis of investor-driven flows stabilizing the peg, we exploit a pseudo
natural experiment: The April 2019 introduction of Tether on the Ethereum blockchain. This
resulted in a large increase in investor access to the Tether Treasury, made possible by the
reduced transaction costs of operating on the Ethereum blockchain.8 Following this event, we
do observe a significant increase in the number of unique addresses transacting with the Tether
Treasury. Consistent with our hypothesis, we also find a significant decline in the size of price
deviations of the peg and a decline in the half-life of deviations from 6 days to 3 days. We then
construct estimates of arbitrage spreads and imputed profits of investors that deposit dollars
with the Tether Treasury. We find that Tether's introduction to the Ethereum blockchain
coincides with a decrease in the average size of arbitrage trades from $7 to $4 million, and a
decline in arbitrage spreads from 70 to 30 basis points. We also find that arbitrage flows to the
secondary market have a stabilizing impact on the Tether price, with a one standard deviation
change in net flows causing a decline in the deviation of Tether's price from the peg by up to
10 basis points.
    We then test hypotheses regarding which fundamentals drive peg deviations. This follows a
literature on national-currency pegs, e.g. Eichengreen et al. (1994), in which deviations of pegs
are due to either macroeconomic fundamentals (such as interest rates misalignments, current
account deficits, government deficits, or high inflation) or insufficient reserves. Analogously, we
can test which fundamentals impact pricing of stablecoins. The first (proximate) fundamental
we examine is order flow, which is the net of buyer-initiated trades less seller-initiated trades in
the Tether-Dollar pair in the secondary market.9 We use order-book data across multiple crypto
exchanges, and find evidence that order flow is significant for price discovery in the secondary
market, with a positive shock to net buyer-initiated flows to the secondary market causing an
increase in the dollar price of Tether: One percent change in price per roughly $40 million in
net order flows. We then examine fundamentals such as the intensity of trading of Bitcoin.
We find that on average an increase in the volatility of Bitcoin trading has a positive effect on
the Tether price. This is evidence that Tether, and other stablecoins, serve as safe havens in
the domain of cryptoassets. This effect is particularly pronounced in turbulent periods. For
example, when the price of Bitcoin crashed in January of 2018, the Tether price averaged a
premium of 5 cents. Investors rebalanced their portfolios by liquidating their Bitcoin holdings
into Tether during this period. In another example, Bitcoin crashed by 40% overnight during
the COVID-19 economic shock. As investors rebalanced their portfolios toward a store of value,

8
  For more information on the event, we refer readers to https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/
  huobi-global-offers-deposit--withdrawal-in-tether-erc20-300803113.html.
9
  Identifying the direction of a trade's initiation is crucial for getting the information economics right: all trades
  have a buyer and a seller ­ the informational "news" is in the direction of the initiator/aggressor.

                                                          5
we find increases in stablecoin premiums during this period as well.
   Finally, we conclude with a case study of a speculative attack on Tether in October of 2018.
In this episode, speculators were uncertain whether Tether was fully collateralized, due to a
move by its partner exchange Bitfinex to suspend convertibility of dollar deposits. The Bitfinex
exchange is responsible for investing the majority of USD deposits with the Tether Treasury. A
risk of the Treasury being under-collateralized poses a systemic risk to the Bitfinex exchange.
In response to this event, we find a decline in the USD price of Tether, a rise in the volatility
of trading volume in Tether, and a rise in bid-ask spreads.
   Turning to related literature, there are many studies of how fundamentals determine fixed
exchange rates, such as relative money supplies and interest rates, capital flows, financial fric-
tions, and commodity prices (Eichengreen et al., 1994; Engel and West, 2005; Gabaix and
Maggiori, 2015; Itskhoki and Mukhin, 2017; Chen and Rogoff, 2003). Eichengreen et al. (1994),
for example, show that macroeconomic factors such as insufficient reserves of the central bank,
interest-rate differentials, current-account and sovereign deficits, and high inflation can result
in a currency trading at prices discounted from the pegged value. In this setting a peg can
collapse due to macroeconomic fundamentals that are sufficiently weak. With stablecoins, stan-
dard macroeconomic fundamentals need not apply in the same way, and certainly do not when
considering the fundamentals of the currency-issuing entity (not a country). A second line of
macroeconomic modeling of fixed rates focuses on the collapse of fixed exchange rates due to
inadequate central bank reserves (Krugman, 1979; Flood and Hodrick, 1986; Obstfeld, 1984).
This has led to so-called "2nd generation" models, where currency crises arise from specula-
tive attacks that are potentially self-fulfilling (Eichengreen et al., 1995; Morris and Shin, 1998;
Chamley, 2003; Cukierman et al., 2004). In these models, there is generally an equilibrium un-
der which the peg is sustainable, and another under which the peg can be broken if speculation
is sufficiently intense.
   Our paper also relates to the role of central-bank intervention in maintaining pegs (Fratzscher
et al., 2019a,b; Sarno and Taylor, 2001; Ferreira et al., 2019; Flood and Jeanne, 2005; Vitale,
1999) and a theoretical literature on target zones (Krugman, 1991; Svensson, 1992). Empirical
evidence in Fratzscher et al. (2019b) shows that central banks typically "lean against the wind"
by actively counteracting the private forex buy/sell trades of market participants, which has a
stabilising effect on the exchange rate. A theoretical prediction of the target-zone models is the
so-called "honeymoon" effect: That the currency price under a credible peg tends to cluster
toward the middle of the target zone due to the expectation of a central bank intervention that
leans against the wind near the edges. With national-currency-based stablecoins, there is gen-
erally no equivalent of a central bank actively participating in the market to stabilize the peg.
Instead, most stablecoin systems generate price stabilization through demand-driven flows to
arbitrage differences between the official peg and the rate in the secondary market, akin to the

                                                6
mechanism that keeps exchange-traded funds trading at prices close to their net asset values.10
     The literature on cryptocurrencies is relatively new, with many papers focusing on how
Bitcoin and other prices are determined (Abadi and Brunnermeier, 2018; Biais et al., 2019;
Catalini and Gans, 2016; Chiu and Koeppl, 2017; Easley et al., 2019; Schilling and Uhlig, 2019;
Raskin and Yermack, 2018; Zimmerman, 2020; Sockin and Xiong, 2020), initial coin offerings
(ICOs) (Catalini and Gans, 2018; Howell et al., 2018; Goldstein et al., 2019; Florysiak and
Schandlbauer, 2019), and central-bank digital currencies (Bordo and Levin, 2017; Benigno et
al., 2019; Bindseil, 2020; Brunnermeier et al., 2019; Fernández-Villaverde et al., 2020; Kumhof
and Noone, 2018; Raskin and Yermack, 2018; Skeie, n.d.). Topics include: Bitcoin having a
dual role as a medium of exchange and speculative investment, the pricing of fees for mining,
and the interaction of digital-currency deposits with monetary policy and central banking. In
our paper, we abstract from the process of Bitcoin price determination and base our model
on Bitcoin (or other non-stable cryptocurrency) as a predominantly speculative investment,
focusing instead on the investor's decision whether to use dollars or stablecoins as the vehicle
to finance their speculative investment.
     The cryptocurrency research most closely related to our paper focuses on market efficiency.
Much attention has been paid to the potential for market manipulation, with evidence of
pump and dump schemes (Gandal et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018; Dhawan and Putnins, 2020),
opportunities for speculation and arbitrage on crypto exchanges (Makarov and Schoar, 2019,
2020; Hale et al., 2018) and determining a set of factors to explain cryptocurrency returns
(Liu and Tsyvinski, 2018; Bhambhwani et al., 2019). There is a recent and growing literature
investigating properties of stablecoins (Berentsen and Schär, 2019; Bullmann et al., 2019; BIS,
2019; Eichengreen, 2019). For example Eichengreen (2019) comments on stablecoins being
backed by either national currencies or cryptocurrencies, and highlights that systems can be
vulnerable to speculative attack if there is perception that the peg is under-collateralized. Griffin
and Shams (2020) document the role of Tether as a vehicle currency, and how it has been used
potentially to manipulate Bitcoin prices during 2017 and 2018.11 There is also recent work
that looks at intraday price changes to support the role of stablecoins as safe havens (Baur and
Hoang, 2020, in press). We extend existing work on stablecoins in several ways. Most broadly,

10
   There are other differences between the decentralized structure of stablecoins and forex interventions by a
   central bank. For example, a central bank is typically concerned with macroeconomic fundamentals like
   preserving low interest rates and inflation, and is targeting an exchange rate that is based on a set of macroe-
   conomic fundamentals. A stablecoin issuer has no equivalent policy function. Secondly, investors can often
   deposit dollars directly with the stablecoin issuer. In contrast, investors cannot typically initiate trades, or
   directly deposit currency, with the central bank.
11
   As of October 2019, there is a class-action suit against Tether that claims: (i) Tether is not backed one-for-
   one by dollar reserves and (ii) Bitfinex increased Tether issuance during 2017 to manipulate Bitcoin markets.
   Plaintiff-estimated damages amount to roughly 1.4 trillion USD. For more details, see The Economist : https:
   //econ.st/2WPQjXX.

                                                        7
we push beyond past work focusing on prices only and address quantities, in particular signed
order flow. This allows many new avenues of analysis, e.g., quantifying the effects on prices of
bearing the risk that safe havens help avoid (by estimating the negative loadings of stablecoin
prices on a crypto risk factor). We also present an optimizing model that clarifies why dollar
prices of Tether should at times trade above the parity of 1.0, as noted above.
     The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In section 1 we summarize the proper-
ties and performance of the major stablecoins. In section 2 we introduce the model of stablecoin
prices, and use it to illustrate potential mechanisms that produce a distribution of peg devia-
tions that is two-sided. In section 3, we illustrate mechanisms through which arbitrage flows
from investors can stabilize deviations of market prices from parity. In section 4 we test hy-
potheses about which fundamentals drive parity deviations, and provide a discussion of factors
contributing to why Tether trades at a premium, such as its role as a safe-haven asset in periods
of increased risk, and why Tether trades at a discount, such as the amount of collateral and
trading volatility. Section 5 concludes.


1      Stablecoins: Properties and Performance
     The collateral systems adopted by the six largest stablecoins by market capitalization are
presented in Table 1.12 Stablecoins are typically backed by either dollar collateral or crypto
collateral. Of the top six coins by market cap, five are backed by dollar deposits, the exception
being DAI, which is backed by Ethereum.13 The methods of how dollar collateral itself is
backed includes a central issuer in the case of Tether, which acts analogously to the Hong Kong
Currency Board. The second-largest stablecoin, USDC, has a more decentralized system of
governance, with multiple issuers that have a license to provide USDC tokens. The other three
stablecoins managed by dollar collateral, Binance USD Coin, Paxos, and TrueUSD, focus on
concerns over the risk of issuer default: In the case of Binance USD coin and Paxos, dollar
collateral is backed by FDIC-insured banks, whereas TrueUSD dollar collateral is backed by
escrow accounts.14
     The sixth largest coin, DAI, is different from the other coins in that it is a crypto-collateral-

12
   The top six coins by market share in April 2020 capture over 95% of the stablecoin market.
13
   Since November 16, 2019, investors holding single-collateral DAI have transferred their holdings to multi-
   collateral DAI. For the purposes of our analysis, we address single-collateral DAI as it has a longer time series.
   Multi-collateral DAI is also based on Ethereum collateral at present, with a view to extend to different types
   of collateral in the future. In the market, the ticker DAI now refers to the multi-collateral version; the original
   single-collateral version now has the ticker DAI.
14
   Escrow accounts offer a novel security design. For example, suppose an investor wants to deposit one USD for
   one TrueUSD token. They first deposit their dollar in a protected escrow account. TrueUSD then provides
   the escrow account 1 token. Only upon receipt of the token, and once the token is sent to the investor, the
   escrow account transfers the dollar deposit to TrueUSD. This system minimises settlement risk on both sides
   of the transaction.

                                                          8
based coin. Under this system, investors deposit Ethereum into a collateralized position that
allows them to borrow DAI. The number of DAI they can borrow is limited by a smart (i.e.,
auto-executing) contract. The contract liquidates underlying Ethereum collateral if the value
of that collateral is less than 150% of the corresponding DAI-borrowing value. Agents therefore
have an incentive to scale back borrowing by redeeming DAI when Ethereum prices fall in order
to prevent their collateral from breaching the 150% level.
     A technical difference among the stablecoins is their choice of stabilizing mechanism. For
stablecoins backed by dollar collateral, this works through investor arbitrage flows. When the
USD price of the stablecoin rises above parity, investors have an incentive to deposit dollars
to create new stablecoin tokens, and sell them in the secondary market. For a coin backed by
Ethereum, an investor has to take into account expectations of the future value of Ethereum,
so there is no risk-free arbitrage opportunity in this case.15 DAI also has by design a monetary-
policy tool at its disposal: Through a voting procedure on DAI's platform MAKER DAO,
holders of the currency have a right to vote on a "stability fee". This is a fee for borrowing
DAI, analogous to a central bank setting the interest rate on borrowed money. All else equal,
in a period when DAI is trading at a discount, a rise in the stability fee induces an increase in
DAI redemptions, shrinking supply in order to restore parity.
     An equally important institutional detail is how these coins' collateral is audited. Tether
publishes its balance sheet daily,16 which provides a breakdown of the value of its assets (dollar
deposits) and liabilities (Tether in circulation on blockchain platforms). While Tether liabilities
are accounted for based on the record of transactions on the blockchain, there is a need to audit
issuers to verify that the holdings of dollar deposits are secure. For full solvency, the dollar
value of assets held in the issuer's accounts must at least equal the dollar value of its liabilities.
Audit reports for these top coins assert that they are sufficiently collateralized. We review audit
accountability and transparency measures in Appendix B.




15
   For example, suppose DAI trades at a premium in the secondary market. The value of Ethereum collateral
   is subject to uncertainty, so if an investor believes the value of Ethereum is expected to fall, they may choose
   not to add Ethereum collateral in order to borrow DAI to sell in the secondary market.
16
   See https://wallet.tether.to/transparencyformoredetails.

                                                        9
                             Table 1: Top 6 Stablecoins ­ System of Collateral


            Coin            Symbol       Blockchain                          System of Collateral
            Tether          USDT     Omni and Ethereum  100% USD Deposits held in centralized Tether Treasury
          USD Coin          USDC         Ethereum       100% USD Deposits in decentralized (private) accounts.
       Paxos Standard       PAX          Ethereum           100% USD Deposits held by FDIC-insured banks
      Binance USD Coin      BUSD         Ethereum           100% USD Deposits held by FDIC-insured banks
          True USD          TUSD         Ethereum             100% USD Deposits held in escrow accounts
     Multi Collateral DAI    DAI         Ethereum      Ethereum held in CDO with value of >150% DAI borrowed

The table lists properties of the top-six stablecoins by market capitalization as of April 2020. Blockchain refers
to the platform on which the history of transactions is recorded. System refers to method of collateral; for
dollar-collateral-based systems this means there is, as a stated principle, 100% backing of dollar deposits.


       Table 2 presents summary statistics on the deviations from peg prices as of March 2020.
(For details on the source of price data, see the data appendix A.) The first observation is the
high ratio of total reported trading volume to the market capitalization, also referred to as the
daily velocity of stablecoins in circulation.17 This daily ratio is typically over five for Tether, the
largest coin, and is similarly above one for other national-currency-backed coins Paxos (PAX)
and TrueUSD (TUSD). For perspective, the daily turnover in spot foreign exchange markets
involving the USD as one leg of the transaction is $1.7 trillion over the period 2016-2019,
compared to a total supply in circulation of approximately $15 trillion. This implies a daily
USD velocity of one tenth, an order of magnitude smaller than stablecoin velocities. A takeaway
is that stablecoins derive significant use in cryptocurrency markets as vehicle currencies.




17
     The reported 24H Volume in Coinmarketcap and other vendors includes all transactions verified on the
     blockchain. The volume of trading on exchanges trusted by the SEC is less likely to be inflated for the
     purpose of feigning activity and liquidity.

                                                       10
                            Table 2: Top 6 Stablecoins ­ Peg Price Deviations


       Sample        Symbol     Market Cap       24H Volume      Mean       SD     Min     Max     Half-Life (days)
 04/17-03/20         USDT         $6,400M         $40,000M        -20.5    128.9 -960      571            6.4
 01/20-03/20         USDC          $705M           $692M            6.9     25.0 -21       100            0.8
 01/19-03/20         PAX           $245M           $911M           7.8     29.6 -100       200            0.5
 10/10-03/20         BUSD          $187M            $49M            1.4     6.1   -10       50            0.3
 06/18-03/20         TUSD          $136M           $466M            6.7     59.2 -170      990            0.4
 04/18-03/20          DAI          $79M             $12M           42.5    128.7 -391      800            4.7

Note: Market capitalization for all coins is based on total value of stablecoins in circulation; 24H Volume is
total reported trading volume, from Cryptoslate (as of April 10th 2020, https://cryptoslate.com/cryptos/
stablecoin/). Summary statistics for price deviations from the parity peg are expressed in basis points (100
basis points equals 1 percent, which here equals 1 US cent). Half-Life is in days. Price data are sourced from
Coinapi, which reports data from trusted exchanges Bitfinex, Bittrex and Kraken.


       Examining the summary statistics in Table 2, we observe that stablecoins typically have
two-sided distributions, with maximum deviations both below and above the one-to-one parity
exceeding 500 basis points (five percent) for Tether (USDT), and of similar magnitudes for the
other coins. We also observe deviation persistence, measured by the half-life of price departures
from the peg. The half-lives for all coins range from 1 to 10 days.18 Persistence of deviations is
evidence that the stabilizing mechanisms of these coins are not without frictions or risk.
       Our hypothesis and model below includes three possible explanations for the existence of the
deviations' two-sided distribution and persistence. The first is liquidity, for example, affecting
the price impact of arbitrage-trade flows. The second explanation is a speculative channel and
includes concern over whether the stablecoin peg is in fact sustainable. The third explanation
depends on the fundamentals of intermediation costs. For example, because stablecoins use
blockchains for settlement, they remove the need for certain intermediation fees and processing
in contrast to dollar transactions, leading potentially to premiums when crypto investors want
to liquidate into a less risky asset.


2        Model of Stablecoin Prices
       Our model serves three purposes, all of which present testable implications. First, we want
to generate in an optimizing setting the two-sided distribution of stablecoin prices around their
pegs. While a pegged currency trading at a discount can be explained by issuer mismanagement,
a lack of collateral, or speculation against the peg, it is puzzling given past findings in exchange-
18
     To measure the half-life, we run an auto-regressive process of order 1 on the deviations,  = t-1 + ut . The
                                                                                  
     half-life, or the time it takes for a shock to dissipate by 50%, is T = - log(0 .5) .


                                                        11
rate economics why stablecoins sometimes trade at a substantial premium.
   Second, we want to understand more fully how stablecoins serve as a vehicle currency. We
find in the model's equilibrium that pressure for stablecoins to trade at a premium operate
through three channels. The first is an intermediation premium that arises from added costs of
using dollars as a vehicle to buy the model's risky asset (think of the model's risky asset as a
cryptoasset traded on a crypto exchange, some of which accept only stablecoins for purchases).
The second channel is a safety premium: stablecoins can trade at a premium due to its role
as as safe haven. The third channel is a "latency" premium tied to the relative variance of
risky-asset returns in dollars versus stablecoins (think of using the dollar as a vehicle as taking
more time).
   Third, we want to understand the mechanism by which stablecoin prices move back toward
their pegs. Here, we model a representative investor/arbitrageur reallocating dollar wealth
toward stablecoins when the stablecoin trades at a premium, and toward the dollar when the
stablecoin trades at a discount. In the former case, they deposit dollars with the stablecoin
issuer, draw stablecoins at par (avoiding the premium), and use these coins to purchase the
model's risky asset; this increase in the relative supply of stablecoins leads to a decline in the
secondary-market price of stablecoins toward the peg.
   The model has two periods. A representative investor decides in period 1 the optimal choice
for investing in a combination of the risk-free asset and the risky asset (e.g., Bitcoin or other
non-stable cryptoasset). They have two alternatives for the risk-free asset, the dollar or a
stablecoin. Which risk-free asset is chosen determines which is used for investing in the risky
asset.
   Investors face a cost to rebalancing their portfolio when holding the dollar. The intuition
is that liquidating risky cryptoassets incurs greater intermediation costs when converting into
dollars (e.g., conversion into stablecoins is faster and incurs lower transaction costs). This
assumption will affect the point at which an investor is indifferent between choosing the dollar
versus the stablecoin as the risk-free asset. We illustrate both methods in Figure 2.

   1. If dollar is chosen: Invest a fraction m,1 of wealth in a combination of the dollar as
         the risk-free asset and the risky portfolio C .

   2. If stablecoin is chosen: Convert the fraction 1 - m,1 of wealth into stablecoin S at the
         prevailing exchange rate pm/s and uses those stablecoins to invest in the risky asset C .




                                                   12
            Figure 2: Investor decision to use dollars or the stablecoin as vehicle currency

                                                   stable coin                        Stable
                        Dollar           s
                                                     market                            Coin
                       Investor                       pm/s                           Investor


                                          m




                                                      Crypto
                                                      market


Note: This figure illustrates the choice of a representative investor to adopt dollars versus stablecoins as a vehicle
currency, with shares m,1 and s,1 respectively.


Dollar Chosen Case
       Wealth is allocated to the risky cryptoasset and the risk-free asset, in this case the dollar.
                                                                 2
The cryptoasset has a final return in dollars of Rm  N (E [Rm ], m ). The risk-free dollar asset
has a non-negative return Rf . The investor has CARA utility over wealth, which yields mean-
variance preferences. We can represent the dollar-investor problem by maximising equation (1)
subject to the period 1 and period 2 budget constraints. Expressing the investor's wealth W in
dollars, they purchase the cryptoasset C up to a share of their wealth m,1 at the dollar price
pm/s .

                                                              1
                                  max        L = E [m,1 W2 ] - V ar(m,1 W2 )                                      (1)
                                  Cm,1                        2
subject to:

                                                 m,1 W1 = pm/s,1 Cm,1 + M1                                        (2)
                                     m,1 W2 = Rm Cm,1 + Rf M1 - (Cm,1 )                                           (3)

       In period 1 the dollar investor chooses between the risk-free dollar asset M and the risky asset
C . In period 2, returns are realized, and the investor incurs a dollar portfolio rebalancing cost
(.) that is an increasing function of C , with  (.) > 0 a constant marginal cost of transacting
in the dollar/cryptocurrency market.19
       Solving for optimal investment in the risky cryptoasset in period 1 yields equation (4). This
19
     The intermediation cost is technically a function of the change in holdings of the cryptoasset. Given period
     1 constitutes the first period in which cryptoassets are held, the intermediation cost is (Cm,1 ).

                                                         13
level of cryptoassets depends positively on the expected return, and negatively on the risk of
the portfolio. In particular, the intermediation cost  (Cm ) has a negative effect on the optimal
holdings of the cryptoasset.

                                                     E [Rm ] -  (Cm,1 )
                                            Cm,1 =                                                     (4)
                                                              2

Stablecoin Chosen Case
   The representative investor converts the remaining fraction of their period-1 wealth into
the stablecoin at the exchange rate pm/s,1 units of dollars per stablecoin. With CARA utility,
we can represent the stablecoin investor problem by maximising equation (5) subject to the
period 1 and period 2 budget constraint. The cryptoasset now has a final return in stablecoins
                   2
of Rs  N (E [Rs ], s ). Note that we express the allocations of wealth, cryptoasset and the
risk-free asset in stablecoins. In contrast to using dollars, there is a zero risk-free rate on
holding stablecoins, and so if the investor decides to use stablecoins as the vehicle currency, all
stablecoins will be used to purchase the cryptoasset in period 1.

                                                      s,1 W2    1      s,1 W2
                                   max       L = E[          ] - V ar(        )                        (5)
                                    Cs,1              pm/s,1    2      pm/s,1
subject to:
                                                   s,1 W1
                                                           = Cs,1                                      (6)
                                                    pm/s,1
                                                 s,1 W2
                                                        = Rs Cs,1                                      (7)
                                                 pm/s,1
   Solving for the optimal cryptoassets in period 1 yields equation 8. As before, the optimal
level of cryptoassets depends positively on the expected return, and negatively on the risk of
the portfolio.

                                                            E [Rs ]
                                                   Cs,1 =       2
                                                                                                       (8)
                                                             s

Equilibrium allocation of dollar and stablecoin portfolio shares
   To choose an optimal weight m,1 of wealth to invest as the dollar investment and s,1 =
1 - m,1 as a stablecoin investment, the representative investor equates the value of investment
in dollars with the value of investment in stablecoins. We normalise the investments by the
shares m,1 and s,1 to effectively equate the investment value per unit wealth invested. The
            E1 [pm/s,2 ]
fraction     pm/s,1
                           measures the valuation effect of stablecoins over the investment horizon of the
investor.


                                                         14
                                       Cm,1   Cs,1 E1 [pm/s,2 ]
                                            =                                                           (9)
                                       m,1    s,1 pm/s,1
    In the optimal allocation, the investor is indifferent between both methods. This yields the
condition in equation (10), which is analogous to an uncovered interest-rate parity condition in
foreign exchange markets. The expected return per unit invested using dollars and stablecoins
are equalised after taking into account exchange rate changes. On the left hand side, we define
                                                                                               1
the return per dollar of wealth invested in the dollar portfolio. An investment of             m,1
                                                                                                     dollars
makes an expected return equal to E [Rm ] -  (Cm ). On the right hand side, we convert one
dollar into stablecoins at the rate pm/s,1 . The expected return on stablecoin investment is equal
to E [Rs ], and this is reconverted back to dollars at the future expected price of stablecoins
E1 [pm/s,2 ].

                               E [Rm ] -  (Cm,1 )   E1 [pm/s,2 ] E [Rs ]
                                         2
                                                  =                   2
                                                                                                       (10)
                                    m,1 m            pm/s,1 s,1 s
    We can then solve for the dollar price of the stablecoin, pm/s , which yields equation (11):
                                                                          2
                                                 1 - s,1     E [Rs ]      m
                         pm/s,1 = E1 [pm/s,2 ]                            2
                                                                                                       (11)
                                                   s,1 E [Rm ] -  (Cm,1 ) s
                                                                                         1-s,1
    The relative price of stablecoins is a function of three ratios. The first ratio,     s,1
                                                                                               ,   captures
the relative market share of the stablecoin. All else equal, a higher share of representative-
investor wealth invested in stablecoins leads to a lower stablecoin price. This is intuitive, as a
rise in s,1 is equivalent to an increase in the supply of stablecoins in circulation (and conversely
a relative decline in the supply of dollars). Equilibrium in the stablecoin/USD market requires
                                                                                  E [R]
the stablecoin price to fall to clear the market. The second ratio,           E [R]- (c)
                                                                                         ,   measures the
role of intermediation costs  (Cm ). This measures the relative advantage of stablecoins in
that it incurs lower intermediation costs than using the dollar to buy the risky asset. Added
intermediation costs in dollars leads to a reduction in the return an investor can get when
using dollars as the vehicle currency. By the UIP condition, this causes an appreciation of the
stablecoin's exchange rate. The third ratio reflects differences in the volatility of the risky asset
in dollars versus stablecoins. We discuss immediately below a potential channel through which
practical differences in the time needed to transact in stablecoins versus dollars can change the
uncertainty investors face.

Safety and latency premium
    We elaborate on the UIP condition in two ways. The first is the role of risk premia in driving
a wedge between the risky-asset return as a stablecoin versus a dollar investor. More formally,
define the relationship between the risky-asset return in dollars, Rm , and in stablecoins Rs :

                                                    15
                                                             pm/s,2
                                                 Rm = Rs                                                    (12)
                                                             pm/s,1
       Taking expectations,

                                                     pm/s,2            pm/s,2
                               E [Rm ] = E [Rs ]E           + cov Rs ,                                      (13)
                                                     pm/s,1            pm/s,1
                                    p
       The latter term cov (Rs , pm/s,
                                  m/s,1
                                       2
                                         ) can be interpreted as a safety premium of the stablecoin:
                                                                                 m/s,2      p
If stablecoins appreciate in periods of low risky-asset returns, then cov (Rs , pm/s, 1
                                                                                        ) < 0. This
increases the relative return on using stablecoins as a vehicle currency.
       A different premium relating to the safety premium arises as a practical matter ­ i.e., not
directly in the model ­ due to a differential in time needed to transact when using the dollar as
a vehicle versus the stablecoin. The variance of cryptocurrency returns depends on the latency
time of the transaction. For dollars, this latency time can be quite high if the transaction
involves intermediation costs.20 Formally, let us define the standard deviation of risky-asset
returns  (T ), where T is the latency time, and  (T ) is an increasing function in T ,  (.) > 0.
       Therefore, assuming the latency time for dollar transactions exceeds that for stablecoin
transactions, Tm > Ts , the ratio of volatility of cryptocurrency returns in dollars relative to
stablecoins is greater than one. This causes a stablecoin premium due to latency time of
transactions, which we dub the "latency premium," and can work in tandem with the safety
premium if investors decide to liquidate cryptocurrency into a store of value in bad times. Given
it takes more time in actual crypto markets to convert a non-stable cryptocurrency into dollars,
investors prefer to use stablecoins as a way to rebalance their portfolios, causing a relative
increase in the price of stablecoins. We document the latency premium and safety premium in
equation 14.

                                          1 - s,1            E [Rs ]             2 (Tm )
                  pm/s,1 = E1 [pm/s,2 ]                                                                     (14)
                                            s,1 E [R ] + cov R , pm/s,2 -  (C )  2 (Ts )
                                                    s         s p            m
                                                                  m/s,1


       While we have established a relationship between pm/s,1 and s,1 , we need another relation
to close the model. We now turn to arbitrage flows as a stabilising mechanism.

Arbitrage flows
       The primary-market issuer is willing to supply stablecoins at a 1:1 exchange rate. This
means departures of the stablecoin price from the peg result in incentives for arbitrage, and
will cause endogenous investor flows. For example, if what we will call the "secondary-market

20
     For example, cryptocurrency exchange Bitfinex states that there can be a delay of up to two weeks for a bank
     wire of dollar deposits to be useable to buy cryptocurrency.

                                                        16
price" pm/s,1 > 1, investors will buy stablecoins from the primary-market issuer with dollars
at par. Conversely, investors will sell stablecoins to the primary-market issuer for dollars at
par when the secondary-market price pm/s,1 < 1. Therefore the representative investor using
stablecoins as the vehicle currency will, through arbitrage flows, cause s,1 to be a positive
function of deviations from the peg. We illustrate this in equation 15. The change in the
representative investor's share of wealth using the stablecoin as the vehicle, s = s,2 - s,1 is
positively related to deviations from the peg, pm/s,1 - 1. The constant of proportionality is 
and measures the half-life of the peg. The speed of convergence parameter  depends on the
ability of private investors to transact with the stablecoin issuer directly via depositing dollars,
obtaining an equivalent number of stablecoin tokens, and then selling them in the secondary
market at pm/s,1 . In a highly efficient market, investors can arbitrage deviations quickly, and
this is represented by a high  . Conversely, frictions in arbitrage, for example by limiting the
agents' ability to transact with the primary issuer of the stablecoin, will result in a low  .

                                              s =  (pm/s,1 - 1)                                              (15)


Figure 3: Dollar holdings reallocate toward stablecoins when in the secondary market pm/s > 1


                                                   Treasury
                                                   pm/s = 1




                                     s



                                                   stable coin                 Stable
                           Dollar         s
                                                     market                     Coin
                          Investor                  pm/s > 1                  Investor


                                           m -m
                                                                       s +s




                                                     Crypto
                                                     market


Note: This figure illustrates the endogeneity of investor arbitrage flows. In response to a secondary-market price
of stablecoins trading above the peg, an investor reallocates their portfolio away from dollars (share m,1 ) and
toward stablecoins (share s,1 ).




                                                       17
   We illustrate arbitrage flows in Figure 3. The dollar investor reallocates a share m of
dollars and deposits them in the stablecoin Treasury. In return, they obtain stablecoin tokens
which they then use to purchase the risky asset. Therefore the share allocated to the stablecoin
increases by s . The increase in the stablecoin share of wealth will cause the gap between
the primary- and secondary-market rate to narrow, until the secondary market trades at parity
(the new steady state equilibrium).

Equilibrium: Phase Diagram
   The equilibrium is characterised by the following two equations 16 and 17. In characterising
our equilibrium, we extend the two-period model to a multi-period model in continuous time to
illustrate the dynamics of arbitrage flows in stabilizing the peg. The first equation represents
the price that leads to a representative investor making an optimal allocation between dollars
and stablecoins as a vehicle currency. The second equation represents the investor's incentive
to arbitrage deviations from the peg, by increasing the relative share of stablecoin use when the
secondary market trades at a premium to the peg. The equilibrium can be represented through
a phase diagram, plotted in Figure 4.


                                                       1 - s,t    E [Rs ]
                             pm/s,t = Et [pm/s,t+1 ]                                                    (16)
                                                         s,t E [Rm ] -  (Cm )

                                           s,t =  (pm/s,t - 1)
                                                                                                        (17)


                               Figure 4: Phase Diagram of Equilibrium




Note: This phase diagram illustrates equilibrium, which in steady state will always be where pm/s = 1, elimi-
nating the incentive for arbitrage flows.


   The model yields two key predictions.

                                                       18
Prediction 1: Stablecoin premiums
    An increase in intermediation costs  (C ), and an increase in the latency time Tm for
dollar transactions, increases the price pm/s,t > 1, all else equal. Logic: The representative
investor reallocates their portfolio toward stablecoins (m,t  and s,t ) by depositing dollars
with the stablecoin issuer, obtaining stablecoins at a 1:1 rate, and uses stablecoins to buy the
risky cryptoasset. This causes the price pm/s to gradually return to its equilibrium pegged value
of one as t  .

Prediction 2: Stablecoin discounts
    A decrease in the expected future spot price, Et [pm/s,t+1 ], decreases the current spot price
pm/s,t < 1, all else equal. Logic: One economic rationale for an investor expecting the peg
to trade at a discount is insufficient collateral. The representative investor reallocates their
portfolio toward dollars (m,t  and s,t ) by withdrawing their dollar deposits with the stablecoin
issuer, and using those dollars to buy the risky cryptoasset. This causes the price pm/s to
gradually return to its equilibrium pegged value of one as t  .
    We document both channels in Figure 5. The first is the effect of a positive shock to
intermediation cost  (C ). All else equal, the relative return of a unit of cryptoasset purchased
via a stablecoin is higher. This causes a contemporaneous increase in the price of the stablecoin
pm/s . This is represented as a shift upward of pm/s until it reaches the new saddle path, indicated
in Figure 5, left.


  Figure 5: Left panel: Shock to intermediation cost  (C ); Right panel: Speculative attack




Note: The left panel shows the transition dynamics for a shock to intermediation costs of using dollars as a
vehicle. This results in a temporary stablecoin price pm/s > 1, and causes arbitrage flows to the secondary
market, s,t , to restore parity. The right panel shows the impact of an unsuccessful speculative attack (i.e.,
one that does not break the peg), which results in a decline in E [pm/s ], and redemptions of stablecoins, s,t ,
to restore parity.



                                                      19
       Consequently, the representative investor decides to sell a fraction of their wealth in $
and buy stablecoins from the primary-market issuer. This is mathematically represented by
s,t =  (pm/s,t - 1) > 0. Movement along the saddle path will occur until the price of stable-

coins reaches a new long-run equilibrium at pm/s = 1, and a higher vehicle-currency share for
stablecoins, s .
       The second key prediction is the effect of a speculative attack. In our model this most
closely corresponds to 2nd-generation currency-crisis models (e.g., Morris and Shin (1998)),
which show how fixed exchange rates can be vulnerable to self-fulfilling attack from speculators
who believe the currency is overvalued. Under this theory, we would expect deviations from the
peg to be one-sided. For example, suppose speculators believe there is some positive probability
P > 0 that the stablecoin will collapse. This necessarily implies that the expected value of the
stablecoin price trades at a discount to the peg, Et [pm/s,t+1 ] = P × 0 + (1 - P ) × 1 < 1. The low
secondary market price of the stablecoin will cause the representative investor to redeem their
stablecoins and withdraw dollar deposits from the primary-market issuer, causing a decline in
the stablecoin share of wealth, s,t =  (pm/s,t - 1) < 0. Movement along the saddle path will
occur until the price of stablecoins reaches a new long-run equilibrium at pm/s = 1, and a lower
vehicle-currency share for stablecoins, s .We illustrate the dynamics in Figure 5, right.


3        Empirical Evidence: Stabilising Mechanisms
       We examine now how deviations from stablecoin pegs are arbitraged, which is fundamental
to how they dissipate. As an analogy, consider first the setting of a national currency and
a fixed exchange-rate peg managed by a central bank. The central bank is committed to
maintaining the peg by buying the domestic currency and selling foreign-currency reserves
when the domestic-currency value falls below the peg level, and conversely selling domestic
currency when the domestic-currency value rises above the peg level.21
       While forex intervention can work in theory, central banks typically face societal pressures
when the domestic currency is overvalued relative to economic fundamentals. These fundamen-
tals include high inflation, current account and sovereign deficits, and high interest rates. Many
currency crises, most famously the peso crises of Argentina, among others, have occurred when
a central bank has insufficient foreign reserves to defend the peg, or insufficient resolve to keep
short-term interest rates high, making the peg vulnerable to a speculative attack.

21
     The literature emphasizes whether this central-bank intervention is sterilized versus unsterilized. When un-
     sterilized, the simpler case, the central bank action either removes or adds to the domestic money supply
     when exchanging for foreign currency. Sterilizing the effect of the intervention on the domestic money supply
     is achieved by conducting a parallel, offsetting open market operation ­ buying or selling domestic-currency
     bonds from the public and thereby injecting/absorbing an offsetting amount of domestic money. Unsterilized
     intervention is the more potent due to its direct effects on money supply and, especially, short-term interest
     rates. See Sarno and Taylor (2001) for details on the forex intervention literature.

                                                         20
      In contrast to conventional exchange rate pegs, stablecoins are not managed by a national
central bank. The issuer of Tether has formally stated that it does not intervene in secondary
markets to stabilise the market rate. In a statement released on its website, Tether Inc states:22
      Tether does not purport to be a central bank, and it is false to suggest that Tether is like a
central bank for a number of reasons:

      1. Tether does not represent a country or oversee a banking system

      2. The USDT supply is dictated by consumer demand (all issued USDT has been bought by
         a consumer at a 1:1 ratio)

      3. Tether does not set or manage any interest rates anywhere

      4. Tether does not oversee ­ and is not responsible for ­ a banking or exchange sector, and
         does not claim to do so, and no serious person is under the impression that we do so.

      In the absence of intervention, we posit a mechanism driven by demand-side arbitrage. We
test whether arbitrage flows accommodated by the Tether Treasury to the exchanges act to
stabilise deviations from the peg. While our analysis in this section focuses on Tether, as it
represents approximately 90% of the stablecoin market, our analysis applies more generally
to the class of national-currency-backed stablecoins. We provide similar analysis for other
national-currency-backed coins in Appendix C, and provide a brief discussion of alternative
stability mechanisms for cryptocurrency-collateralized stablecoins in Appendix D.

Tether Balance Sheet
      Tether is collateralized with a national currency, the USD. Analogous to a currency board,
every Tether issued is in principle backed by a dollar deposit, so that in the event of a run,
all investors could redeem their Tether for an equivalent amount in dollars at the exchange.
Tether tokens are created through Tether grants, which occur when an investor or exchange
deposits USD in Tether's account, creating an equivalent supply of Tether introduced in cir-
culation. Conversely, a revoke is when Tether is redeemed for dollar deposits and withdrawn
from circulation.




22
     For full reference, see https://tether.to/a-commentary-on-tether-chainalysis/.

                                                   21
Figure 6: Left ­ Distribution of Tether to Secondary Market via Bitfinex; Right ­ Distribution
of Tether directly to Crypto Exchanges

                                                                                            Exchange
                                                       Exchange
                                                                       $ Deposit
                                                                                        USDT
                                                    USDT

                                                                         Tether
           Tether       USDT
                                     Bitfinex                           Treasury
          Treasury

                       $ Deposit                    USDT                                USDT

                                                                       $ Deposit
                                                       Exchange                             Exchange


Note: Left figure illustrates the creation of Tether "grants" prior to April 2019. Bitfinex, a crypto exchange,
deposits dollars into the Tether Treasury. The Tether Treasury then issues a number of Tether tokens at parity
(1:1 exchange rate). The newly created Tether tokens are then distributed to other investors and exchanges in
the secondary market. Right figure illustrates the creation of Tether starting in April 2019 ­ when investors and
other exchanges began getting direct access to the Tether Treasury on the Ethereum blockchain. Exchanges
directly deposit dollars with the Tether Treasury to create newly minted Tether tokens.


     Figure 6 describes the creation and subsequent distribution of Tether from the Treasury
to the secondary market. Prior to April 2019, Bitfinex, an active cryptocurrency exchange,
first deposits dollars with the Tether Treasury. The Treasury transfers newly created Tether
tokens to Bitfinex, which then distributes them to a set of other exchanges and investors for
trading in the secondary market. While we use Bitfinex as an example of an investor, we stress
that Tether, in its white paper, states that currently any investor is allowed to deposit dollars
directly in order to obtain Tether tokens at the 1:1 pegged rate (Tetherinc. (2016)). This
corresponds to distribution of Tether where crypto exchanges directly deposit dollars with the
Tether Treasury in order to create newly minted Tether tokens (Figure 6, right). To construct
the balance sheet of Tether, including the size and timestamp of grants and revokes, we use three
databases, Omniexplorer, Etherscan, and Tron.23 These are platforms on which the blockchain
­ the entire history of on-chain transactions involving transfers of Tether, is recorded.24 These
platforms contain an api that allows users to access an entire history of transactions in Tether.
Transactions are classified as "simple send," "grants," or "revokes." These transactions are then

23
   These are the three largest blockchain platforms on which Tether is traded, and account for over 99% of Tether
   in circulation as of April, 2020.
24
   Off-chain transactions, such as transactions within a cryptocurrency exchange, are not recorded.

                                                       22
recorded in a series of blocks, and can be retrieved using the Omniexplorer and Etherscan api.
For more detail on the databases, including how the flows are constructed from the addresses
of the issuer, see data appendix A.
       Prior to 2018, nearly all Tether created in grants is distributed to Bitfinex and the other
exchanges for trading in the secondary market. However, since 2018 this is no longer the case:
The Tether Treasury now holds a fraction of total Tether in circulation. To obtain the balance
at the Tether Treasury, we use the Omniexplorer api to receive all transactions and Etherscan
api of the Tether Treasury address. In the left panel of Figure 7, we document the total
Tether in circulation, which changes due to grants and revokes, as well as the division of total
Tether held by the Treasury and the secondary market, which included balances held at crypto
exchanges, retail investors, and institutional investors. While balances held at the Treasury are
typically a small fraction of total Tether in circulation, they reached almost $1B USD in 2018,
which equates to 25% of total Tether in circulation. While the Tether Treasury holds one of the
largest balances of Tether, other accounts are typically held by cryptocurrency exchanges. The
usefulness of the Treasury's reserves can be seen as analogous to the accumulation of foreign
exchange reserves by a central bank. This provides the stablecoin issuer a one-sided potency
against stablecoin premiums; in the event of a secondary market price above one USD, the
Tether Treasury can sell its Tether reserves in the secondary market to restore parity of the
peg. This provides an alternative to endogenous investor flows as a stability mechanism.25
       While Tether grants occur at a low frequency, there are continuous flows of Tether from the
Treasury to the secondary market. In the right panel of Figure 7 we plot daily flows between the
Treasury and the secondary market against the Tether price. Flows from the Treasury to the
secondary market typically coincide with periods in which the price is above the peg. Conversely,
when Tether trades at a discount to the dollar, there are net flows from the secondary market
to the Treasury. This is suggestive evidence that flows between the Tether Treasury and the
secondary market are key to the stabilising mechanism that maintains the Tether/USD peg.
For details on the balance sheets of other national-currency-backed stablecoins, see Appendix
C.




25
     The accumulation of Tether reserves helps guard against stablecoin premiums, but not stablecoin discounts.
     For example, if Tether trades at a discount, then the Tether Treasury would require investors to redeem their
     dollar deposits and withdraw Tether from circulation.

                                                         23
Figure 7: Left is Tether/USD Balance Sheet ­ Tether held by the Treasury and Other Accounts
(exchanges); Right is Scatter Plot of Daily Flows from the Tether Treasury to the Secondary
Market, and the Tether/USD peg

                                                                                                                                              Treasury-Exchange Flows and TetherUSD Price
                                           Tether Balance Sheet
                         6   Secondary Market                                                                                        200
                             Tether Treasury




                                                                                           Flows to Secondary Market (USD Million)
                         5
                                                                                                                                     100
     amount (Billions USD)




                         4
                                                                                                                                       0
                         3
                                                                                                                                     100
                         2

                         1                                                                                                           200

                0
                     1     5     9     1     5     9     1     5     9     1
                  7-0 017-0 017-0 018-0 018-0 018-0 019-0 019-0 019-0 020-0 020-0
                                                                                  5                                                    0.94    0.96        0.98                 1.00   1.02
            2 0 1     2     2     2     2     2     2     2     2     2     2                                                                                     Price (USD)
                                                 Date


Note: Left figure plots total Tether in circulation, divided into holdings in the secondary market (by investors
and exchanges) and holdings by the Tether Treasury as reserves. Right figure illustrates scatter plot of flows
of Tether to the secondary market, and the corresponding Tether/USD price, measured using daily data on
secondary-market flows from Omni and Etherscan. Price data are from Coinapi, and uses transaction data from
trusted crypto exchanges Bitfinex, Bittrex, and Kraken. Sample is April 2017 to March 2020.


Arbitrage Mechanism
       An investor can make money from gaps between the market rate on exchanges and the rate
the Tether Treasury buys and sells Tether, which is parity. Consider the case in which the
dollar price of Tether in the market is above parity, illustrated in Figure 8. In this instance,
an investor can buy Tether from the Treasury at a one-for-one rate, and sell Tether at the
prevailing market rate to profit. This arbitrage results in a flow of Tether from the Treasury
to the secondary market.26 Stability of the Tether/USD peg is thus maintained through the
actions of investors seeking to arbitrage differences between the pegged rate and the secondary-
market rate. Arbitrage by secondary market participants offers a decentralized solution to
exchange-rate stability.27




26
   Conversely, when the dollar price of Tether is below 1, an investor can buy Tether at the exchange and sell to
   the Tether Treasury, resulting in a flow in the opposite direction ­ from the secondary market to the Tether
   Treasury.
27
   The arbitrage mechanism we outline is taking advantage of a law-of-one-price deviation in currency markets,
   and follows a line of reasoning similar to arbitrage conditions in foreign exchange markets such as covered
   interest-rate parity arbitrage (Akram et al., 2008) and triangular arbitrage of cross-rates in forex (Foucault
   et al., 2017).

                                                                                      24
Figure 8: Arbitrage Flows when Tether Price in Secondary Market is Trading at a Premium

                                 Tether                              Secondary
                                Treasury                              Market

                                           1 USDT              1 USDT

                                     1$
                                                                        (1 + )$
                                                    Investor


Note: Schematic illustrates an arbitrage trade where the secondary-market price of Tether trades at a premium.
An investor makes a dollar deposit with the Tether Treasury, obtains a Tether token (at exchange rate 1 Tether
per 1 USD), and then sells Tether tokens in the secondary market for a round-trip profit of .


      For the arbitrage mechanism to work, at least some investors must be able to deposit
dollars with the primary-market issuer when the secondary-market price trades at a premium,
and conversely to be able to redeem their dollar deposits when the market price trades at a
discount. To test the arbitrage mechanism we have identified, we exploit a particular event:
The migration of Tether from the Omni to the Ethereum blockchain in 2019. By operating on
the Ethereum blockchain, Tether could now be used more directly as a vehicle currency for a
large number of cryptocurrency investors that use the Ethereum blockchain. Tether circulating
on the Ethereum blockchain has faster deposit/withdrawal features, enabling higher-frequency
arbitrage.28
      Increased direct access of investors for depositing dollars with the Tether Treasury is coinci-
dent with the introduction of Tether in circulation on the Ethereum Blockchain, which occurred
in April, 2019 (Figure 9, left). Figure 9 shows that prior to 2019, there was typically only one
unique address transacting with the Tether Treasury, and that is the Bitfinex exchange. We
decompose total flows to the secondary market into flows from the Tether Treasury to Bitfinex
versus flows to other investors (equation 18). Consistent with the increased number of unique
addresses since April 2019, there is a strong shift in flows toward other investors (Figure 9,
right).


                              F lowT EX = F lowT Bitfinex + F lowT Investors                             (18)



28
     For more on the benefits of migrating to the Ethereum blockchain, see https://www.prnewswire.com/
     news-releases/huobi-global-offers-deposit--withdrawal-in-tether-erc20-300803113.html. The
     Ethereum blockchain processes 15 transactions per second, in contrast to the Omni blockchain (based on
     Bitcoin) at about 4 transactions per second.

                                                      25
Figure 9: Left ­ Number of Unique Addresses on Omni, Ethereum and Tron Blockchains; Right
­ Decomposing cumulative flows to the Secondary Market to Bitfinex and other investors.
                                         Number of Unique Addresses- by Blockchain                            5                   Decomposing Secondary Market Flows
                              30       Omni                                                                                 Bitfinex
                                       Etherscan                                                                            Other Investors
                                       Tron                                                                   4
                              25
     Number of Unique Addresses




                                                                                          amount (Billions USD)
                              20
                                                                                                              3
                              15
                                                                                                              2
                              10
                                                                                                              1
                                  5

                                  0                                                                           0
                                        1   4   7   0   1      4 7  0   1    4                                             1     4     7     0     1     4     7     0     1      4
                                     8-0 8-0 8-0 8-1 9-0 9-0 9-0 9-1 0-0 0-0                                            8-0 018-0 018-0 018-1 019-0 019-0 019-0 019-1 020-0 020-0
                                  201 201 201 201 201 201 201 201 202 202                                         201       2     2      2     2    2     2      2     2    2
                                                          Date                                                                                      Date


Note: Left plots the daily number of unique investor addresses transacting with the Tether Treasury. Right plot
decomposes cumulative flows from Treasury to Bitfinex and other investors/exchanges. Data from Etherscan,
Omniexplorer, and Tron Blockchains. Sample is January 2018 through March 2020.


                We hypothesize that the introduction of Tether transactions on the Ethereum blockchain,
and the subsequent access of other investors to the primary market, should translate to an
increased effectiveness of the arbitrage mechanism in sustaining the peg. For example, if Bitfinex
is the only investor that has access to the primary market, then this will impair the ability of
private investors to arbitrage peg deviations.29 We test this mechanism, by first partitioning our
sample of Tether prices into the pre and post periods according to the date that investors are
first able to deposit dollars directly with the Tether Treasury on the Ethereum blockchain, which
we identify as April 9th, 2019.30 Table 3 presents summary statistics. We find a significant
difference in the average size of peg deviations, and in particular, note a significantly lower
half-life of deviations, measuring 6.5 days in the pre Ethereum blockchain sample, versus 3.3
days in the post period.
                We compute an upper bound for the size of arbitrage profits. To do so we match the
timestamp of investor Treasury deposits with the secondary-market price of Tether based on
minute-frequency price data from trusted exchanges Bitfinex, Bittrex, and Kraken, three of the
most liquid exchanges in the Tether/Dollar market. We assume an arbitrage sequence where
an investor deposits dollars with the Tether Treasury, and contemporaneously sells Tether
in the secondary market. The arbitrage spread is then defined, in USD, as the difference
pU SDT - 1, where pU SDT is the dollar price of Tether at the exchange. In constructing the
arbitrage spread, we assume the transaction sequence is contemporaneous, and there are no
29
   This is particularly relevant given allegations that Bitfinex colluded with Tether to manipulate the market as
   outlined in Griffin and Shams (2020).
30
   For details on the dataset covering Tether Treasury transactions, see data appendix A.

                                                                                     26
Table 3: Summary Statistics of Tether/USD Deviations, pre and post introduction of Tether
on the Ethereum Blockchain

                           Period               Mean          SD   Min   Max    Half-Life (days)
               Pre Ethereum Blockchain           -28.2    97.2 -505      298           6.5
               Post Ethereum Blockchain           -0.9    47.2 -298      119           3.3

Note: Summary statistics for deviations from the peg are expressed in basis points (100 basis points = 1 US
cent). Secondary-market price is based on daily data that averages prices from the Bitfinex, Bittrex, and Kraken
exchanges, all three being trusted exchanges, sourced from Coinapi. Sample is divided into 04/17-04/19 in the
pre period, and 04/19-03/20 in the post period. The post period corresponds to when investors can directly
transact with the Tether Treasury on the Ethereum blockchain.


delays in the processing of each transaction due to queuing or latency time of transactions.
Second, the arbitrage profit is also an upper bound due to our implicit assumption that the
investor's selling of Tether in the secondary market does not have immediate price impact. The
resulting profit we calculate, on a per-trade basis, is the amount deposited with the Tether
Treasury multiplied by the arbitrage spread. We summarise the statistics of arbitrage profits,
deposits and spread in Table 4.
       Based on our calculations of arbitrage spreads and profit, the majority of deposits of in-
vestors, both on the Omni and Ethereum blockchains, earn positive profits, with 92% and 87%
of deposits with the Tether Treasury coinciding with a secondary market price above the peg.
There are two takeaways from Table 4. First, the introduction of Tether to the Ethereum
blockchain increased investor access: more Treasury transactions are executed, rising from 16
per month on average in the pre period to 92 in the post period, with the average size of these
trades falling from 7.0 to 4.0 USD Million. Second, arbitrage spreads shrink from an average of
69 basis points on Omni to 27 basis points on Ethereum. Increased investor access has reduced
the extent of arbitrage opportunities. We can also do a back-of-the-envelope calculation of
the amount of arbitrage profit in total. On the Omni platform, 394 deposits, with an average
arbitrage profit of 0.03 Million USD, comes to a total arbitrage of 394 × 0.03  12 Million USD.
The total arbitrage profit made on the Ethereum blockchain is 1098 × 0.01  11 Million USD.
       We test now more directly whether arbitrage flows stabilize price around the peg. This
follows a large literature on measuring the effects of forex intervention. Specifically, we test
whether there is a price impact from arbitrage flows that is stabilizing. We conduct local pro-
jections (based on Jordà (2005)) of the value of net inflows from the Treasury to the secondary
market on the level of deviations from Tether's parity peg. We denote F lowT EX,h as total
flows from the Treasury to the secondary market, measured at a daily frequency.31 The change

31
     A positive flow to the secondary market is equivalent to a net positive deposit of dollars with the Tether
     Treasury, aggregated at a daily frequency.

                                                         27
 Table 4: Summary Statistics of Arbitrage spreads on the Omni and Ethereum Blockchains


                                                          Omni      Blockchain
             Variable             Count     Mean           Std          Min         25%      50%      75%      Max
 Deposit (USD Million)             394      6.991       32.37          0.002   0.528 1.442 3.396               400
 Spread (Basis Points)             394      69.42       81.95        -303.50   28.18 51.00 95.00               437
  Profit (USD Million)             394      0.031       0.309         -2.320   0.002 0.007 0.018               3.78
                                                      Ethereum      Blockchain
         Variable                 Count     Mean            Std          Min       25% 50% 75%        Max
 Deposit (USD Million)            1098      3.84           13.11        0.000      0.544 1.798 4.183  300
 Spread (Basis Points)            1098      27.16          35.67      -157.77      12.00 25.00 38.50 483.75
  Profit (USD Million)            1098       0.01          0.024       -0.079      0.001 0.003 0.011 0.383

Note: Table records statistics on Tether Treasury deposit size, arbitrage spread, and profit (calculated as
arbitrage spread times deposit size, trade-by-trade). Spread, measured in basis points, is the difference between
the secondary-market price of Tether and the pegged rate of 1. Secondary-market price is based on minute-
frequency data that averages prices from the Bitfinex, Bittrex, and Kraken exchanges, sourced from Coinapi.
Sample is April 2017 to March 2020.


in the Tether dollar price, Pt+h - Pt-1 , is projected on the level of arbitrage flows of investors
in equation (19), allowing for feedback effects using lagged price and flows as controls. We hy-
pothesize a negative coefficient h , which suggests that positive flows to the secondary market
have a stabilizing impact on price. We present the results of the local projections in Figure 10,
with a baseline specification of 4 lags.32


                                                4
     Pt+h - Pt-1 =  + h F lowT EX +                 k F lowT EX,t-k +
                                              k=1
                                                      4
                                                           k (Pt-k-1 - Pt-k-2 ) + ut        h = 0, 1, 2, ... (19)
                                                     k=1

       Consistent with our hypothesis, arbitrage flows from investors have a stabilizing effect on the
Tether/USD price (Figure 10). After dividing our sample based on the introduction of Tether
to the Ethereum blockchain, we find a significant price impact of arbitrage flows in the post
period, confirming that increased direct access of investors to the Tether Treasury supports the
arbitrage mechanism. In the period since April 2019, a price impact of between 5 and 10 basis

32
     An alternative specification for equation 19 is a structural VAR. By using the method of local projections, we
     do not impose restrictions on the timing of the model's flow shocks; however we still control for endogeneity
     through lagged prices and lagged flows in our specification.

                                                            28
points results from one standard-deviation shock in secondary-market flows (approximately 30
Million USD daily). The largest deposit in Table 4 is 300 Million USD, which yields based on
our estimates up to a maximum 100 basis-point movement in the USDT back toward the peg.
These effects tend to dissipate over longer horizons, which may be due to the underlying "wind
the arbitrage is leaning against" being persistent. In the case of stablecoins collateralized by
cryptocurrency, such as DAI, the arbitrage mechanism is not exactly the same; we explore the
stability mechanism used in that case in Appendix D.


Figure 10: Response of Tether/USD price to 1 standard deviation shock in flows to the sec-
ondary market; Left panel ­ Pre Ethereum blockchain; Right panel ­ Post Ethereum blockchain

                    USDT price response to Arbitrage Flows (1std)                        USDT price response to Arbitrage Flows (1std)
                                                                                     5
               10
                                                                                     0
                0
basis points




                                                                     basis points
                                                                                     5
               10
                                                                                    10
               20
                                                                                    15
               30
                     0     10     20     30     40     50     60                          0     10     20     30     40     50     60
                                        days                                                                 days
Note: Figure documents the effect of a 1 standard-deviation shock to net secondary-market flows on the price
of Tether/USD. Left and Right panels are for different sample periods based on the introduction of Tether to
the Ethereum blockchain. Data for secondary-market flows are from Omniexplorer and Etherscan. Price data
are from Coinapi, and takes an average of trade-price data from three trusted exchanges: Bitfinex, Bittrex, and
Kraken. Sample is April 2017 to March 2019 in left panel, and April 2019 to March 2020 in right panel. Gray
area denotes two-standard-error bands for statistical significance at the five-percent level.


Stablecoin's role as a vehicle currency: Effect on cryptoasset prices
               The previous section on Tether established that there are self-stabilizing mechanisms in
place, principally through arbitrage, to maintain the stablecoin peg. A recent paper by Griffin
and Shams (2020) suggests that Tether plays an additional role via intervention/manipulation
in currency markets. If stablecoins are managed by a single issuer, analogous to a central bank,
then the issuer could in principle strategically change stablecoin supply if, for example, such
an action would affect the prices of other cryptoassets (e.g., Bitcoin). Even if this action were
public information, it could still have important distributional effects. To the extent it is not
public information, additional distortions would arise. These possibilities depart from central
banks in that for central banks, if well functioning, goals are clear and social-welfare based, and
actions are public.

                                                                    29
       Under a null hypothesis that stablecoins are passive with respect to intervention in crypto
markets, and are used purely to satisfy transaction demand by investors, then one should find
no systematic effect of stablecoin issuance on, for example, the price of Bitcoin. Under this
null the coin's use would depend on other factors, for example, the coin's role in reducing
intermediation costs, its role in restoring parity in the stablecoin vs USD market, its use as a
risk-free asset in crypto investors portfolios, and technological advances in crypto markets.
       Our first test is to measure the effect of shocks to Tether supply on Bitcoin price, after
controlling for past movements in supply and Bitcoin price (to control, for example, for two-
way feedback and for lagged effects). The regression specification is outlined in equation 20.
The outcome variable measures the price change in Bitcoin, regressed on the measure of total
flows of Tether to the secondary market. A similar specification can be conducted for other non-
stable cryptocurrencies such as Ethereum. Controls include lagged price changes of Bitcoin and
lagged measures of secondary-market issuances. We also include controls for the daily change
in the hash rate Hasht (a measure of BTC-miner computing power) and the daily change in the
number of unique addresses, Adrt , which proxies the outcome-variable's network value. This
is based on work in Bhambhwani et al. (2019) that finds a cointegrating relationship between
Bitcoin price, the hash rate, and the number of unique addresses. We find no significant effect
on the prices of Bitcoin and Ethereum: These prices are not responding to Tether flows to the
secondary market (Figure 11).33
       Our results do not discount the possibility that price manipulation can occur, as discussed
in (Griffin and Shams, 2020). Based on aggregate issuance data, however, there is no systematic
effect. This supports the notion that stablecoins operate at the top level as decentralized systems
of exchange-rate pegs, without intervention effects on prices in other non-stable cryptocurrency
markets.


                                                        4                         4
     PBT C,t+h - PBT C,t-1 = +h F lowT EX +                  k F lowT EX,t-k +         k (PBT C,t-k - PBT C,t-k-1 )+
                                                       k=1                       k=1
           4                                       4
                k (Hasht-k - Hasht-k-1 ) +             k (Adrt-k - Adrt-k-1 ) + ut            h = 0, 1, 2, ... (20)
          k=1                                    k=1




33
     Our analysis here is limited to aggregate issuance data, and is robust to the choice of sample period, finding
     qualitatively similar results by restricting our sample from March 2017 to March 2018, the period of analysis
     in ?. That no effect arises in the overall data is, in our judgment, material. One finding in Griffin and Shams
     (2020) is that flows of Tether were apparently directed to a particular wallet, which then proceeded to invest
     in Bitcoin. Aggregate flows to the secondary market do not capture these microeconomic flows.

                                                            30
            Figure 11: Response of Bitcoin and Ethereum prices to issuance flows in USDT

      300   Response of BTC to shock to USDT Issuance               Response of ETH to shock to USDT Issuance
                                                               20

      200                                                      15
                                                               10
      100
                                                                5
USD




                                                         USD
        0                                                       0
                                                                5
      100
                                                               10
      200                                                      15 0
            0     10    20     30     40    50     60                     10    20     30     40    50     60
                              days                                                    days
Note: Figure documents local projections of a change in secondary-market issuance on the prices for Bit-
coin and Ethereum. Data for secondary-market flows are from Tether transactions on Omni, Etherscan, and
Tron Blockchains. Price data are from Cryptocompare. Controls include lagged price changes and changes in
cryptocurrency fundamentals such as hash rate and the number of unique addresses of the network, based on
Bhambhwani et al. (2019). 4 lags are included in the baseline specification. Sample period is from April 2017
to March 2020. Gray area denotes two-standard-error bands for statistical significance at the five-percent level.



4       Empirical Evidence: Fundamentals of Peg Deviations
      In this section we test channels through which stablecoins trade at a premium or discount.
We present evidence that premiums arise in times of increased volatility in non-stable cryp-
tocurrency markets. Notable examples include the crash of Bitcoin in early 2018 and the
COVID-19 crisis of 2020. This supports our model predictions of stablecoin premia due to the
three channels of safety, latency time, and intermediation cost differences. This section also
addresses a second prediction of the model that centered on the effects of speculative attacks.
We document an example of speculation on Tether in October 2018, when Bitfinex temporarily
suspended convertibility of dollar deposits. This signalled to investors that Tether may not have
been fully collateralized, and Tether traded at a discount of approximately 500 basis points,
with significant increases in bid-ask spreads. All data used in this section, including transaction
data used to construct order flow, are discussed further in the data appendix A.

Liquidity Fundamentals
      We quantify factors that determine pricing in the Tether/USD market. We identify two
such factors, order flow, which is a measure of net buying pressure, and cryptocurrency price
volatility. Determinants of Tether's value are difficult to model in traditional ways with macroe-
conomic fundamentals such as inflation and interest-rate differentials. We draw instead from
the medium-of-exchange role in monetary theory to posit that the price of Tether is driven by


                                                        31
factors connected to Bitcoin- and Tether-market liquidity.

Order Flow
       The first determinant of Tether returns we examine is order flow. Order flow is a measure
of net buying pressure in the secondary market and, viewed through the lens of information
models in microstructure theory, is the primary means through which dispersed information in
the market is expressed and aggregated in price-setting.
       We construct a measure of order flow using transaction data provided by cryptocurrency
vendor Coinapi. This includes a history of trades from a series of exchanges that trade in
the Tether/USD pair.34 This dataset provides the timestamp of each trade, together with the
amount of underlying Tether in each trade, and a true-or-false variable taker side sell which we
use to construct the sign of the transaction.
       The exchange follows a maker-taker structure. The marketmaker is the provider of liquidity,
and typically submits limit orders to the exchange with a specified bid and ask price. The takers
are typically private investors who submit market orders for Tether, and are the aggressor of
the transaction. When the taker side sell column reads true, this signifies that the taker is
selling Tether and buying USD. The price they are willing to sell Tether is the bid price offered
by the marketmaker. Conversely, when taker side sell is false, the taker is buying Tether and
selling USD. They buy Tether at the ask price offered by the marketmaker. Using this signing
convention we can construct a measure of order flow as the difference between buyer- and
seller-initiated transactions, expressed in the following equation where Tk is the transaction, B
indicates it is buyer-initiated and S indicates it is seller-initiated, and VTk is the amount of the
transaction.

                                               k=t
                                  OFtvol   =          VTk (1[Tk = B ] - 1[Tk = S ])                           (21)
                                               k=t0

       Figure 12 plots daily order flow on the left. We observe that order flow is stationary and
mean-reverting towards zero. This is consistent with marketmakers in crypto exchanges being
averse to holding inventory and net positions in Tether. We also observe a strong correlation
between cumulative order flow and the price level of Tether in Figure 12, right. This suggests
that order flow may convey significant information for price dynamics in the market. In partic-
ular, we observe a sharp positive correlation between order flow and price changes in October
2018, when Tether was trading at a steep discount.


34
     Exchanges that trade significantly in Tether/USD are Bitfinex and Kraken. For the baseline results we use
     the Kraken exchange as it has the highest volume of trades, and the earliest history (starting in April 2017).

                                                            32
                                 Figure 12: Cumulative Order Flow and Price in Tether/USD

                                   OF: USDT_USD                                                   Cumulative OF and Price:USDT_USD
                    20                                                                                                                                  300
                                                                               1.04
                    10                                                         1.02




                                                                                                                                                              Cumulative OF (Tether Millions)
                                                                                                                                                        200
Tether (Millions)




                                                                               1.00
                     0




                                                                     Price (USD)
                                                                               0.98                                                                     100
                    10                                                         0.96
                                                                                                                                                        0
                    20                                                         0.94
                                                                               0.92                                                                         100
                    30
                                                                               0.90
                           1   3   5   7    9  1   1   3    5                            5     9     1     5     9     1     5        9     1      5
                        9-0 9-0 9-0 9-0 9-0 9-1 0-0 0-0 0-0                        201
                                                                                      7-0 017-0 018-0 018-0 018-0 019-0 019-0 019-0 020-0 020-0
                     201 201 201 201 201 201 202 202 202                                   2     2     2     2     2     2     2        2
                                                                                                                                Price (USD)
                                                                                                                                              2
                                         Date                                                                                   Cumulative OF (Tether Millions)

Note: Figure plots order flow of Tether/USD (left panel), and price and cumulative order flow (right panel).
Transaction price and volume data are from Coinapi. Sample is April 2017 to March 2020.


Volatility of Cryptocurrency Markets
                    We construct measure of volatility in the BTC/USDT market based on a 10-day rolling
standard deviation of the BTC/USDT price. This fundamental captures the safety premium of
Tether; in times of high uncertainty in the Bitcoin price, investors want to liquidate to a store
of value. Stablecoins have lower intermediation costs and lower latency time of transactions,
with bank wires taking significantly longer than a transaction executed on the blockchain. We
hypothesize that this results in investors choosing to liquidate unstable cryptocurrencies to
stablecoins, as opposed to dollars, causing Tether to trade at a premium in times of increased
risk in cryptocurrency markets.

Price discovery and determinants of Tether premiums and discounts
                    Following Evans and Lyons (2002), we first report regressions of price discovery on order
flow. We estimate equation (22), where pt = pt - pt-1 measures the difference between the
closing dollar price of Tether today and the prior day. OFt measures the net of buyer-initiated
trades for Tether over the concurrent 24 hours.


                                                      pt =  + OFt + ut                                                                                   (22)

                    We find that order flow conveys significant information relevant to price-discovery (Table
5). A one standard-deviation change in order flow (which we measure as $3.8 million based
on our estimation period for combined trading in the Bitfinex, Bittrex, and Kraken exchanges)
leads to an approximately 10 basis-point increase in the dollar price of Tether, where 100 basis
points is $0.01. Alternatively, a 100 basis-point move in the dollar price of Tether then requires

                                                                33
an approximate $40 million change in net trading. We then condition the order-flow equation
on subsets of the sample. In specification 2, we condition on the USDT price being within 1
standard deviation of parity. In specifications 3 and 4, we condition on the price being less
than 1 standard deviation, and greater than 1 standard deviation respectively.
     The estimated elasticity of price changes to order flow is significantly higher than estimates
for national currencies in Evans and Lyons (2002). The authors find net trading of $1 billion
in the USD/Deutschemark market in 1995 led to a 50 basis point change in the exchange rate.
Our estimates are significantly higher likely due to the relative differences in liquidity between
the stablecoin and national-currency forex markets.35 The high elasticity of price to net trading
in the stablecoin market is also due to the role of private investors in arbitraging deviations
from parity.36 When Tether trades at a discount, the price impact of order flow is insignificant.
We reason that speculation and liquidity fundamentals explain periods when Tether trades at
a large discount to the Dollar. In these periods, order flow is likely to be more noisy and
aggregate less information than in periods of relative stability in the peg. Finally, we show that
order flow has much larger price impact when Tether trades at significant premiums in column
4. In this case, flows from the Tether Treasury to the secondary market begin to occur as a
potential stabilizing mechanism. To the extent these arbitrage flows impact the order book in a
systematic way, this explains the increased price impact of order flow. For example, in response
to Tether trading at a premium, an investor deposits dollars with the Treasury, obtains an
equivalent amount of Tether at a price of 1.0, and sells it at the higher secondary-market price
via a market order at the best bid. This results in an increase in seller-initiated transactions,
meaning negative order flow, and price stabilizing toward the peg.37




35
   Daily trading volume in USD markets in 1995 is approximately $1 trillion according to BIS figures. In our
   sample, the daily average trading in the Kraken exchange is approximately $5 million.
36
   Another related paper on order flow in fixed exchange rate regimes is (Killeen et al., 2006), which analyses the
   transition from fixed to floating of the currencies under the European Monetary System (EMS). They propose
   that under fixed exchange rates, the sensitivity of order flow goes to zero under a perfectly credible regime
   because the central bank stands ready to offset any private-sector order flow. Therefore order imbalances have
   zero price impact. Alternatively, in our setting, stablecoin issuers are passive, and so even under a perfectly
   credible regime, private investors are required to initiate trades in the market to arbitrage peg deviations.
37
   If the investor is also a marketmaker (such as a crypto exchange), they could alternatively post competitive
   limit-order offers to sell. This action could have an opposing effect on measured order flow since it can trigger
   buyer-initiated trades.

                                                        34
                          Table 5: Price Discovery and Signed Order Flow

                                              I           II         III         IV
                                              p           p          p           p
                     OF               9.49***          9.19*** 11.97   35.07***
                                       (1.73)           (1.34) (11.60)  (11.07)
                     Intercept          -0.69            0.44  28.00* -53.74***
                                       (1.73)           (1.31) (15.81)   (9.79)
                     R-squared           0.03            0.05    0.01     0.13
                     No. observations   1104             956      78       70
                     Full Sample          Y               N       N        N
                     |pt-1 - 1| < 1sd     N               Y       N        N
                     pt-1 - 1 < -1sd      N               N       Y        N
                     pt-1 - 1 > 1sd       N               N       N        Y


Note: Table presents regressions of the daily change in the USD price of Tether on a measure of daily order
flow. Order flow is constructed as the net of buyer-initiated transactions for the Tether/USD pair, where a
buy transaction is reported as +1 when the buyer of Tether is the aggressor. Order flow and trade price data
are from Coinapi. Sample period is April 2017 to March 2020, and consolidates trade data from three trusted
exchanges: Bitfinex, Bittrex, and Kraken. *** denotes significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent
level, and * at the 10 percent level.


    We now regress the deviation of the Tether price from the peg, pt - 1, on signed order
flow OFt , as well as a ten-day rolling window of Bitcoin price volatility, BT C,t , as expressed in
equation 23.


                                  pt - 1 =  + 1 OFt + 2 BT C,t + ut                                      (23)

    Table 6 provides evidence that liquidity fundamentals have an important role in explaining
deviations from the peg. In specification 1, we present the results of regression 23 for the full
sample. We then condition on subsets of the sample in specifications 2, 3, and 4. In column 2,
we condition on the USDT price being within 1 standard deviation of parity. In columns 3 and
4 we condition on price being more than 1 standard deviation below parity, and greater than 1
standard deviation above parity respectively.
    We find positive effects of an increase in Bitcoin volatility on the Tether price. Based
on specification 1, the volatility of trading volume in Bitcoin has a positive effect on Tether
premiums, with a 1 percent increase in BTC price volatility increasing the price of Tether by



                                                     35
                Table 6: Determinants of Tether/USD Price ­ Liquidity Fundamentals

                                                I             II           III            IV
                                             pt - 1        pt - 1        pt - 1         pt - 1
                    OF                21.85***            13.60***        23.45         19.36*
                                        (3.79)              (1.84)       (19.63)       (11.54)
                    BT C              30.90***             6.07***     115.10***         -5.63
                                        (4.15)              (2.06)       (24.30)        (9.53)
                    Intercept        -178.55***           -26.01**     -903.42***     183.64***
                                       (23.34)             (11.64)      (121.54)       (53.66)
                    R-squared            0.07                0.06          0.24          0.05
                    No. observations     1091                942            77            70
                    Full Sample           Y                   N             N              N
                    |pt-1 - 1| < 1sd      N                   Y             N              N
                    pt-1 - 1 < -1sd       N                   N             Y              N
                    pt-1 - 1 > 1sd        N                   N             N              Y

Note: Table presents regressions of the deviation from parity in the USD price of Tether on variables capturing
liquidity in the Tether/USD and BTC market. OF measures order flow and is constructed as the net of buyer-
initiated transactions for the Tether/USD pair, where a buy transaction is reported as +1 when the buyer of
Tether is the aggressor. BT C is the log standard deviation of the BTC/USDT trading price sourced from
Cryptocompare. Standard deviations are measured using a rolling window of 10 days. Sample is April 2017
to March 2020, and consolidates trade data from three trusted exchanges: Bitfinex, Bittrex, and Kraken. ***
denotes significance at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and * at the 10 percent level.


approximately 0.4 basis points.38 This suggests a potential risk-hedging motive for holding
Tether in periods of extreme Bitcoin-price volatility. One of Tether's features is its store-of-
value function for crypto investors. This analysis is suggestive evidence that Tether acts as a
safe haven, however two questions remain. To what extent is the role of Tether a safe haven to
the entire class of non-stable cryptocurrencies? And does the behaviour of Tether generalize to
other stablecoins as well? We address both questions in the following section, which provides
more evidence on the role of the safety premium and latency time in giving rise to stablecoin
premiums.

Stablecoin premiums: Safety and latency premium
       To test the role of stablecoins as a safe asset in the domain of cryptoassets, we conduct a
factor analysis of the returns of the five largest non-stable cryptocurrencies by market capi-

38
     Our result on the effects of BTC price volatility is robust to using a trading-volume measure to construct our
     volatility variable.

                                                         36
talization (BTC, ETH, XRP, BCH, LC), together with each stablecoin separately. The factor
analysis suggests a first factor that explains a cumulative 55 per cent of covariance between
asset returns. Critically, all non-stable cryptocurrencies load positively on this risk factor, and
Tether (USDT) loads negatively on this risk factor (Table 7). We conduct a similar analysis for
other major stablecoins, and tabulate the loadings of the first factor on the stablecoin. We find
negative loadings on other stablecoins as well, suggesting stablecoin returns comove negatively
with a crypto risk factor.
       Why do Tether and other stablecoins exhibit safe-haven properties? In periods of risk,
investors need to liquidate into a store of value. Portfolio rebalancing toward Tether and
other stablecoins provide this function with minimal intermediation costs. As noted, on some
exchanges for example, there are long processing lags for dollar withdrawals to comply with
intermediation procedures. Fees are also often imposed when dollar withdrawals are frequent
or large.39

Table 7: Factor analysis of crypto returns and stablecoins show stablecoins have a negative
loading with respect to a crypto risk factor

                              F1                  F1                  F1                   F1
                    BTC       0.80      BTC       1.00        BTC    0.89        BTC       0.85
                    ETH       0.94      ETH       0.85        ETH    0.92        ETH       0.83
                    XRP       0.72      XRP       0.73        XRP    0.83        XRP       0.57
                    BCH       0.66      BCH       0.78        BCH    0.86        BCH       0.83
                    LTC       0.87      LTC       0.79        LTC    0.88        LTC       0.83
                   USDT      -0.02     USDC      -0.02        PAX   -0.002      TUSD      -0.02

Note: Table reports correlations of the first factor with returns on a set of 5 largest crypto currencies (by market
cap), and a stablecoin. The factor analysis is based on a model with 2 factors, and the loadings on the stablecoin
are illustrated in the last row of the table. Price data are from Cryptocompare for major cryptocurrencies, and
Coinapi for the stablecoins. Sample for each coin is based on available price data of daily close prices from
Bitfinex, Bittrex, and Kraken exchanges. For details on sample period refer to appendix A.


       To provide evidence of the safe-haven demand during the period from January 6 to February
6, 2018, we first note that there was a decline of up to 65 percent in the price of Bitcoin. While
this necessarily implies a relative portfolio shift from Bitcoin to dollars purely from the valuation
effect, we observe a similar rebalancing toward Tether during this period. We use trade data
on BTC-USDT sourced from Coinapi for the Binance exchange. This covers a sample from
August 2017 to June 2018. We see clearly a decline in cumulative order flow for BTC during
39
     For more information, see announcements by Bitfinex: https://bit.ly/2NEzITW and https://www.
     bitfinex.com/posts/311. Bitfinex states it will take investors 7 to 15 days to make dollar withdrawals
     from their platform in order to comply with intermediation procedures. Bitfinex has also introduced transac-
     tion costs of a 3% fee for investors who make more than two dollar withdrawals a month, or for withdrawals
     larger than $1 million in a given month.

                                                         37
the period of January-February 2018 in Figure 13. Liquidation into Tether is intuitive given
Tether is pegged to the dollar, and provides a natural hedge for crypto investors, and proxies
as a risk-free cryptoasset. Liquidation into Tether is also the only option for exchanges such as
Binance which do not allow conversion into national currencies directly.


                             Figure 13: Cumulative Order Flow and Price in BTC/USDT


                          20000                 Cumulative OF and Price:BTC-USDT BINANCE
                          17500                                                                       30




                                                                                                           Cumulative OF (BTC Thousands)
                          15000                                                                       20
                          12500                                                                       10
            Price (USD)




                          10000                                                                       0
                          7500                                                                            10
                          5000                                                                            20
                          2500
                                                                                                          30
                             0
                                           9     0     1     2     1     2     3     4     5      6
                                        7-0 017-1 017-1 017-1 018-0 018-0 018-0 018-0 018-0 018-0
                                  201        2     2     2     2     2     2     2     2     2


Note: Figure plots cumulative order flow in the BTC-Tether market (red line) against the BTC-Tether price
(blue line). Data from Coinapi, which provides trade data for BTC-USDT pair on Binance exchange.


Stablecoins During the COVID-19 Panic
   The COVID-19 economic crisis resulted in a collapse of the BTC market of approximately
40%, as it fell from approximately $8,000 to $5,000 from March 12th to 13th. Amidst the
widespread sell-off in cryptocurrency markets, there were clear efforts by investors to liquidate
into a store of value. To gauge investors incentive to liquidate into a store of value quickly,
we use the Ether Network's gas prices. Gas is a measure of the amount of ether (ETH) a
user pays to perform a given activity, or batch of activities, on the Ethereum network. These
transaction costs are analogous to commissions on exchanges, however these costs are paid to
the miners who authenticate the transactions on the Ethereum blockchain. These prices are
denominated in GWEI which is equivalent to one-billionth of one ETH, and they are typically
an average of 10 GWEI per transaction. Critically, these units of GWEI provide a proxy for
transactions' latency time. For example, on March 29th, 2020, the Ether gas station states that
there is transaction cost of 8 units of GWEI for a transaction time less than 2 minutes, 5 units
of GWEI for a transaction time less than 5 minutes, and 3 units of GWEI for a transaction

                                                                   38
time less than 30 minutes.40
     On March 12th, the average gas prices temporarily spiked to over 100 GWEI per transaction
from the 10 GWEI average seen just one day prior. There was congestion on the Ethereum
blockchain as investors wanted to liquidate unstable cryptocurrencies into stablecoins. The rise
in gas costs reflected the cost of latency time; investors were willing to pay more gas costs to
liquidate faster.41
     We plot in Figure 14 the price response of the six largest coins by market cap, based on data
in March 2020. Shaded areas indicate the period in which the price of Bitcoin fell by 50%. In
all cases, we see a rise in the price of stablecoins of approximately 500 basis points. The largest
increase is for BinanceUSD coin, the stablecoin issued by the Binance cryptocurrency exchange.
A potential reason why BinanceUSD trades at a premium to the dollar is because Binance
platforms do not allow conversion to national currencies directly. Therefore, for investors on
the Binance exchange, converting to BinanceUSD is a good option for reducing latency time.
     We finish our analysis on the latency premium with Figure 15, which plots cumulative order
flow and price of BTC in terms of stablecoins for the five largest market-cap currencies. There
is a significant sell-off of BTC during March 12th. For example, on the Binance exchange, there
was an approximate 30,000 unit net selling pressure of BTC on March 12th. Similar trends
of a decline in cumulative order flow for BTC in other stablecoin markets is evident. For the
crypto-collateralized coin DAI, we examine the ETH/DAI market, and a similar trend collapse
of the Ether price and decline in cumulative order flow on March 12th is evident; it is not as
pronounced, however, as for the national-currency-backed coins.42




40
   Gas prices, as well as daily amounts of Ether Gas used, are provided in https://ethgasstation.info/.
41
   For more information see https://blockonomi.com/ethereum-gas-prices-surged/.
42
   We reason that as DAI is crypto-collateralized, investors use it more as a speculative investment. Therefore,
   investors that liquidate ETH into DAI will return to longer Ethereum positions once there is a greater expec-
   tation of rising Ethereum prices in the future; we do see a quick turnaround in order flow once the Ethereum
   price reaches its low.

                                                      39
      Figure 14: Response of stablecoin prices to negative price shock of Bitcoin in March, 2020
                                     Price USDT                                                                         Price USDC
                                                                                         1.025
               1.05                                                                      1.020
               1.04                                                                      1.015
               1.03                                                                      1.010
    Price (USD)




                                                                              Price (USD)
               1.02                                                                      1.005
                                                                                         1.000
               1.01
                                                                                         0.995
               1.00
                                                                                         0.990
       0.99
                                                                                      0.985
            9 1       5      9      3       7     1      5      9                           9 1       5      9      3         7      1      5      9
         2-23-0   3-0    3-0    3-1      3-1   3-2   3-2    3-2                          2-23-0   3-0    3-0    3-1       3-1    3-2    3-2    3-2
      0-00-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0                                0-00-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0
    202
  202           2      2      2      2       2     2      2                         2
                                                                                  20 202        2      2      2      2         2      2      2
                                       Date                                                                            Date



           1.030                      Price PAX                                                                         Price BUSD
                                                                                            1.10
           1.025
           1.020                                                                            1.08
           1.015
                                                                                            1.06
 Price (USD)




                                                                                  Price (USD)


           1.010
           1.005                                                                            1.04

           1.000                                                                            1.02
           0.995
                                                                                            1.00
       0.990
               239-01            5     9     3       7      1     5      9                       9-01             5      9      3        7      1      5      9
          002--0             3-0    3-0   3-1     3-1   3-2    3-2   3-2                       23
                                                                                            2--0              3-0    3-0    3-1      3-1    3-2    3-2    3-2
   0 2 0
       0
         -2
                       02 0-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0                  0 2 0
                                                                                       0
                                                                                          00
                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                       0 2 0-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0
  2 2                2            2     2     2       2      2     2              2 2                2             2      2      2        2      2      2
                                                Date                                                                               Date



                                     Price TUSD                                                                          Price DAI
               1.04                                                                         1.10

               1.03                                                                         1.08

               1.02                                                                         1.06
    Price (USD)




                                                                                  Price (USD)




               1.01                                                                         1.04

               1.00                                                                         1.02

               0.99                                                                         1.00

            9 1       5      9      3       7     1      5      9                           9 1       5      9      3        7      1      5      9
         2-23-0   3-0    3-0    3-1      3-1   3-2   3-2    3-2                          2-23-0   3-0    3-0    3-1      3-1    3-2    3-2    3-2
      0-00-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0                                0-00-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0
    202
  202           2      2      2      2       2     2      2                         202
                                                                                  202           2      2      2      2        2      2      2
                                       Date                                                                            Date

Note: Price (in USD) of 6 largest stablecoins by market cap during March 2020. Price data are from Coinapi
and are hourly, available on cryptocurrency exchanges Binance, Bitfinex, Bittrex, and Kraken. Shaded areas
indicate the period when the price of Bitcoin fell approximately 50% from March 12th to March 13th.




                                                                             40
Figure 15: Response of Bitcoin prices and order flow in BTC/Stablecoin markets in March,
2020
                                       Cumulative OF and Price:BTC_USDT BINANCE                                                                                     Cumulative OF and Price:BTC_USDC BINANCE
                8000                                                                                   0                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                           9000
                7500                                                                                                                                                                                                     1000
                                                                                                           5000
                7000                                                                                                                                       8000                                                          2000




                                                                                                                       Cumulative OF (ETH)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cumulative OF (BTC)
                                                                                                           10000
                6500                                                                                                                                                                                                     3000
  Price (USD)




                                                                                                                                             Price (USD)
                                                                                                                                                           7000
                6000                                                                                       15000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4000
                5500                                                                                       20000                                           6000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5000
                5000
                                                                                                           25000                                           5000                                                          6000
                4500
                                                                                                           30000                                                                                                         7000
                4000                                                                                                                              4000
                            0           2          0           2           0           2           0                                                     9 1       5      9      3      7      1      5     9    1
                       11 0        11 1        12 0       12 1        13 0        13 1        14 0                                                    2-23-0   3-0    3-0    3-1    3-1    3-2    3-2
                                                                                                                                                   0-00-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         3-2 4-0
                 03-            03-         03-        03-         03-         03-         03-                                                   202
                                                                                                                                               202           2      2      2      2      2      2      2  2



                                        Cumulative OF and Price:BTC_PAX BINANCE                                                                                     Cumulative OF and Price:BTC_BUSD BINANCE
                                                                                                       0
                9000                                                                                                                                       9000
                                                                                                           200                                                                                                           500
                8000                                                                                       400                                             8000                                                          1000
                                                                                                                 Cumulative OF (BTC)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cumulative OF (BTC)
                                                                                                           600                                                                                                           1500
  Price (USD)




                                                                                                                                             Price (USD)
                7000                                                                                                                                       7000
                                                                                                           800                                                                                                           2000
                6000                                                                                       1000                                            6000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2500
                                                                                                           1200
                5000                                                                                                                                       5000                                                          3000
                                                                                                           1400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3500
       4000                                                                                                                                       4000
              9 1       5      9      3      7      1      5     9    1                                                                                  9 1       5      9      3      7      1      5     9    1
           2-23-0   3-0    3-0    3-1    3-1    3-2    3-2    3-2 4-0                                                                                 2-23-0   3-0    3-0    3-1    3-1    3-2    3-2    3-2 4-0
        0-00-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0                                                                                     0-00-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0
      202
    202           2      2      2      2      2      2      2  2                                                                                 202
                                                                                                                                               202           2      2      2      2      2      2      2  2



                                       Cumulative OF and Price:BTC_TUSD BINANCE                        0
                                                                                                                                                                    Cumulative OF and Price:ETH_DAI COINBASE
                9000                                                                                                                                          250                                                    35000
                                                                                                           500
                                                                                                                                                              225                                                    30000
                8000                                                                                       1000                                                                                                      25000
                                                                                                                                                              200
                                                                                                                 Cumulative OF (BTC)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Cumulative OF (ETH)
                                                                                                           1500                                                                                                      20000
  Price (USD)




                                                                                                                                                Price (USD)




                7000                                                                                                                                          175
                                                                                                           2000                                                                                                      15000
                6000                                                                                                                                          150                                                    10000
                                                                                                           2500
                                                                                                                                                              125                                                    5000
                5000                                                                                       3000
                                                                                                                                                              100                                                    0
                                                                                                           3500
        4000                                                                                                                                                                                                             5000
               9 1       5      9      3      7      1      5     9    1                                                                                 9 1       5      9      3      7      1      5     9    1
            2-23-0   3-0    3-0    3-1    3-1    3-2    3-2    3-2 4-0                                                                                2-23-0   3-0    3-0    3-1    3-1    3-2    3-2    3-2 4-0
         0-00-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0                                                                                    0-00-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0 020-0
       2
    2 202
     0             2      2      2      2      2      2      2  2                                                                                202
                                                                                                                                               202           2      2      2      2      2      2      2  2


Note: Blue line indicates BTC price (in terms of stablecoin), and red line indicates cumulative order flow in BTC.
Trade data for BTC/Stablecoin are from Coinapi and is hourly, available on cryptocurrency exchanges Binance,
for the national-currency-backed coins USDT, USDC, PAX, BUSD, and TUSD. For crypto-collateralized DAI,
we plot the Ethereum price and cumulative order flow in ETH/DAI market on the Coinbase exchange. Shaded
areas indicate the period when the price of Bitcoin fell approximately 50% from March 12th to March 13th.




                                                                                                                          41
Stablecoin Discounts: Speculative Attacks
      The event we consider is a classic example of a 2nd-generation currency crisis, in which
a perceived risk of the Tether Treasury not being fully backed leads to a sell-off on Tether
as investors perceive a non-zero probability that Tether may be devalued. The setting is an
announcement on 11th October, 2018, by the exchange Bitfinex. On that day, Bitfinex decided
to temporarily pause national-currency deposits (USD, GBP, EUR, JPY) for certain customer
accounts in the face of processing complications.43 This exchange is the first point of contact
for the Tether Treasury, so an announcement suppressing investors' ability to redeem for US
dollars can signal that Tether is not fully collateralized.

              Figure 16: Flow of Dollar Deposits and USDT in a Speculative Attack
                                            $ Deposit

                            Tether
                                                              Bitfinex
                           Treasury

                                              USDT

                                                   USDT                    $ Deposit




                                                              Investor


Note: Schematic illustrates the dynamics of a speculative attack. Investors have expectations that Tether is not
fully backed by dollar reserves. In response, an investor redeems dollar deposits with Bitfinex. In turn, Bitfinex
redeems its dollar deposits with the Tether Treasury, withdrawing Tether tokens from circulation.


      Figure 16 helps understand the motive for Bitfinex suspending conversion to dollars. Sup-
pose the Tether Treasury is not fully collateralized, and contains a level of dollar deposits that
is less than the amount of Tether in circulation. If investors believe the USDT peg is unsta-
ble, they will redeem their Tether for dollar deposits at Bitfinex. Bitfinex will in turn want
to redeem their Tether for dollar deposits from the Tether Treasury. If the Tether Treasury
suspends Bitfinex's conversion to dollar deposits, then this poses a systemic risk to Bitfinex.
This suggests that Bitfinex is susceptible to a liquidity crisis in the event that Tether is not
fully collateralized. Hence, the suspension of dollar convertibility in Bitfinex serves as a signal
43
     See https://medium.com/bitfinex/fiat-deposit-update-october-15th-2018-18ddd276c3fd.

                                                       42
to investors that Tether may not be fully collateralized.
   We can see the unfolding of this event on Tether's dollar price, and on measures of liquidity,
in Figure 17. Tether prices fall to a discount of 95 cents on October 15th. Similarly, liquidity
fundamentals such as volatility of USDT tell a similar story. There is a sharp rise in Tether
trading volume, and a corresponding decline in network transaction value, around the Bitfinex
announcement. This is consistent with a relative increase in return volatility as buyers and
sellers of Tether are unsure of the fundamental trading price.
   Bid-ask spreads rise significantly, with bid prices in the limit order book falling to 85 cents,
indicating a lack of buyers. While the whole-sample average bid-ask spread is between 0.1
and 0.15 of a cent, with a standard deviation of 0.2 cents, there are evident spikes in bid-ask
spreads, suggesting an information asymmetry in response to speculative events. In particular,
the sharp fall in bid and ask prices corresponds to a spike in the width of the spread of 6 cents
(600 basis points).


Figure 17: Tether/USD price, Trading Volume, Cumulative Order Flow, and Bid-Ask Spreads
                                    Price:                                           Trading Volume (Millions)
           1.00
                                                                       30
           0.99                                                        25
                                                                    Frequency




           0.98                                                        20
      USD




                                                                       15
           0.97
                                                                       10
           0.96                                                            5
                                                                           0
                 01 05 09 13 17 21 25 29 01                                    1     5     9     3     7     1     5      9 1
                                                                            0-0 -10-0 -10-0 -10-1 -10-1 -10-2 -10-2 -10-2-11-0
          8 - 10- 8-10- 8-10- 8-10- 8-10- 8-10- 8-10- 8-10-8-11-      8 - 1    8     8     8     8     8     8     8    8
       201 201 201 201 201 201 201 201 201                         201 201 201 201 201 201 201 201 201
                                       Date                                                         Date
                             bid and ask prices                                            bid-ask spread
        1.000                                                           0.06
        0.975                                                           0.05
        0.950                                                           0.04
        0.925                                                           0.03
     USD




                                                                   USD




        0.900                                                           0.02
        0.875                                                           0.01
         0.850                                                        0.00
                -01 -05 -09 -13 -17 -21 -25 -29 -01                         -01 -05 -09 -13 -17 -21 -25 -29 -01
         1 8 -10 18-10 18-10 18-10 18-10 18-10 18-10 18-1018-11      1 8 -10 18-10 18-10 18-10 18-10 18-10 18-10 18-1018-11
       20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20                                  20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20
                                        Date                                                        Date
Note: Schematic illustrates the movement in Tether/USD price, bid-ask prices, spreads, and trading volume
during October 2018. Transaction, bid, and ask prices from Coinapi trade and order-book data. Volume data
are from Cryptocompare. Sample period October 2018.




                                                                   43
5     Conclusion
    This paper examined the efficiency and mechanisms of how stablecoins work in the digital-
asset economy. Two fundamental questions were addressed. First, how does price stabilization
function in the case of stablecoins and does this process differ from the supply-driven (i.e.,
central-bank-intervention-driven) process that applies when national currencies are pegged to
one another? Second, what fundamentals account empirically for the premiums and discounts
that open up in Tether and other stablecoin markets?
    We develop a model both to clarify the channels through which stablecoin premiums and
discounts can arise and to provide other testable implications. A representative investor can
use dollars, stablecoins, or both as vehicle currencies through which they invest in a non-stable
cryptoasset (e.g., Bitcoin). Stable-coin premiums can arise in the model due to relatively
low intermediation costs, which accords with actual market conditions since stablecoins use
blockchains. Stablecoin premiums can also arise in the model by providing a hedge for non-
stable cryptoassets. An arbitrage mechanism stabilizes the stablecoin price around the peg: in
response to a deviation from the peg, the investor has an incentive to buy (sell) Tether from
the primary market issuer at a one-for-one rate and sell (buy) Tether in the secondary market
when that price trades above (below) parity. These endogenous investor flows drive the price
of stablecoins toward its pegged value.
    Empirically, we find that stablecoin issuance, the closest analogue to central-bank interven-
tion, plays only a limited role in stabilization, pointing instead to the demand side as providing
the fundamental stabilizing forces, consistent with our model. In explaining deviations from
the peg, we find that stablecoin premiums are due to coins' uniqueness as a safe-haven asset
within the digital-asset economy, citing evidence of significant premiums during the crash in
non-stable cryptocurrencies in early 2018 and during the COVID-19 crisis, whereas stablecoin
discounts derive from both liquidity effects and collateral concerns.
    Looking to the future, Facebook announced in 2019 its intention to launch Libra, a global
stablecoin. Our analysis sheds light on the mechanisms by which a global stablecoin like Libra
can maintain its peg, in that case to a basket of currencies. Our findings indicate that a
decentralized system of pegs can work well even when the primary issuer remains passive and
depends on demand-driven arbitrage to stabilize price around the peg. As stablecoins become
even more widely used, new mechanisms for stabilizing price around the peg will inevitably
arise. Introductions of forward and futures markets on stablecoins, for example, will attract
arbitrage capital from regulated financial institutions, inducing still greater stability, so long as
the pegs remain fully credible and collateralized.




                                                 44
References
Abadi, Joseph and Markus Brunnermeier, "Blockchain economics," Technical Report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Akram, Q Farooq, Dagfinn Rime, and Lucio Sarno, "Arbitrage in the foreign exchange market:
  Turning on the microscope," Journal of International Economics, 2008, 76 (2), 237­253.

Baur, Dirk G and Lai T Hoang, "A Crypto Safe Haven against Bitcoin," Finance Research Letters,
  2020, in press.

Benigno, Pierpaolo, Linda M Schilling, and Harald Uhlig, "Cryptocurrencies, currency compe-
  tition, and the impossible trinity," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

Berentsen, Aleksander and Fabian Schär, "Stablecoins: The quest for a low-volatility cryptocur-
  rency," 2019.

Bhambhwani, Siddharth, Stefanos Delikouras, and George M Korniotis, "Do Fundamentals
  Drive Cryptocurrency Prices?," available at SSRN 3342842, 2019.

Biais, Bruno, Christophe Bisiere, Matthieu Bouvard, and Catherine Casamatta, "The
  blockchain folk theorem," The Review of Financial Studies, 2019, 32 (5), 1662­1715.

Bianchi, Daniele and Alexander Dickerson, "Trading Volume in Cryptocurrency Markets," 2018.

Bindseil, Ulrich, "Tiered CBDC and the financial system," 2020.

BIS, "Investigating the impact of global stablecoins," 2019.

Bordo, Michael D and Andrew T Levin, "Central bank digital currency and the future of monetary
  policy," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Brunnermeier, Markus K, Harold James, and Jean-Pierre Landau, "The digitalization of
  money," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

Bullmann, Dirk, Jonas Klemm, and Andrea Pinna, "In search for stability in crypto-assets: Are
  stablecoins the solution?," ECB Occasional Paper, 2019, (230).

Catalini, Christian and Joshua S Gans, "Some simple economics of the blockchain," Technical
  Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.

   and     , "Initial coin offerings and the value of crypto tokens," Technical Report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research 2018.

Chamley, Christophe, "Dynamic speculative attacks," American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (3),
  603­621.

                                                  45
Chen, Yuchin and Kenneth Rogoff, "Commodity currencies," Journal of international Economics,
  2003, 60 (1), 133­160.

Chiu, Jonathan and Thorsten V Koeppl, "The economics of cryptocurrencies ­ bitcoin and
  beyond," Available at SSRN 3048124, 2017.

Cukierman, Alex, Itay Goldstein, and Yossi Spiegel, "The choice of exchange-rate regime and
  speculative attacks," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2004, 2 (6), 1206­1241.

Dell'Erba, Marco, "Stable Cryptocurrencies? Assessing the Case for Stablecoins," New York Uni-
  versity Journal of Legislation and Public Policy, Forthcoming, 2019.

Dhawan, Anirudh and Talis Putnins, "A new wolf in town? Pump-and-dump manipulation in
  cryptocurrency markets," 2020.

Easley, David, Maureen O'Hara, and Soumya Basu, "From mining to markets: The evolution
  of bitcoin transaction fees," Journal of Financial Economics, 2019, 134 (1), 91­109.

Eichengreen, Barry, "From Commodity to Fiat and Now to Crypto: What Does History Tell Us?,"
  Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

  , Andrew K Rose, and Charles Wyplosz, "Speculative Attacks on Pegged Exchange Rates:
  An Empirical Exploration with Special Reference to the European Monetary System," Technical
  Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 1994.

  ,   , and    , "Exchange market mayhem: the antecedents and aftermath of speculative attacks,"
  Economic policy, 1995, 10 (21), 249­312.

Engel, Charles and Kenneth D West, "Exchange rates and fundamentals," Journal of Political
  Economy, 2005, 113 (3), 485­517.

Evans, Martin DD and Richard K Lyons, "Order Flow and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal
  of Political Economy, 2002, 110 (1), 170­180.

Fatas, A., Economics of Fintech and Digital Currencies, VoxEU, 2019.

Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Daniel Sanches, Linda Schilling, and Harald Uhlig, "Central
  Bank Digital Currency: Central Banking For All?," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research 2020.

Ferreira, Alex Luiz, Arie Eskenazi Gozluklu, and Joao Mainente, "Central Bank Reserves and
  Currency Volatility," Available at SSRN 3409832, 2019.

Flood, Robert P and Olivier Jeanne, "An interest rate defense of a fixed exchange rate?," Journal
  of International Economics, 2005, 66 (2), 471­484.


                                                  46
   and Robert J Hodrick, "Real aspects of exchange rate regime choice with collapsing fixed rates,"
  Journal of International Economics, 1986, 21 (3-4), 215­232.

Florysiak, David and Alexander Schandlbauer, "The information content of ico white papers,"
  Available at SSRN 3265007, 2019.

Foucault, Thierry, Roman Kozhan, and Wing Wah Tham, "Toxic arbitrage," The Review of
  Financial Studies, 2017, 30 (4), 1053­1094.

Fratzscher, Marcel, Lukas Menkhoff, Lucio Sarno, Maik Schmeling, and Tobias Stoehr,
  "Systematic Intervention and Currency Risk Premia," Available at SSRN 3119907, 2019.

  , Oliver Gloede, Lukas Menkhoff, Lucio Sarno, and Tobias Stöhr, "When is foreign exchange
  intervention effective? Evidence from 33 countries," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  2019, 11 (1), 132­56.

Froot, Kenneth A and Tarun Ramadorai, "Currency returns, intrinsic value, and institutional-
  investor flows," The Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (3), 1535­1566.

Gabaix, Xavier and Matteo Maggiori, "International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (3), 1369­1420.

Gandal, Neil, JT Hamrick, Tyler Moore, and Tali Oberman, "Price Manipulation in the
  Bitcoin Ecosystem," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2018, 95, 86­96.

Goldstein, Itay, Deeksha Gupta, and Ruslan Sverchkov, "Initial coin offerings as a commitment
  to competition," Available at SSRN 3484627, 2019.

Griffin, John and Amin Shams, "Is Bitcoin Really Untethered?," Journal of Finance, Forthcoming,
  2020.

Hale, Galina, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Marianna Kudlyak, Patrick Shultz et al., "How
  futures trading changed bitcoin prices," FRBSF Economic Letter, 2018, 12, 1­5.

Hoang, Lai T and Dirk G Baur, "How stable are stablecoins?," Available at SSRN 3519225, 2020.

Howell, Sabrina T, Marina Niessner, and David Yermack, "Initial coin offerings: Financing
  growth with cryptocurrency token sales," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2018.

Itskhoki, Oleg and Dmitry Mukhin, "Exchange rate disconnect in general equilibrium," Technical
  Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Jordà, Òscar, "Estimation and inference of impulse responses by local projections," American eco-
  nomic review, 2005, 95 (1), 161­182.


                                                47
Kearns, Jonathan and Roberto Rigobon, "Identifying the efficacy of central bank interventions:
  evidence from Australia and Japan," Journal of International Economics, 2005, 66 (1), 31­48.

Killeen, William P, Richard K Lyons, and Michael J Moore, "Fixed versus flexible: Lessons
  from EMS order flow," Journal of International Money and Finance, 2006, 25 (4), 551­579.

Klein, Michael W and Jay C Shambaugh, "Fixed exchange rates and trade," Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics, 2006, 70 (2), 359­383.

Krugman, Paul, "A model of balance-of-payments crises," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
  1979, 11 (3), 311­325.

Krugman, Paul R, "Target zones and exchange rate dynamics," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  1991, 106 (3), 669­682.

Kumhof, Michael and Clare Noone, "Central bank digital currencies-design principles and balance
  sheet implications," 2018.

Li, Tao, Donghwa Shin, and Baolian Wang, "Cryptocurrency Pump-and-Dump Schemes," avail-
  able at SSRN, 2018.

Liu, Yukun, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Xi Wu, "Common risk factors in cryptocurrency," Technical
  Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

   and    , "Risks and Returns of Cryptocurrency," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research 2018.

Makarov, Igor and Antoinette Schoar, "Price discovery in cryptocurrency markets," in "AEA
  Papers and Proceedings," Vol. 109 2019, pp. 97­99.

  and     , "Trading and arbitrage in cryptocurrency markets," Journal of Financial Economics, 2020,
  135 (2), 293­319.

Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin, "Unique equilibrium in a model of self-fulfilling currency
  attacks," American Economic Review, 1998, pp. 587­597.

Obstfeld, Maurice, "Balance-of-Payments Crises and Devaluation," Journal of Money, Credit and
  Banking, 1984, 16 (2), 208­217.

Raskin, Max and David Yermack, "Digital currencies, decentralized ledgers and the future of
  central banking," in "Research Handbook on Central Banking," Edward Elgar Publishing, 2018.

Sarno, Lucio and Mark P Taylor, "Official intervention in the foreign exchange market: Is it
  effective and, if so, how does it work?," Journal of Economic Literature, 2001, 39 (3), 839­868.



                                                 48
Schilling, Linda and Harald Uhlig, "Some simple bitcoin economics," Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 2019, 106, 16­26.

Skeie, David R, "Digital currency runs."

Sockin, Michael and Wei Xiong, "A model of cryptocurrencies," Technical Report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research 2020.

Svensson, Lars EO, "An interpretation of recent research on exchange rate target zones," Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 1992, 6 (4), 119­144.

Tetherinc., "Tether: Fiat currencies on the Bitcoin blockchain," 2016.

Vitale, Paolo, "Sterilised central bank intervention in the foreign exchange market," Journal of In-
  ternational Economics, 1999, 49 (2), 245­267.

Wei, Wang Chun, "The impact of Tether grants on Bitcoin," Economics Letters, 2018, 171, 19­22.

Yermack, David, "Is Bitcoin a Real Currency? An Economic Appraisal," Handbook of Digital Cur-
  rency, 2015, pp. 31­43.

Zimmerman, Peter, "Blockchain structure and cryptocurrency prices," 2020.




                                                  49
Appendices
A        Data Appendix
       We have four sources, each supporting a different aspect of our analysis.

      1. Coinapi: Online subscription with access to open, high, low, close, and volume (OHLCV)
         trade data and order book data from multiple crypto exchanges.

      2. Omniexplorer and Etherscan: Blockchain explorers that contain transaction data
         of individual wallets, used to obtain new issuance/redemptions of stablecoin tokens to
         compute flows of these tokens to the secondary market.

      3. Cryptocompare: Price and trading volume data for currencies (based on a representa-
         tive list of crypto exchanges).

      4. Coinmetrics: Provides fundamentals data on the network value, computing power of
         cryptocurrency mining, and number of unique addresses.

Coinapi
       Coinapi offers a monthly subscription with access to their data api which gives historical
cryptocurrency OHLCV, trade, and order book data. We outline in Table 8 the specific trading
pairs, coin symbols, and types of data that we employ. To use the api, we followed https:
//github.com/coinapi/coinapi-sdk, which gives sample code for querying the api.44 The
trade data are used to construct order-flow data, as it has a boolean "taker_side_sell" variable
that is a seller-initiated transaction if True, and buyer-initiated if False. Orderbook data for
exchanges are also provided, useful for bid and ask prices. To construct bid-ask spreads, we
take the highest bid and the lowest ask out of a set of 20 quotes for a specific time period,
which gives us a lower bound for the bid-ask spread at any given point in time.




44
     Modifications were made to customize results; api requests are limited to 100,000 data points per day.

                                                        50
                                      Table 8: Coinapi Data

                      Data Type                  Coin Symbol    Exchange    Sample Period
         OHLCV, Trade and Order Book Data USDT_USD               Kraken      04/17-03/20
         OHLCV, Trade and Order Book Data USDT_USD              Bitfinex     12/18-03/20
         OHLCV, Trade and Order Book Data USDT_USD               Bittrex     05/18-03/20
                    OHLCV                 USDC_USD               Kraken      01/20-03/20
                    OHLCV                  PAX_USD               Bittrex     01/19-03/20
                    OHLCV                 BUSD_USD              Binance      10/19-03/20
                    OHLCV                 TUSD_USD               Bittrex     06/18-03/20
                    OHLCV                  DAI_USD              Bitfinex     04/18-03/20
             OHLCV and Trade Data         BTC_USDT              Binance      08/17-03/20
             OHLCV and Trade Data         BTC_USDC              Binance      12/18-03/20
             OHLCV and Trade Data         BTC_PAX               Binance      11/18-03/20
             OHLCV and Trade Data         BTC_BUSD              Binance      09/19-03/20
             OHLCV and Trade Data          ETH_DAI              Coinbase     05/19-03/20



      Where multiple cryptocurrency exchanges offer the same data, we choose the exchange
that (i) has the longest time series and (ii) is one of ten exchanges that has "trusted volume"
according to a report filed by the SEC.45 The report tests exchanges for fraudulent activities
(e.g., suspicious variability in bid-ask spreads, systematic patterns in histograms of transaction
size) and finds that the exchanges listed in Table 9 do not have the telltale patterns in trading
volume or spreads. We note that of the ten exchanges, two do not offer an onramp for trading
national currencies, Binance and Poloniex. Similarly, two platforms, Itbit and Bitflyer, only
accepted national currencies at the time the SEC report was written.




45
     See https://www.sec.gov/comments/sr-nysearca-2019-01/srnysearca201901-5164833-183434.pdf.

                                                51
                        Table 9: Trusted Exchanges According to SEC Report

                              Exchange     National Currencies      Stablecoins
                              Binance                N                   Y
                              Bitfinex               Y                   Y
                              Bitstamp               Y                   Y
                               Bittrex               Y                   Y
                               Bitflyer              Y                   N
                              Coinbase               Y                   Y
                               Gemini                Y                   Y
                                Itbit                Y                   N
                               Kraken                Y                   Y
                              Poloniex               N                   Y



Omniexplorer and Etherscan
      We use this dataset to construct net flows from the stablecoin issuer to the secondary
market. The addresses of the issuers are listed in Table 12. We follow Wei (2018) in obtaining
transactions of Tether grants (creation of new tokens) and revokes (redemptions) from the
Omniexplorer api. Tether's id is 31, and using the api call in Table 11, we retrieve the entire
history of Grants and Revokes.46 Etherscan is an explorer of all transactions recorded on the
Ethereum blockchain, available at https://etherscan.io/. This includes transactions for
Tether and other national-currency-backed coins. The history of token grants and revokes is
exportable to a data-readable format.
      For Etherscan, we first need the contract address of each coin, which one can find by
searching the ticker id of the coin (USDT, USDC, PAX and TUSD) in the search portal on
https://etherscan.io/. The contract addresses are listed in Table 10. To find the Etherscan
address, you need the contract address of the coin, followed by the wallet address to get the
entire history of transactions for a given wallet. For example, the contract address for USDC
is 0xa0b86991c6218b36c1d19d4a2e9eb0ce3606eb48, and the wallet address for Tether grants is
0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000. Therefore, the Etherscan url for USDC grants
is given by: https://etherscan.io/token/0xa0b86991c6218b36c1d19d4a2e9eb0ce3606eb48?
a=0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000. The addresses for Tether Grants/Revokes
of tokens are listed in Table 11, and the Treasury addresses of four coins are listed in Table
12. (The only national-currency-backed coin that does not have a Treasury listed is TrueUSD.)
We note that the addresses for Tether Grants for USDC, PAX, and TUSD are identical; when
46
     Please refer to https://api.omniexplorer.info/ on how to obtain transaction histories.

                                                      52
searching for transactions of the grant address, each coin has a different contract address and
so it is a unique identifier. Using the following data, we compute net changes in Tether in
circulation to the secondary market as the level of token grants less redemptions. Similarly, we
measure net flows in and out of the Tether Treasury wallet. Subtracing net flows into Treasury
from the net of grants and revokes of tokens gives a measure of total flows to the secondary
market.

                           Table 10: Stablecoin Contract Addresses

           Coin    Blockchain                      Contract Address
          USDT     Etherscan        0xdac17f958d2ee523a2206206994597c13d831ec7
          USDC     Etherscan        0xa0b86991c6218b36c1d19d4a2e9eb0ce3606eb48
          PAX      Etherscan        0x8e870d67f660d95d5be530380d0ec0bd388289e1
          TUSD     Etherscan      0x97A9F6F941b54c373cec38b8Dc7565CcDBbE75C6




                         Table 11: Stablecoin Issuer Wallet Addresses


  Coin      Blockchain                                 Wallet Address
 USDT     Omni Explorer    https://api.omniexplorer.info/v1/properties/gethistory/31
 USDT      Etherscan                 0xc6cde7c39eb2f0f0095f41570af89efc2c1ea828
 USDC      Etherscan               0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000
 PAX       Etherscan               0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000
 TUSD      Etherscan               0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000




                         Table 12: Stablecoin Issuer Wallet Addresses

           Coin      Blockchain                      Wallet Address
          USDT     Omni Explorer     1NTMakcgVwQpMdGxRQnFKyb3G1FAJysSfz
          USDT      Etherscan         0x5754284f345afc66a98fbb0a0afe71e0f007b949
          USDC      Etherscan         0x55fe002aeff02f77364de339a1292923a15844b8
          PAX       Etherscan        0x5195427ca88df768c298721da791b93ad11eca65
          TUSD      Etherscan                             N/A




                                              53
Cryptocompare
      Cryptocompare provides public access to price and volume data based on volume-weighted
averages of price quotes and trades from 150 cryptocurrency exchanges, available via their
api https://min-api.cryptocompare.com/.47 We use this resource to measure total traded
volume in the Tether/USD and BTC/USD pairs. We also use cryptcompare to determine the
daily closing price of non-stable cryptocurrencies BTC, ETH, XRP, BCH, and LTC.

Coinmetrics
      We use coinmetrics for the following series, based on the data dictionary available at https:
//coinmetrics.io/data-downloads, using the tickers listed in Table 13.
      Hash Rate: The mean rate at which miners are solving hashes in a give time interval. Hash
rate is the speed at which computations are being completed across all miners in the network.
The unit of measurement varies depending on the protocol.
      Number of Unique Addresses: The sum count of unique addresses that were active in
the network (either as a recipient or originator of a ledger change) in that time interval. All
parties in a ledger change-action (recipients and originators) are counted. Individual addresses
are not double-counted if previously active.
      Following Bhambhwani et al. (2019), we use the hash rate and number of unique addresses
as fundamentals to model price determination of non-stable cryptocurrencies such as BTC and
ETH.

                                    Table 13: Coinmetrics Indicators

                                  Variable                 Ticker         Pairs
                              Hash Rate                  HashRate BTC, ETH
                       Number of Unique Addresses        AdrActCnt BTC, ETH




47
     For more detail on how quotes and traded volume are calculated, see: https://www.cryptocompare.com/
     media/27010937/cccagg_methodology_2018-02-26.pdf.

                                                    54
B        Governance and Transparency Measures
       We provide here more institutional detail on the transparency measures undertaken by
stablecoins. Tether inc. acknowledges in its white paper that there are potential problems with
the security of its dollar deposits. It lists the following five points (Tetherinc., 2016):

      1. We (Tether inc.) could go bankrupt

      2. Our bank could go insolvent

      3. Our bank could freeze or confiscate the funds

      4. We could abscond with the reserve funds

      5. Recentralization of risk to a single point of failure

       Of the following points, Tether claims dollar deposits are still redeemable if Tether inc. goes
bankrupt or becomes insolvent. For the third and fourth point, they state that their bank is
familiar with holding cryptocurrency deposits, and that absconding with funds is unlikely due
to its public charter. The fifth point is the biggest issue with Tether, and that is, while Tether
in circulation is using a decentralized system of exchange by being on the blockchain, all dollar
deposits are held in a centralized issuer. There is settlement risk if the dollar deposits are
vulnerable to attack from an outside party. One way for Tether to mitigate the central point
of failure is by having sufficient reserves in its balance sheet. This point is tackled differently
by newer stablecoins, e.g., Paxos, which has FDIC-insured deposits, and USDC tokens via
decentralization of the issuer with multiple licenses to create tokens, and finally by protecting
counterparty risk through the use of escrow accounts.
       The main transparency measure undertaken by Tether is the publication of its daily balance
sheet. As stated in the Tether White Paper (Tetherinc., 2016), Tether follows a "proof of re-
serves" process in which they account for all liabilities (Tether in circulation) on the blockchain.
This includes all platforms Tether currently trades on, the three main platforms being Omni
explorer, Ethereum, and Tron according to its balance sheet in April, 2020. Every Tether in
circulation is backed, in principle, by a dollar deposit. Tether inc. releases a daily balance
sheet reporting their total dollar deposits. For example, on April 2nd, 2020, their balance
sheet, according to https://wallet.tether.to/transparency, says the Total Assets, which
is the bank deposits, is equal to $6,480,678,611.74, and total Tether in circulation is given by
$6,349,160,932.47. The excess of assets over liabilities is $131,517,679.27. As a percentage of
total assets, that is approximately 2%. We note that this matches very roughly what a risk-free
rate would yield annually on fixed-income instruments.48
48
     While not explicit about their interest-bearing assets, the following article documents that Tether does earn
     interest on its dollar deposits: https://cryptobriefing.com/tether-interest-stablecoins/.

                                                         55
Audit Reports
      Similar to Tether, we have monthly auditing reports for TrueUSD and USDC that are
managed by accounting firms Cohen & Co and Grant Thornton respectively. For example,
a typical audit report on TrueUSD, from the December 2019 statement, states the following:
"The issued and collateralized TrueUSD...do not exceed the balance of the escrow accounts
reported above. The supply of TUSD tokens can be reconciled to transactions within the escrow
accounts...".
      Similarly, a statement on USDC's accounting firm Grant Thornton, December 2019 state-
ment, states the following: "USD Coin (USDC) tokens issued and outstanding = $519,628,995
USDC US Dollars held in custody accounts = $520,537,729...the issued and outstanding USDC
tokens do not exceed the balance of the US Dollars held in custody accounts."
      Statements confirm that total assets exceed total liabilities and that the stablecoins are at
least 100% collateralized.

Crypto-Collateralized Coins
      The above discussion accounts for national-currency-backed coins; a different set of rules of
transparency and accountability apply to the crypto-collateralized coin DAI. DAI is encoded
on the Ethereum blockchain using a smart contract. This is a set of protocols that are enforced
by computer code. In the case of DAI, the smart contract is designed to enforce liquidation of
the collateral if the collateral ratio goes below 150% (the ratio of Ethereum collateral to total
value of DAI borrowings), and will impose a liquidation penalty to the borrower. In contrast to
national-currency-backed coins, there is no centralized risk of the issuer absconding with funds,
as the smart contract means any Ethereum collateral deposited by the investors is locked in
the contract.
      Due to the nature of the Ethereum collateral, this currency requires additional features
for stability of the secondary market price. One such tool is the DAI borrowing rate, which
controls the level of borrowings of DAI, and by extension flows of DAI into the secondary
market. This feature is controlled through a continuous voting process where voters can choose
a DAI stability rate, with the weight of votes given by their share of total DAI borrowings in the
economy. While the system consults all users on the stability rate, there are occasions where a
"whale", an investor with significant market power, can manipulate the stability rate.49

C       Data on Other National-Currency-Backed Stablecoins
      We provide here supplementary evidence on other national-currency-backed stablecoins.
USDC, Paxos, and TrueUSD are among the largest 5 coins by market cap as of March, 2020,

49
     See https://bit.ly/2WoJRXY for more details.

                                                    56
and are national-currency-backed like Tether. They differ from Tether: USDC decentralises
the primary issuer to have multiple issuers with licenses to create USDC tokens; Paxos dollar
deposits are insured by FDIC banks; and TrueUSD uses a system of escrow accounts in transac-
tions between investors and the stablecoin issuer. All of these systems claim to be 100% backed
by US dollar collateral.
   We subdivide this section into the following:

   1. Transaction prices and histograms showing a two-sided distribution of deviations.

   2. Balance sheets and secondary market flows.

Transaction Price and Histogram of Deviations
   We plot transaction-price deviations from the peg for USDC, Paxos, and TrueUSD. Data
are from Coinapi for all coins. We make two general observations based on the following Figures
18, 19, and 20. The first is that deviations are two-sided ­ these stablecoins trade at both a
premium and a discount to the dollar parity peg. The second observation is that deviations are
typically persistent, and as indicated in section 1, we note a half-life of deviations that ranges
from 5 to 10 days for most coins.


            Figure 18: USDC/USD Deviations from Peg and Histogram of Deviations
                             Deviations from Peg: USDC                                      Deviations from Peg: USDC
          0.010
                                                                            2500
          0.008
                                                                            2000
          0.006
                                                                    Frequency




          0.004                                                             1500
    USD




          0.002                                                             1000
          0.000                                                                 500
          0.002
                                                                                       0
                      -15            -01   -15    -01  -15    -01                 . 0 2 0 .015 .010 .005 .000 .005 .010 .015 .020
              0   -01           0 -02 20-02 20-03 20-03 20-04                   0         0    0    0    0    0    0    0    0
           202             20 2       20     20    20     20                                               USD
                                             Date
Note: Figure plots deviations of the USDC peg from parity (left panel). A positive deviation indicates USDC
trades at a premium. Right panel is a histogram of deviations of the USDC peg. Data from Coinapi. Sample
is January 2020 to March 2020.




                                                                     57
               Figure 19: PAX/USD Deviations from Peg and Histogram of Deviations
                       Deviations from Peg: PAX                           Deviations from Peg: PAX
            0.020                                              800
            0.015
                                                               600
            0.010




                                                       Frequency
            0.005
     USD




                                                               400
            0.000
            0.005                                              200
            0.010                                                0
                  1   3   5   7   9   1   1    3                 0    5    0    5    0    5    0    5     0
               9-0 9-0 9-0 9-0 9-0 9-1 0-0 0-0               0.02 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.02
            201 201 201 201 201 201 202 202
                                Date                                                USD
Note: Figure plots the Paxos deviations of the peg from parity (left panel). A positive deviation indicates Paxos
trades at a premium. Right panel is a histogram of deviations of the Paxos peg. Data from Coinapi. Sample is
January 2019 to March 2020.



              Figure 20: TUSD/USD Deviations from Peg and Histogram of Deviations
                      Deviations from Peg: TUSD                          Deviations from Peg: TUSD
             0.10                                              250
             0.08
                                                               200
             0.06
                                                       Frequency




                                                               150
      USD




             0.04
             0.02                                              100
             0.00                                                  50
             0.02                                                   0
                     7   0   1   4     7 0   1    4                  0 .015 .010 .005 .000 .005 .010 .015 .020
                  8-0 8-1 9-0 9-0 9-0 9-1 0-0 0-0            0 . 0 2   0    0    0    0    0    0    0    0
               201 201 201 201 201 201 202 202
                                  Date                                                  USD
Note: Figure plots the deviations of the TrueUSD peg from parity (left panel). A positive deviation indicates
TrueUSD trades at a premium. Right panel is a histogram of deviations of the TrueUSD peg. Data from
Coinapi. Sample is June 2018 to March 2020.


Balance Sheets of Other Stablecoins
    We plot here the balance sheets of other major stablecoins. The data platform we use is
Etherscan, which records the entire set of transactions of a given stablecoin on the blockchain.
To use Etherscan, we identify the wallet address of the issuer, and the wallet address of the
Treasury (where applicable). We can then use the api to extract a set of transactions of a given
wallet. Transactions are classified as a "from" or "to". The underlying assumption is that
for the set of transactions involving the primary issuer, if the issuer is "from" this indicates a
flow from the issuer to the secondary market. Conversely, "to" indicates redemptions and a
withdrawal of stablecoin tokens from circulation. Sample period is from introduction of a given
coin to Etherscan to November 2019.

                                                       58
                                              Figure 21: Balance Sheet for USDC, Paxos, and TrueUSD
                                                                                                    USDC Balance Sheet
                                                                               0.5
                                                                                     Secondary Market
                                                                                     USDC Treasury
                                                                               0.4




                                                           amount (Billions USD)
                                                                               0.3

                                                                               0.2

                                                                               0.1

                                                                       0.0
                                                                            9     1     1     3     5     7     9      1
                                                                         8-0 018-1 019-0 019-0 019-0 019-0 019-0 019-1
                                                                     201      2     2     2     2      2    2     2
                                                                                                  Date



                                               Paxos Balance Sheet                                                                                                      TrueUSD Balance Sheet
                                Secondary Market                                                                                   0.25             Secondary Market
                         0.25   Paxos Treasury
                                                                                                                                   0.20
                         0.20
     amount (Billions USD)




                                                                                                               amount (Billions USD)

                                                                                                                                   0.15
                         0.15

                                                                                                                                   0.10
                         0.10

                                                                                                                                   0.05
                         0.05

                                                                                                                                   0.00
                      0.00
                             9     1     1     3     5     7     9      1                                                                       4         7                0         1          4            7               0               1
                          8-0 018-1 019-0 019-0 019-0 019-0 019-0 019-1                                                                      8-0       8-0           8-1          9-0        9-0       9-0             9-1             0-0
                      201      2     2     2     2      2    2     2                                                                   201          201           201          201        201       201          201             202
                                                   Date                                                                                                                                 Date


Note: Figure plots the balance sheet of USDC, Paxos, and TrueUSD. Balance-sheet data from Etherscan.


Arbitrage Flows
                         We estimate the following regression in equation 24 (h equals 0,1,2, ...) to test the stabilizing
effect of arbitrage flows on the pegs. The results for Paxos and TrueUSD in Figure 22 suggest
a stabilizing effect, on the order of 40 basis points for Paxos and 20 basis points for TrueUSD
(for a one-standard-deviation shock in order flow).50

                                                                                              4                                                               4
           Pt+h - Pt-1 =  + h F lowT EX +                                                         k F lowT EX,t-k +                                                 k (Pt-k-1 - Pt-k-2 ) + ut (24)
                                                                                            k=1                                                           k=1




50
     We do not report results for USDC as our price data currently do not go back far enough, unlike the other
     two coins.

                                                                                                          59
Figure 22: Response of Paxos (left panel) and TrueUSD (right panel) Prices to a Unit Standard
Deviation of Flows to the Secondary Market
                    PAX price response to Arbitrage Flows (1std)                                     TrueUSD price response to 1 std Flows to Exchange
               20                                                                          0

                                                                                           5
                0
                                                                                          10
basis points




               20                                                                         15




                                                                           basis points
                                                                                          20
               40                                                                         25

                                                                                          30
               60
                                                                                          35
                    0          10   20    30    40     50      60                              0.0      2.5     5.0   7.5     10.0
                                                                                                                              days
                                                                                                                                     12.5   15.0   17.5   20.0
                                         days
Note: Figure documents the effect of a 1 standard deviation shock to net secondary market flows on the price
of Paxos and TrueUSD. Data for secondary-market flows from Etherscan. Price data from Coinapi. Sample
is January 2019 to March 2020 in left panel, and June 2018 to March 2020 in right panel. Gray area denotes
two-standard-error bands for statistical significance at the five-percent level.


D               Crypto-Collateralized Stablecoins
               In this section we detail the stability mechanisms of DAI, a stablecoin backed by Ethereum
collateral. Similar to other national-currency-backed coins, DAI exhibits a two-sided distribu-
tion of stablecoin prices, illustrated in Figure 23.

                           Figure 23: DAI/USD Deviations from Peg and Histogram of Deviations
                                    Deviations from Peg: DAI                   70                       Deviations from Peg: DAI
                        0.08
                                                                               60
                        0.06
                                                                               50
                        0.04
                                                                     Frequency




                                                                               40
                        0.02
                USD




                                                                               30
                        0.00
                                                                               20
                        0.02                                                   10
                       0.04                                                     0
                            4 7 0 1 4 7 0 1 4                                              0.04          0.02         0.00       0.02       0.04
                         8-0 8-0 8-1 9-0 9-0 9-0 9-1 0-0 0-0
                      201 201 201 201 201 201 201 202 202                                                               USD
                                           Date
Note: Figure plots the deviations of the DAI/USD peg from parity (left panel). A positive deviation indicates
DAI/USD trades at a premium. Right panel presents a histogram of deviations of the DAI/USD peg. Data are
Coinapi. Sample is April 2018 to March 2020.


               The steps that increase DAI supply involve depositing a set amount of Ethereum collateral
into a collateralized debt position. Based on the value of Ethereum collateral, the investor can
borrow a fraction of their collateral as DAI tokens. There is a limit on how much DAI one can

                                                                    60
borrow. The safe ratio of collateral is considered by many market practitioners to be 300%. The
minimum collateral ratio required is 150%. If the collateral ratio falls below 150%, the smart
contract will trigger a liquidation.51 In this event, the investor is required to repay the debt of
DAI tokens using their remaining collateral, as well as pay a liquidation penalty. In general,
investors are incentivized to maintain a stable collateral ratio of 300%. If the value of Ethereum
prices fall, then an investor can either inject more Ethereum collateral, or alternatively redeem
DAI, in order to maintain their level of collateral.
     These incentives of the liquidation system and enforcement of smart contracts make it less
likely that extreme price events in Ethereum will cause significant deviations from DAI/USD
parity. An equally central question for stabilisation is what tools can be used when a coin like
DAI trades systematically above or below parity. For national-currency-backed coins there is
an arbitrage motive for investors in the event of a difference between the peg and the secondary
market rate. However, in the case of DAI there is no similar arbitrage motive because the
real-time value of the underlying collateral that would be released or absorbed is uncertain.
     For example, suppose DAI trades at a dollar price above 1. If an investor buys Ethereum
for dollars, then deposits that Ethereum as collateral and borrows DAI, then sells DAI in the
secondary market for dollars, and finally closes out their position (by buying back DAI and
exchanging that for their Ethereum collateral), they could lose money if the market value of
Ethereum in dollars has fallen over the latency period. Given the market price of Ethereum
against the USD exhibits considerable volatility, valuation losses on their Ethereum can easily
dwarf deviations of the DAI secondary-market price from the peg.
     Accordingly, crypto-collateralized coins use additional tools to maintain the peg. One tool
that is used is the stability fee. Implemented by the MAKER DAO protocol, the stability fee
is managed by the issuer of DAI tokens, and is effectively an interest rate on borrowing DAI
tokens. This is analogous to a central bank managing interest rates. We document plots of the
stability fee and the DAI/USD price in Figure 24. A critical difference from a national central
bank is the voting structure. While central banks typically have a centralised arrangement for
setting rates, DAI has a decentralised, continuous-voting procedure for approval of a stability-
fee (i.e., rate) change. Voters can choose from a range of options for the stability rate, and if
the number of votes surpasses the number of votes for the prior decision, the stability rate will
change.52


51
   A smart contract is a set of instructions in computer code that defines the conditions of the contract for each
   counterparty under different scenarios (default etc.). Being managed by computer code and visible on the
   blockchain, it can be verified publicly by all nodes on the blockchain.
52
   Voting can be influenced by whales, i.e. voters with market power. A recent stability-rate change in October
   28, 2019, was influenced largely by one voter with a significant holding of DAI, and had a near 50% share of
   the total number of votes.

                                                       61
                  Figure 24: DAI Stability Fee (blue) and DAI/USD Price (red)

                                                                 Stability Fee and DAI-USD Price             1.06
                                                 20
                                                 15                                                          1.04
                                                 10

                        Stability Fee (% p.a.)
                                                                                                             1.02
                                                  5




                                                                                                               DAI price (USD)
                                                  0                                                          1.00
                                                  5
                                                                                                             0.98
                                                 10
                                                 15                                                          0.96
                                                 20
                                                                                                             0.94
                                                         5    7     9     1     1     3     5     7      9
                                                     8-0   8-0 018-0 018-1 019-0 019-0 019-0 019-0 019-0
                                                  201 201       2     2     2     2     2     2     2


Note: Figure illustrates the stability fee (blue) and the DAI/USD price (red). Stability fee is expressed as a
rate on borrowing DAI, sourced from Maker DAO api. DAI/USD data are from Coinapi. Sample is April 2018
to September 2019.


    Given a higher DAI stability rate raises the cost of borrowing DAI, the intention of the
stability rate is to reduce growth of DAI in circulation. This will be a combination of redemp-
tions of existing DAI borrowed, and reductions in future growth of new Ethereum collateral by
investors when generating DAI tokens. By reducing supply, all else equal, this will lead to a
rise in the price of DAI.
    On November 16th, 2019, MakerDAO introduced a multi-collateral DAI as well as retaining
the single-collateral version (which has been renamed SAI and is planned to phase out by
the end of 2020). Now investors can choose to diversify their basket of collateral to reduce
idiosyncratic risk of a single cryptoasset, such as Ethereum. This is a natural direction for
evolution in crypto-collateralization as future coins like Facebook's Libra consider pegging to
currency baskets rather than a single currency such as the US dollar.




                                                                             62
