                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE USE OF GROUP-LEVEL APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL
                           RESOURCE POLICY

                                         Matthew Kotchen
                                         Kathleen Segerson

                                        Working Paper 27142
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27142


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2020




We thank two anonymous reviewers for very useful comments on an earlier version of this article,
along Suzy Leonard's excellent editorial suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Matthew Kotchen and Kathleen Segerson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Use of Group-Level Approaches to Environmental and Natural Resource Policy
Matthew Kotchen and Kathleen Segerson
NBER Working Paper No. 27142
May 2020
JEL No. H2,Q2,Q3,Q5

                                              ABSTRACT

Policies to address environmental and natural resource management are often implemented at the group
level. The defining feature of such policies is that penalties or rewards are based on group rather than
individual performance, or rights are allocated to a group rather than to individuals. This article discusses
how group-level policies have been applied and studied across a variety of contexts in the literature
on environmental and natural resource management. The aim is to identify common theoretical and
empirical insights and lessons learned about the design and implementation of these instruments. A
general finding is that group-level policies are most likely to be effective when rewards and/or penalties
are designed to provide strong incentives for groups to meet targets in a cost-effective way. Moreover,
to the extent that this requires coordination within the group, the effectiveness of policies will depend
on whether the group has or can create its own institutions or mechanisms to facilitate and enforce
that coordination.


Matthew Kotchen
School of the Environment,
School of Management,
and Department of Economics
Yale University
195 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06511
and NBER
matthew.kotchen@yale.edu

Kathleen Segerson
Department of Economics
University of Connecticut
341 Mansfield Road, Unit 1063
Storrs, CT 06269-1063
Kathleen.Segerson@uconn.edu
INTRODUCTION

Environmental economists have a long history of studying alternative policy instruments aimed at
improving environmental and natural resource management. In most cases, the particular policies
under study target individual polluters or resource users. Examples of such policies include limits on a
firm's emissions, taxes on a firm's polluting inputs or outputs, and information disclosure about a firm's
production practices or emissions. This article discusses policies that are instead applied at the group
level. The defining feature of a group-level policy is that rewards or penalties are based on group
performance rather than the practices or performance of individuals, or rights are allocated to a group
rather than individuals (Kotchen and Segerson 2018). For example, rather than each firm facing a tax
that depends only on its own emissions, each firm could face a tax that is based on ambient levels of
pollution (i.e., pollution levels or concentrations measured in a given waterbody or airshed), which
depend on the combined emissions from all contributing sources (Xepapadeas 2011). Similarly, rather
than paying individual landowners for their conservation efforts, a payment-for-ecosystem-services
(PES) program could make payments to a community or village based on its collective conservation
activities or outcomes (Kerr et al. 2014). In addition, an entire industry could be threatened with costly
regulation if it fails to collectively meet pollution control objectives through some form of self-regulation
or voluntary pollution control (Segerson 2017). Finally, rather than allocating fishing rights or limits on
allowable incidental catch of other species ("bycatch") to individual vessels, the rights could be allocated
to a fishing cooperative or an entire fleet (Holland 2018). 1
        Although there is a large literature on collective (group) action to improve resource
management (e.g., Ostrom 1990, 2000), the literature on regulatory policies that are based on group-
level rewards, punishments, or collective rights has been much more limited. As we will discuss, there
are a number of studies that focus on the use of specific group-level policies in particular environmental
and natural resource contexts. What is missing is a synthesis across different contexts that can provide
general insights about when and how regulators might use group-level polices as an effective and
efficient regulatory approach. This article provides a first step toward providing such a synthesis.
        We are interested in how group-level approaches can, do, and should fit into the proverbial
"toolbox" of policy instruments for environmental and natural resource management. We aim to


1
  Of course, some combination of individual and group-level instruments is also possible, as, for example, when
individual rights holders form a group and pool their rights, or when a group that holds rights allocates them
among individuals within the group (Holland 2018).
                                                        1
identify theoretical and empirical insights and lessons learned about the design and implementation of
these instruments by examining group policies in different contexts. Rather than provide a
comprehensive review, we focus on the use of group-level policies in four specific contexts: agricultural
pollution from diffuse sources (i.e., "nonpoint" pollution 2), payments for ecosystem services (PES),
industry-wide voluntary programs, and fisheries. We also briefly discuss the use and performance of
group-level policies at the national level under the U.S. Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act. An important
conclusion that emerges from examining these various contexts is that group-level policies are most
likely to be effective when rewards and/or penalties are designed to provide strong incentivizes for
groups to meet targets in a cost-effective way. We also find that to the extent that this requires
coordination within the group, it is important that the group has or can create its own institutions or
mechanisms to facilitate and enforce that coordination.
        The remainder of this article is organized as follows. The next section presents a conceptual
overview of group-level policies, highlighting general issues that arise in the design and use of these
policies. 3 We then examine their application in the four specific contexts listed above. For each
context, we discuss how the most relevant general issues apply, provide examples of group policies that
have been implemented, and summarize the evidence regarding their impact. We then briefly discuss
the parallels between these contexts and the group performance provisions of the U.S. Clean Air Act and
Clean Water Act. We conclude with a summary of insights and lessons learned about the design and
implementation of group-level policies.



A CONCEPTUAL OVERVIEW OF GROUP-LEVEL POLICIES

Broadly speaking, a group is any collection of individuals (e.g., landowners) or organizations (e.g., firms).
There are a number of different ways in which groups might form or be defined. A group could
represent a natural or feasible management unit, such as all firms within a biophysical unit (e.g., a
watershed), a political jurisdiction (e.g., a state or municipality), an economic sector/industry, or some
combination of these. Alternatively, a set of individuals or firms might voluntarily choose to form a
group, such as a group of owners of fishing vessels who form a cooperative. The definition of the


2
  The term "nonpoint" pollution is used to distinguish between pollution that stems from diffuse sources (such as
agricultural land) and pollution that stems from more concentrated or "point" sources (such as smokestacks or
discharge pipes).
3
  For a more formal analysis of a unified model of group-level policies, see Kotchen and Segerson (2018).
                                                        2
relevant group might be part of the policy design (if a regulator can choose which firms to include in the
group), or it might be determined by other factors (such as legal or social relationships among group
members).
         Our primary interest here is in the design of policies aimed at correcting externalities (i.e.,
reducing the costs) that members of the group collectively impose on others outside the group. 4 For
example, agricultural pollution from a group of farmers imposes costs on downstream water users, and
reduced ambient air quality resulting from emissions by a group of firms in a given area or sector can
impose health costs on neighboring residents. Likewise, fishing by vessels in a given fleet can impose
ecological damage on marine environments and lead to incidental bycatch of threatened marine
mammals valued by society as a whole. In the absence of policy, when group members are making their
production decisions, they will generally have little (if any) incentive to consider the costs they impose
on others outside the group. It is the existence of such externalities that typically provides the rationale
for some policy intervention.
         There are at least four reasons why a policy intervention might target the group as a whole
rather than individuals within the group:

    1) In some cases, individual actions may be very difficult (or even impossible) to monitor, while a
         group outcome is more easily monitored. For example, a regulator might find it difficult or
         prohibitively costly to monitor the activities of individual farmers polluting a given waterbody,
         but easy to monitor the resulting water quality (or ambient concentrations of pollutants) in that
         waterbody.
    2) Even when individual activities can be monitored, group-level policies may have advantages
         when greater coordination among group members is needed to improve efficiency. For
         example, in the case of fisheries, coordination among vessels within a fleet might help spread
         fishing activity, thereby reducing congestion, and sharing information about the location of
         threatened or endangered marine mammals or other fish species can help avoid incidental
         bycatch.

4
 In some cases, members of the group may impose externalities on each other as well. Within-group externalities
can stem, for example, from spatial interactions such as congestion or use of a common-pool resource (where
additional extraction or harvest by one member of the group reduces the amount available for other members of
the group). In such cases, the group itself has an incentive to self-organize to address the within-group externality.
As noted earlier, there is a large literature that examines the conditions under which self-organization to address
over-exploitation of such resources is likely to occur and be effective (e.g., Ostrom 1990, 1994). A thorough review
of this literature is outside the scope of this article, although many of the insights discussed below have roots in it.
                                                           3
       3) Group-level policies might be the only sensible approach when resources are owned jointly by a
           group. For example, in many developing countries, land is collectively owned or managed by a
           community or village, making the community or village the relevant level for applying policies.
       4) Even when resources are individually owned, transaction costs could be lower under a group
           approach. For example, when seeking to reduce deforestation, contracting with a single entity
           that represents a group may be less costly than contracting with many small individual
           landowners. This is similar to (1) if monitoring costs are viewed as a form of transaction costs.

Regardless of the rationale for using a group approach, imposing penalties or rewards based on group
performance or allocating rights to groups creates an interdependency among the group members. This
interdependency is above and beyond any interdependence that might arise for other, non-policy-
related reasons (e.g., from use of a common pool). Specifically, when the aggregate measure of the
group's performance or activity (e.g., aggregate emissions, ambient pollution concentrations, combined
resource use or degradation) determines the rewards or penalties faced by individuals, each member's
own costs, benefits, or both depend not only on the member's own actions but also on the actions of all
other group members. Thus, introduction of a group-level policy will create a policy-induced
interdependency among firms or individuals within the group, which is a critical feature of all group
policies.
           This policy-induced interdependence creates two potential issues: (1) incentives to free-ride,
and (2) incentives to coordinate, or even collude.


Incentives for Free-riding

Free-riding may occur if some firms are able to benefit from an improvement in group performance
even if they do not contribute to the cost of ensuring that improvement. Importantly, when it comes to
meeting group-level targets, free-riding can take two different forms: 1. all firms "under-supply" and
hence the environmental objective is not met; 5 and 2. some firms under-supply and others over-supply.
In the second case, the environmental objective can still be met (i.e., there is no "under-provision" at
the aggregate level), but the under-provision by some members means that the objective is not met at
least cost.




5
    This is analogous to the classic free-riding that results in under-provision of a public good.
                                                              4
        There are several ways in which policy design can address the potential for free-riding. One
option is to appropriately structure rewards and penalties (Kotchen and Segerson 2018). For example,
even if individual actions cannot be observed, policy parameters (tax or subsidy rates, thresholds, etc.)
can be set so they still induce efficient decisions by all group members. 6 This simply requires that
rewards and/or penalties for meeting or exceeding group targets are structured such that each group
member faces the full marginal social cost and benefit of their actions. For example, under a policy that
taxes individuals within a group when a collective environmental target is not met and subsidizes them
when the group performs better than the target, individual group members will face incentives to
behave efficiently if the tax/subsidy rate is set equal to the marginal damages from ambient pollution
(Segerson 1988; Kotchen and Segerson 2018).
        Second, free-riding can be eliminated if firms can be excluded from receiving the group-based
benefit when they do not contribute to meeting the group standard, although using exclusion to reduce
free-riding requires the ability to monitor the practices or performance of individual group members.
Eliminating free-riding through this form of exclusion underlies the concept of a "green club," in which
only contributors reap the benefits of club membership (Potoski and Prakash 2005; Kotchen and van' t
Veld 2011). Exclusion can also be used by cooperatives as a way to reduce or eliminate free-riding, as,
for example, when fishing cooperatives revoke membership for vessel owners who violate rules for
sharing costs or benefits (e.g., Holland 2018).
        Finally, even if some firms free-ride in the sense of not contributing toward meeting the
collective target, this does not necessarily mean that the target will not be met. As long as the benefits
of meeting the target are sufficiently large for enough members of the group, these firms may still
undertake the actions necessary to ensure the target is met, despite the free-riding by others (Dawson
and Segerson, 2008). In this case, the program can still be successful in terms of achieving the collective
performance goal, but, as noted above, the target will generally not be met at least cost.


Incentives to Coordinate (or Collude)

In some cases, ensuring that collective environmental goals are met efficiently requires coordination
among members of the group. To illustrate, suppose that a group faces a fixed penalty (like closure of a
fishery) if aggregate harvest or bycatch exceeds an allowable limit. If each vessel owner expects that all


6
 This implies that the policy instrument can be designed to yield a first-best outcome (i.e., an outcome that
maximizes social welfare). For a detailed discussion, see, for example, Segerson (1988) and Xepapadeas (2011).
                                                        5
other vessels will contribute to staying within the collective limit, then it may be in each vessel's interest
to contribute to that effort as well. However, if a vessel owner expects that other vessels will not
contribute, then it may not be in the individual vessel owner's interest to contribute unilaterally. To
ensure that the first outcome (the "good" equilibrium) rather than the second outcome (the "bad
equilibrium") occurs, the vessel owners need some way to coordinate so that each knows that others
will contribute sufficiently toward the collective goal.
         Note that in the example above, there are multiple possible equilibrium outcomes under which
the target is met, but they are not all equally "good". In fact, only one of them is an outcome where
each member of the group contributes the efficient amount, which means the target is met at the
lowest possible cost. Under other outcomes, the target is met but not at least cost, due to the second
type of free-riding discussed above (where some firms "over-supply" and others "under-supply").
Coordination within the group can help to ensure that the most efficient outcome (where the target is
met at least cost) emerges.
        There is a large literature on self-governance of common-pool resources that identifies factors
that determine whether attempts at coordination are likely to be successful (Ostrom 1990, 1994). Those
same factors are also likely to be important determinants of whether coordination leads to a good or a
bad equilibrium when group policies with more than one equilibrium are implemented. One important
factor is how the group is organized, and how it controls or influences decisions by group members.
Groups may be composed of autonomous members, with each making independent decisions, or they
may have a central decision-making body that sets general "rules" under which the group will operate,
including what (if any) restrictions members will face in making their own choices. The rules could even
specify the allowable actions of individual members of the group, such as how much land individual
landowners within the group can clear or when and where individual vessels in a cooperative can fish.
The design of these "internal" rules will play an important role in determining how the members of the
group respond to the group policy. In addition, if payments (in the form of cash or other benefits) are
made to the group rather than to individuals, the group must devise rules for how those payments will
be distributed or used, taking account of both efficiency and distributional concerns. Perceived fairness
of the rules for sharing costs and benefits is a key condition for successful coordination.
        While coordination can help a group achieve a collective target, it can also create unintended
incentives for collusion aimed at reducing aggregate tax burdens or increasing subsidy payments. This
can lead to members of the group choosing outcomes that correspond to reducing pollution "too much"

                                                      6
from an efficiency perspective (Hansen 1998). 7 For example, if the group receives subsidy payments for
reducing pollution below some threshold and those payments continue to increase with further
reductions, the group can benefit from those further reductions (if the additional subsidy payment
exceeds any additional cost). Although these further reductions would lead to additional environmental
improvements, such reductions would be inefficient if the cost of achieving them exceeds the
corresponding social benefit. In such cases, coordination in the form of collusion would reduce rather
than improve overall efficiency. All else equal, policies should be designed to encourage coordination in
meeting a collective target without creating an incentive to collude and over-abate.


         The discussion in this section has highlighted some general features of group-based policies and
identified some of the issues and concerns that such policies raise. We turn next to the four specific
contexts in which group policies have been -- or could be -- used by regulators seeking to improve
environmental or resource management: nonpoint pollution (mainly from agriculture), PES programs,
industry-wide voluntary approaches, and fisheries.



NONPOINT POLLUTION

Nonpoint pollution, most notably water pollution from agricultural land use, is one context where
group-level policies have the potential to play an important role in achieving environmental quality
goals. Farmers' activities, such as fertilizer use and manure management, contribute to high levels of
nitrogen and phosphorous in streams, rivers, lakes, and coastal estuaries. However, as mentioned
earlier, monitoring all farms to determine the contribution of each farmer to a given water pollution
problem is difficult and costly, if not impossible. It is far easier and less costly to monitor the water
quality in the affected waterbody. In fact, much of the early theoretical work on the use of group-based
approaches to environmental and natural resource management was motivated by the difficulty of
controlling nonpoint pollution using conventional (individual-level) policy instruments (e.g.,
Segerson1988).




7
 This is analogous to the detrimental effects of collusive behavior in anti-trust contexts, where firms collude to
restrict output in an effort to increase profits.
                                                          7
Overview
The theoretical literature on the control of nonpoint pollution grew out of the industrial economics
literature on "team" production. Team production refers to a situation in which the labor of workers
leads to a jointly produced level of output and a manager can observe the joint output but not individual
contributions or effort levels (e.g., Holmstrom 1982). With team production, rewards or penalties set by
a manager must be based on the workers' joint output (e.g., whether the team meets its production
targets) rather than the effort or output of individuals, because individual effort cannot be monitored.
The nonpoint pollution context is analogous to team production. With nonpoint pollution, the
contributions of individual polluters combine to determine a level of environmental quality, and a
regulator can observe overall environmental quality but not the individual contributions to it. The
regulator can then set rewards or penalties tied to the "joint" production of water quality.
         The theoretical literature on nonpoint pollution has examined a number of specific policies
based on group performance, where group performance is defined relative to a specified target level of
ambient water quality. Under these policies, the target can be coupled with (i) rewards paid to each
farmer when the group meets the target (a pure subsidy approach); (ii) penalties imposed on each
farmer if the group fails to meet the target (a pure tax approach); or (iii) a combination of both (a tax
and subsidy approach). The amount of the tax or subsidy can be fixed or it can vary proportionally with
the amount by which the target is exceeded or missed. As noted earlier, by setting the tax or subsidy
rates equal to the marginal social costs of pollution and setting the target at the socially efficient level,
regulators can, in theory, overcome free-riding and induce individual farmers acting independently to
invest efficiently in pollution abating activities (Segerson 1988; Xepapadeas 2011; Kotchen and Segerson
2018).


An Example

Despite the extensive theoretical literature on the efficient design of group-level policies in this context,
these policies have rarely been used in practice to control agricultural nonpoint pollution. We are aware
of one example -- the Florida agricultural privilege tax -- which is levied on agricultural land in the
Everglades Agricultural Area. The tax rate is reduced (through a tax credit) when aggregate
phosphorous loadings from the basin are reduced below a target threshold, thereby rewarding farmers
for basin-wide water quality improvements that go beyond the threshold (Hoffman et al. 2006; Daroub
et al. 2011). However, this collective reward is not the sole mechanism in place. It is coupled with

                                                       8
mandatory requirements and individual incentives for implementation of best management practices
designed to meet the target threshold. Because these requirements and incentives were implemented
at the same time as the agricultural privilege tax, it is difficult to isolate the impact of the tax itself.


Evidence

Because real-world use of taxes and subsidies based on ambient pollution is so limited, what we know
about their effectiveness comes primarily from laboratory and field experiments. Most of the
laboratory studies ask student subjects to make choices that mimic pollution abatement decisions when
faced with different policies that are based on group outcomes. Laboratory experiments are, of course,
only imperfect predictors of what can be expected in the real world. However, Spraggon and Oxoby
(2010) argue that real-world outcomes might actually be more efficient than those that emerge in
laboratory settings, because outcomes improve when decision-makers have information about and
understand profit-maximizing choices, which would be more likely in the real world than in the
laboratory.

Laboratory experiments
The results from laboratory experiments that examine the impacts of these group policies are generally
consistent with what theory predicts (Giordana and Willinger 2013). For example, policies based on
proportional tax incentives (or a tax/subsidy combination) tend to be efficient, although those that
involve subsidies may lead to collusion and over-abatement. In addition, even when policies result in a
given environmental target being met, that target is not necessarily met at least cost (i.e., some subjects
over-abate and others under-abate). Fixed (as opposed to proportional) group penalties tend not to
perform well, presumably because of the difficulty of coordinating to reach the preferred equilibrium in
a setting in which individuals are each acting on their own (i.e., when there is no communication).
Communication can lead to more coordination and hence more efficient outcomes, but also to greater
collusion, which can reduce efficiency (Suter et al. 2008; Vossler et al. 2006). Thus, in settings where
members of the group are encouraged to communicate to improve coordination, regulators should
anticipate possible collusion when setting penalties and/or rewards.

Field experiments
In addition to the laboratory experiments, there have been a small number of field experiments that
have examined the impacts of a collective performance approach to reducing agricultural pollution. In

                                                        9
one field experiment, farmers in a West Virginia watershed were given the opportunity to participate in
a scheme where the group of participants received a collective performance-based payment that
depended on collective nitrate-nitrogen loadings (Collins and Maille 2011). 8 In contrast to the
mechanisms tested in the laboratory experiments, where payments went directly to individuals, in this
field experiment, the payment went to the group as a whole. The group then had to decide how to
distribute the payment among its members. Interestingly, Collins and Maille (2011) find that the group
chose to manage the distribution of payments in a very collaborative/cooperative manner that
considered both incentives to participate and the cost and likely effectiveness of pollution abatement by
individual farmers. In addition, the collective approach created incentives for the collection of
information about pollution sources within the watershed, which could then be used to better manage
pollution reduction efforts.
        Taxes based on group performance have also been field-tested in other agricultural contexts
where monitoring individual behavior or contributions is difficult. For example, Reichhuber et al. (2009)
studied the effectiveness of collective tax and tax/subsidy approaches in the context of biodiversity and
the over-harvesting of non-timber products by Ethiopian farmers. Consistent with theoretical
predictions from the nonpoint pollution literature, they find that both policies achieved a high level of
aggregate efficiency.



COLLECTIVE PAYMENT-FOR-ECOSYSTEM-SERVICES (PES) PROGRAMS

PES programs have been promoted in a wide variety of contexts as a means of creating conservation
incentives, particularly in developing countries. Examples include paying farmers to reduce
deforestation or improve water quality. Payments can be based on practices that are undertaken
(practice-based PES) or on observed environmental outcomes (performance-based PES). Most
applications, such as the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Conservation Reserve Program (Wu 2000),
involve contracts with and incentive payments to individual landowners. However, some PES programs
rely on group-level contracts, because land is jointly owned or managed or as a means to reduce
contracting, monitoring, and enforcement costs (Kerr et al. 2014).




8
  Because participation in the experiment was voluntary, the program was similar to the PES programs we discuss
in more detail in the next section.
                                                       10
Overview
As with all group-level policies, the positive and negative incentive effects of collective PES programs
depend both on how the program is designed and how the group is organized and operates. With
respect to program design, all collective PES programs include some form of collective responsibility,
which typically means that payment will not be received unless the level of group practices or
performance reaches a given target. However, the form of the "payment" or reward for meeting the
target can vary (Engel 2015). For example, it can be a cash payment or an in-kind payment (i.e., a
transfer of resources such as seed or fertilizer). In addition, the payment can be made directly to
individuals (based either on the group's overall contribution or on the individual's contribution, if
observable) or it can be made to the group (e.g., the community or village). In the latter case, the group
must decide how the payment is used or distributed. The group could, for example, decide to distribute
the payment to group members in some agreed upon way or to use the payment for some purpose that
would benefit all group members, such as investment in local public schools, infrastructure, or
community-owned capital equipment (e.g., Munoz-Pina et al. 2008).


Examples

There are numerous real-world examples of collective PES programs, many of which have involved a
resource that is commonly owned or used by a village or community. For example, in Ecuador,
communities with communal land rights can receive payments for limiting grazing and other
ecologically-damaging activities on their lands. Although payments are also available to individual
landholders, most of the land enrolled in the program is communal (Hayes et al. 2015). Similarly, a large
share of Mexico's payments for hydrological and biodiversity services goes to communities that
collectively own and manage enrolled land (Munoz-Pina et al. 2008; Garcia-Amado et al. 2013;
Costedoat et al. 2015). In Sweden, reindeer herder villages with communal grazing rights receive
payments for conservation of wolverines and lynx based on the number of offspring observed in an
annual inventory (Zabel et al. 2014). These performance-based payments directly reward conservation
that is based on population outcomes, which are observable only at the village level. Under Japan's
Farmland, Water and Environmental Conservation Improvement Scheme, self-formed "activity groups"
can receive payments for collective conservation efforts that reduce negative environmental impacts
from agriculture (Ito et al. 2018). In this case, contracting with a group rather than individuals both
reduces transaction costs and incentivizes cooperation.

                                                     11
Evidence

In practice, it is often difficult to identify the extent to which a PES program generates additional
conservation benefits beyond what would have occurred otherwise (Pattanayak et al. 2010; Börner et al.
2017). Nonetheless, several observational studies have examined the impact of collective PES programs,
and there is also evidence from field experiments.

Observational Studies
Observational studies of collective PES programs evaluate how these programs affected either the
actions undertaken by individuals or the group or the resulting environmental outcomes. For example,
in their study of collective payments to Ethiopian farmers, Hayes et al. (2015) find evidence suggesting
that communities that participated in the program strengthened their grazing restrictions after
participation. Although the authors caution against drawing conclusions about causation, their evidence
is consistent with theory, as discussed previously, that predicts that collective payments can create
incentives for groups to develop internal rules for cooperation. Similarly, Ito et al. (2018) find that
communities that had previous experience with collective action were more likely to participate in a
collective PES program and that, after controlling for prior differences between participants and non-
participants, communities that participated in the program were more likely to carry out collective
conservation activities. Finally, in a study of the impact of payments for biodiversity conservation in
Mexico, Costedoat et al. (2015) find that communities that participated in the PES program had lower
deforestation rates than non-participating communities.

Field Experiments
Researchers have also used field experiments to examine how collective payment or reward systems
affect individual decisions. For example, Narloch et al. (2012), Midler et al. (2015), and Narloch et al.
(2017) conducted a number of experiments with farmers from the Bolivian and Peruvian Andes. In
these studies, groups of farmers signed contracts that would reward them with cash or in-kind
payments if, and only if, all farmers in the group planted traditional (environmentally-friendly) crops on
the agreed-upon acreage. The experiments compared different payment designs, including individual
and collective rewards. A general conclusion that emerges from these studies is that group-level
contracts can create strong incentives for conservation when payments for meeting group targets are
made directly to individuals, or when payments are made to the group and the group is able to develop
trust among members and communicate and deliberate about collective action.
                                                     12
        Similarly, Kaczan et al. (2017) used a field experiment in Mexico to examine the impact of a
collective PES program on forest conservation. Consistent with the three studies just discussed, they
find that a collective PES program can have an impact on conservation effort by individuals within the
group, and that the level of individual contribution depends on the existence of within-group
coordination mechanisms. This conclusion is also consistent with the field experiment results in
Rodriguez et al. (2018), who studied collective reward systems for small-scale gold miners in Colombia
and find that the existence of trust within the group was a key factor in determining the effectiveness of
collective payment schemes.



INDUSTRY-WIDE VOLUNTARY APPROACHES

Voluntary approaches to improving environmental quality are often viewed as viable alternatives to
command-and-control or more centralized market-based approaches (Kotchen 2013; Segerson 2013).
Under a voluntary approach, a participating individual or firm voluntarily agrees to take steps to reduce
pollution or increase conservation in response to some inducement. The PES programs we have just
discussed are one type of voluntary approach. In the case of the PES programs, the inducement to
participate comes from the payments that participants receive, which is a "carrot" approach to inducing
participation. However, in many cases, the inducement comes from a "stick" approach; that is, the
threat of regulation. Firms can also undertake voluntary environmental improvements as a way to
achieve some perceived market-related gain, such as improved corporate reputation, product
differentiation, or market access.


Overview
In most cases, government-sponsored voluntary programs target individual firms or landowners. 9
However, in some cases, rewards or penalties target an entire industry. This occurs, for example, when
the government threatens to regulate an entire industry if the industry does not self-regulate -- i.e., if
firms within the industry do not achieve pollution reduction goals on their own. In this case, the level of
industry performance that is necessary to avoid regulation is effectively a group-performance standard,
with a penalty to all members of the group (i.e., all firms in the industry) if the standard is not met.



9
  Numerous studies have examined the effectiveness of this type of voluntary program and found mixed results
(e.g., Morgenstern and Pizer 2007; Borck and Conglianese 2009).
                                                      13
Alternatively, an entire industry might benefit from self-regulation, through, for example, industry-wide
reputational gains. In either case, the industry's performance overall affects the costs, benefits, or both
of individual firms within the industry.
        When regulatory threats or reputation gains occur at the industry-level, the potential for free-
riding arises. The incentives to free-ride can be reduced or eliminated if firm-level decisions or
outcomes are observable so that "good" actors can be distinguished from "bad" actors. For example, if
a regulator threatens to impose a tax or regulation on an entire industry for failure to self-regulate
emissions, the regulator could provide some tax or regulatory relief to individual firms that can
demonstrate sufficient reductions in their own emissions (e.g., Dijkstra and Rubbelke 2013). Similarly,
when self-regulation leads to reputational gains, free-riding can be reduced if firms within an industry
realize those gains only when they have demonstrated through an external "certification" process that
they are environmental stewards (Kotchen and van `t Veld 2011). In both of these cases, free-riding is
addressed by excluding non-participants from reaping the benefits of voluntary improvements.


Examples
There are numerous examples of industry-wide regulatory threats. In the 1990s, the U.S. metal finishing
industry faced the threat of new regulations on wastewater discharges; this ultimately led to the
development of the voluntary Strategic Goals Program, an effort designed to forestall new regulation by
promoting voluntary actions aimed at reducing pollution (Brouhle et al. 2009). Similarly, many U.S.
electric utilities faced with the possibility of industry-wide regulation of greenhouse gas emissions
sought to forestall regulation by participating in the U.S. Department of Energy's voluntary Climate
Challenge program, which encouraged voluntary emissions reductions (Delmas and Montes-Sancho
2010). In these and other examples, a group of firms in a given industry faced a collective threat that
would be triggered (with some probability) if the industry did not improve its performance on its own.
        As discussed earlier, industry self-regulation can also be motivated by a desire to improve the
industry's reputation. For example, the desire to improve the chemical industry's public reputation led
to the creation in 1989 of Responsible Care, a voluntary program designed to improve the
environmental and safety performance of firms in the Chemical Manufacturers Association and thus the
industry's public image (King and Lenox 2000). Industry self-regulation can also be profitable for a group
of firms when it affects market power or structure. For example, the decision by top European
appliance manufacturers to voluntarily eliminate production of low energy efficiency (i.e., high polluting)

                                                    14
washing machines likely increased their profits, at least initially, when commitment and compliance with
the agreement were high (Ahmed and Segerson 2011).


Evidence

Empirical evidence on the impact of industry-wide regulatory threats and reputational gains on
voluntary pollution control is consistent with theoretical models of industry-wide penalties/rewards.
Those models predict that some firms will still participate even if others do not -- i.e., even if there is
free-riding by some firms (e.g., Dawson and Segerson 2008). For example, in his study of the
Responsible Care Program, Lenox (2006) finds that although there were incentives to free-ride, most
firms were better off with than without the program, and thus some firms were willing to participate
even though others did not. Similarly, Delmas and Montes-Sancho (2010) find that participation in the
Climate Challenge program was high; in fact, by the end of the program, utilities that had been
responsible for more than half of the industry's carbon emissions in 1990 had participated.
        However, a high level of participation does not necessarily mean that a program has been
effective. Most empirical studies of voluntary approaches have estimated their effectiveness by
comparing the environmental performance of participants and non-participants. King and Lenox (2000)
find no evidence that firms within the industry that joined the Responsible Care program had better
environmental performance than those that did not. Similarly, Delmas and Montes-Sancho (2010) find
that utilities that participated in the Climate Challenge program did not reduce emissions more than
non-participating utilities. These conclusions must be interpreted with some caution, however, because
estimates of program impacts that are based on comparisons of participants and non-participants will
be biased if some of the program's impacts spill over to non-participants (Zhou et al. 2020).
        Moreover, even if the impact of a voluntary program can be accurately estimated, it is difficult
to identify the specific role of a potential industry-wide threat or reward. For this reason, the empirical
evidence regarding the effectiveness of industry-wide threats or rewards is both rather limited and
mixed (Segerson 2017). For example, in their study of the metal finishing industry and the Strategic
Goals program, Brouhle et al. (2009) find that both participants and non-participants reduced emissions
in response to the threat of regulation, suggesting that the threat of regulation was effective even if the
voluntary program itself was not. In contrast, Harrison and Antweiler (2003) find that the threat of
regulating releases of toxic substances under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act had relatively



                                                      15
little impact on releases, which were driven primarily by existing regulations rather than the threat of
future regulation.



FISHERIES

Historically, fisheries management has been based on regulations such as limitations on the number of
vessels that can fish, the number of days that fishing is allowed, or the type of gear that can be used.
The inefficiencies that these regulations create are well-recognized, which has led to an increased
interest in the use of rights-based fisheries management, under which vessels are granted quotas that
give them rights to a certain amount of harvest, incidental bycatch, or even habitat impact.


Overview
Under rights-based management, rather than allocating rights to individual vessels, regulators can
allocate rights or quotas collectively to groups of vessels (Abbott and Wilen 2009; Zhou and Segerson
2016; Holland 2018). For example, harvest quotas (or a certain share of the total allowable catch) can
be granted collectively to a fishing cooperative comprised of multiple vessels, which must then manage
its quota and establish rules for how members will collectively keep their total harvest within the
cooperative's allowable limits. Similarly, limits for bycatch can be imposed at a group level rather than
on individual vessels. For example, a bycatch limit could be set for an entire fleet or fishery rather than
for individual vessels.
        Whether applied to harvest, bycatch, or habitat, collective or group limits are analogous to the
group-performance mechanisms discussed above, whereby a penalty is triggered when the group
exceeds its allowable limit. In this case, the penalty is typically closure of the fishery. While less
common, an alternative is to allow the group to purchase additional quota when it exceeds its limit
(Steward and Leaver 2016). The threat of a fishery closure or the cost of having to buy additional quota
provides an incentive for the group to devise internal rules to manage its quota effectively. In addition,
given that both harvests and bycatch are inherently stochastic (i.e., they cannot be completely
controlled by fishers), issuing a quota to a group of vessels rather than to individual vessels can also
provide a mechanism for pooling the risks that any individual vessel might catch more than expected,
and thus would have exceeded a vessel-level limit (Holland and Jannot 2012; Zhou and Segerson 2016;
Holland 2018).


                                                      16
Examples

There are many examples of fishing cooperatives, with many of them facing collective limits on harvest
and/or bycatch (Deacon 2012; Holland 2018). Ovando et al. (2013) find that approximately 50 percent
of the fishing cooperatives they surveyed faced a government-imposed total allowable catch, and,
according to Bonzon et al. (2013), 8 percent of the single-species and 23 percent of the multi-species
catch-share programs worldwide allocate quota to a group. For example, in 2002, a share of the total
allowable catch in the Alaskan Chignik salmon fishery was allocated to a voluntarily-formed cooperative
that was allowed to independently manage its own share (Deacon et al. 2013). Similarly, in 2010, the
New England groundfish fishery introduced a system under which vessel owners were allowed to form
groups (called "sectors") that would receive a collective allocation of allowable catch (Holland and
Wiersma 2010). The Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands groundfish fishery has also relied on a group-based
approach, in which quotas for target species were initially set at the fleet level but were subsequently
allocated to individuals who could pool their quota to form cooperatives. These same cooperatives
were then allocated shares of the bycatch limit for non-target protected species (Abbott et al. 2015).
        Although group-level limits are more commonly used to limit the bycatch of other fish species,
they can also be used for the bycatch of non-fish species. A notable example involving endangered
species is the Hawaiian longline swordfish fishery, which since 2004 has been subject to fleet-wide limits
on the total allowable number of loggerhead and leatherback sea turtle interactions, with closure of the
fishery if/when either aggregate limit is reached (e.g., WPRFMC 2018).


Evidence

There is evidence of fishing cooperatives successfully managing collective rights based on case studies in
the U.S. and throughout the world (Townsend et al. 2008; Holland 2018). Coordination has been shown
to be effective in reducing the "race to fish," providing public goods for the group (such as information
about bycatch hotspots or technology development), enforcing gear restrictions, enhancing product
quality, protecting habitat, and reducing financial risks through pooling revenue or quota (Deacon 2012;
Holland 2018). However, success appears to depend on the ability of the group to resolve internal and
external conflicts and monitor and enforce within-group rules to limit free riding (e.g., through internal
fines, social pressure, or threats of exclusion). Case studies suggest that the ability to limit free riding is
enhanced when external observers are on vessels to monitor harvest and/or bycatch, members of the
group have binding contracts committing them to the rules, and social pressure is effective (Holland
                                                      17
2018). Simply setting a fleet-wide total allowable catch, without having mechanisms to establish and
enforce within-group rules, is unlikely to be effective (e.g., Abbott et al. 2015).
        Although there is extensive case study evidence concerning the impacts of collective rights,
there have been few quantitative assessments of those impacts. Quantifying the impacts of collective
quotas faces many of the same empirical challenges that arise for PES programs, including the difficulty
of establishing a valid baseline for comparison and the fact that fishers often voluntarily join
cooperatives, which leads to potential self-selection problems. Nonetheless, the limited quantitative
evidence suggests that collective quotas can be effective in inducing behavioral changes. Because these
quotas are enforced through regulation (typically, closures), the question of interest in this case is not
whether the group has met the collective limit, but rather whether it has met that limit in a more
efficient way than under an alternative regulatory approach. In the case of the Alaskan Chignik
cooperative, Deacon et al. (2013) find that the vessels that joined the cooperative selected the most
efficient among them to harvest the group's allowable catch, thereby maximizing rents for the entire
group. In fact, the authors conclude that the creation of the cooperative led to a gain in economic rents
of at least 33 percent. Abbott et al. (2015) examine the impact of moving from fleet-wide collective
limits for both target and bycatch species in a Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands fishery to a system where
voluntarily-formed cooperatives could collectively manage their allowable catch. They find that the
formation of groups to manage quota caused behavioral changes that led to significant improvements in
the fishery, including adjustments in the timing and location of fishing activities to allow target species
to be harvested with less bycatch. Huang et al. (2018) find evidence of other behavioral responses (such
as increases in effort per vessel and changes in fishing locations) by some types of vessels that joined
cooperatives under the New England groundfish sector program.



NATIONAL AMBIENT REGULATIONS

The preceding examples highlight group-level policies imposed on a specific geographic area, sector, or
both. Two of the most significant national environmental policies in the United States -- the Clean Air
Act (CAA) and the Clean Water Act (CWA) -- illustrate the use of group-level polices on a much broader
scale, through federally-imposed ambient air or water quality standards.




                                                      18
Ambient Standards under the CAA and CWA
A central component of the CAA is the setting of National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), which
apply to six common air pollutants. 10 States are responsible for ensuring compliance with these
standards by designated air quality control regions within their borders. For each pollutant, regions are
categorized as either in "attainment" or "nonattainment" depending on whether they meet the
corresponding NAAQS. If an area is designated as nonattainment, states must submit to the EPA a State
Implementation Plan (SIP) that presents a credible plan for bringing the area into attainment. If a state
does not develop a SIP, or if the SIP is not approved, the CAA gives regulators the authority to impose
sanctions that would be costly to both the region and individual polluters, such as losses in access to
federal grant funding and/or restrictions on permitting new facilities.
        The CWA requires that states and territories maintain a list of waterbodies within their
jurisdictions that do not meet applicable water quality standards. In addition, a state must develop a
Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) analysis for each pollutant, which represents a plan for meeting
national ambient water quality standards for a given waterbody. TMDLs define the maximum total
amount of pollution (i.e., the pollution "load") that the waterbody can receive and still meet those
standards. This total allowable load is then allocated across all sources that contribute to polluting the
waterbody, including both point and nonpoint sources.


NAAQS vs. TMDLs

Both NAAQS and TMDLs involve ambient standards, which define a collective performance standard for
the polluters within a given region. Nonetheless, there are some important differences between
NAAQS and TMDLs. First, many of the sources of the air pollutants governed by NAAQS are point
sources, while the sources contributing to the water pollution problems that TMDLs are designed to
address are often nonpoint sources. In the case of NAAQS, there are enforceable penalties that can be
imposed on regions for failure to meet the ambient standards, and states have regulatory authority for
controlling the behavior of facilities within the region (e.g., for limiting power plant emissions). In this
sense, the state can effectively act like a centralized collective that coordinates compliance within the
air quality control region, setting the rules to control within-group behavior and facilitate compliance
with ambient standards. In contrast, TMDLs do not include clear penalties for failure to meet the group


10
  The six pollutants are ground-level ozone, particulate matter, carbon monoxide, lead, sulfur dioxide, and
nitrogen dioxide.
                                                        19
limits or enforceable rules to control the behavior of all contributing polluters. This is due, at least in
part, to the fact that the CWA does not have a general regulatory structure for limiting nonpoint
pollution, which is a primary source of pollution for many waterbodies. Uncontrolled nonpoint pollution
is much less of a concern for air pollution, which stems primarily from point sources or vehicle
emissions, both of which are regulated under the CAA.
        Given these differences and the findings from the theoretical and empirical literature on
collective approaches discussed earlier, it is not surprising that NAAQS appear to be more effective than
TMDLs. The CAA, along with the NAAQs provision, is generally viewed as having been an effective
environmental policy, leading to significant reductions in air pollution over the past several decades
(EPA 2017). In contrast, there is no strong evidence that TMDLs have been broadly effective in
improving water quality thus far. The evidence about TMDLs is limited, at least in part because of a
shortage of monitoring data and the fact that many TMDLs were developed recently, which means it
may take time for their impacts to be known (Norton et al. 2007). However, it is possible that even with
more data and time, TMDLs will still prove insufficient to meet water quality goals. One reason for this
is that in many cases, their implementation relies on voluntary efforts by farmers, an approach that is
unlikely to be effective unless coupled with strong incentives or requirements to curb polluting activities
(Segerson 2013).



SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

To date, environmental and natural resource economics has generally focused on policies aimed at
individuals, such as individual firms, landowners, or vessel owners. However, there are a number of
reasons why, in some contexts, policies might be applied at the group rather than the individual level,
including lack of observability of individual actions, the need for coordination, group ownership of
resources, or simply lower transaction costs. This article has provided an overview and synthesis of the
use of group policies in a number of different contexts, with the aim of better understanding how these
policies affect behavior and, ultimately, effective environmental and resource management.
        Our main findings and conclusions can be summarized as follows. The theoretical literature
shows that by appropriately setting rewards or punishments, regulators can design group-level policies
that overcome free-rider incentives and effectively meet environmental and natural resource
management objectives. This over-arching finding is also supported by the empirical evidence, which

                                                      20
comes from a variety of contexts and is based on a range of empirical methods, including laboratory
experiments, field experiments, and both case study and statistical evidence from real-world
experience.
        Indeed, the literature suggests that to be effective, group-level policies must include rewards
and penalties that provide strong incentives for groups to meet targets in a cost-effective way.
Moreover, to the extent that meeting targets cost-effectively requires coordination within the group, it
is also important for the group to have or create within-group institutions or mechanisms to facilitate
and enforce that coordination. More specifically, our review suggests that the following three
conditions must be met for group-level policies to be effective.


Strong External Incentives
Group-level policy must establish a strong set of external incentives for the group as a whole to meet
the collective target. These incentives can be based on either "carrots" or "sticks," but they must be
sufficiently strong -- i.e., there must be an adequate regulatory structure to impose costly penalties or
the necessary funds to finance sufficient rewards. For example, if rewards or penalties are fixed, the
penalties or rewards must be sufficiently strong so that if some members of the group free-ride, other
members will still find it beneficial to take the necessary actions to ensure that the overall group target
is met. Moreover, incentives will be effective only if there is adequate enforcement of penalties or
follow-through on rewards, which will often require external monitoring of group performance by a
regulator or third party. Indeed, the lack of an adequate enforcement mechanism, such as an
underlying regulatory structure, has hampered efforts to control nonpoint pollution, both at the local
level and, more broadly, under the CWA's TMDLs. In contrast, the CAA, which has a strong regulatory
structure for enforcing ambient air quality standards, has been more successful.


Incentives Designed for Cost-Effectiveness
The incentives must be carefully designed to ensure that targets are not only met but met cost-
effectively. Regulators can design group rewards and penalties ­ and set tax rates and subsidies -- in a
variety of ways. For example, when penalties and rewards are proportional to how far the group
exceeds or falls short of a collective target, the per-unit rate should be set to ensure that individual
group members face the full marginal social costs and benefits of their actions, which, in principle,
eliminates incentives to free-ride. Indeed, the empirical evidence (mostly from laboratory experiments)
generally indicates that such policies are efficient.
                                                        21
Coordination
Targets are more likely to be met in a cost-effective way if mechanisms are in place to foster
coordination among group members. For example, when penalties or rewards are fixed (as, for
example, with the closure of a fishery or imposition of a costly regulation), multiple equilibria are
possible, including outcomes under which the target is not met or is not met cost-effectively, and the
challenge is to facilitate coordination to ensure a "good" rather than a "bad" outcome. Similarly, if the
group uses a common property resource such as a fishery, coordination concerning where, how, and
when individual members access the resource can affect the overall return to the group. The ability of
the group to coordinate will typically depend on the group having or developing internal operating rules
that promote efficiency, as well as the group having the internal (within-group) capacity to monitor and
enforce those rules (Ostrom 1990, 2000). Enforcement could be based on either formal mechanisms
(such as contracts within the group) or informal mechanisms (such as trust, social norms, and peer
pressure). In addition, successful coordination depends on the group's ability to design internal rules for
allocating costs and benefits that are viewed as both fair and efficient.


Concluding Remarks
The findings and conclusions of our review suggest that, in certain contexts and when properly
designed, group-level policies can be an important tool for regulators to use in managing environmental
and natural resources. Moreover, we believe that the discussion and synthesis we have presented here
provide an initial step toward a more unified view of the lessons that emerge from the theoretical and
empirical literature about the use of group-level policies. Although the various contexts we have
discussed are quite different, the principles that determine the likely success of group-level policies
apply across them all. Thus, we believe that both researchers and policymakers interested in one
context can gain insights by looking at the lessons learned about the effectiveness of these policies in
other contexts. Our hope is that this article will encourage such cross-fertilization, thus helping to guide
both future research and future policy.




                                                     22
REFERENCES
Abbott, J. K. , and J. E. Wilen. 2009. Regulation of Fisheries Bycatch with Common-pool Output Quotas.
   Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 57(2): 195-204.

Abbott, J. K. , A. C. Haynie, and M. N. Reimer. 2015. Hidden Flexibility: Institutions, Incentives, and the
   Margins of Selectivity in Fishing. Land Economics, 91(1): 169-95.

Ahmed, R. and K. Segerson. 2011. Collective voluntary agreements to eliminate polluting products.
   Resource and Energy Economics. 33:572-588.

Bi, X. and M. Khanna. 2012. Reassessment of the impact of the EPA's voluntary 33/50 Program on Toxic
     Releases. Land Economics. 88:341-361.

Bonzon, K. , K. McIlwain, C. K. Strauss, and T. Van Leuvan. 2013. Catch Share Design Manual, Volume 1,
   A Guide for Managers and Fisherman (2nd edition). Environmental Defense Fund.

Borck, J. C. and G. Conglianese. 2009. Voluntary Environmental Programs: Assessing Their Effectiveness.
   Annual Review of Environment and Resources. 43:305-324.

Börner, J. , K. Baylis E. Corber, D. Ezzine-de-Blasd, J. Honey-Rosese, U. M. Persson, and S. Wunderg.
   2017. The effectiveness of payments for environmental services. World Development. 96:359-374.

Brouhle, K. , C. Griffiths, and A. Wolverton. 2009. Evaluating the role of EPA policy levers: An
   examination of a voluntary program and regulatory threat in the metal-finishing industry. Journal of
   Environmental Economics and Management. 57:166-181.

Collins, A. R. , and P. Maille. 2011. Group decision-making theory and behavior under performance-
    based water quality payments. Ecological Economics. 70:806-812.

Costedoat, S. , E. Corbera, D. Ezzine-de-Blas, J. Honey-Roses, K. Baylis, and M. A. Castillo-Santiago. 2015.
    How Effective Are Biodiversity Conservation Payments in Mexico? PLos ONE. 10(3): e0119881.
    https://doi. org/10. 1371/journal. pone. 0119881.

Daroub, S. H. , S. V. Horn, T. A. Lang, and O. A. Diaz. 2011. Best management practices and long-term
   water quality trends in the everglades agricultural area. Critical Reviews in Environmental Science
   and Technology. 41:608-632.

Dawson, N. L. and K. Segerson. 2008. Voluntary Agreements with Industries: Participation Incentives
   with Industry-Wide Targets. Land Economics, 84(1): 97. 114.

Deacon, R. T. 2012. Fishery Management by Harvester Cooperatives. Review of Environmental
   Economics and Policy, 6(2): 258-77.

Deacon, R. T. , D. P. Parker, and C. Costello. 2013. Reforming Fisheries: Lessons from a Self-Selected
   Cooperative. Journal of Law and Economics, 56: 83-125.

Delmas, M. A. and M. J. Montes-Sancho. 2010. Voluntary agreements to improve environmental quality:
   symbolic and substantive cooperation. Strategic Management Journal. 31:575-601.

                                                     23
Dijkstra, B. and D. T. G. Rubbelke. 2013. Group rewards and individual sanctions in environmental policy.
    Resource and Energy Economics. 35:38-59.

Engel, S. 2015. The Devil in the Detail: A Practical Guide on Designing Payments for Environmental
   Services. International Review of Environmental and Resource Economics, 9:131-177.

EPA (2017) National Air Quality: Status and Trends of Key Air Pollutants. Url: https://www. epa. gov/air-
   trends.

Garcia-Amando, L. R. , M R. Perez, and S. B. Garcia. 2013. Motivation for conservation: Assessing
   integrated conservation and development projects and payments for environmental services in La
   Sepultura Biosphere Reserve, Chiapas, Mexico. Ecological Economics. 89:92-100.

Giordana, G. , and M. Willinger. 2013. Regulatory instruments for monitoring ambient pollution. In
    Handbook on Experimental Economics and the Environment, J. A. List and M. K. Price (Eds).
    Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

Hansen, Lars Gårn. 1998. A Damage Based Tax Mechanism for Regulation of Non-point Emissions.
   Environmental and Resource Economics, 12(1):99-112.

Harrison, K. and W. Antweiler. 2003. Incentives for Pollution Abatement: Regulation, Regulatory Threats,
    and Non-Governmental Pressures. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 22(3):361-82.

Hayes, T. , F. Murtinho, and H. Wolff. 2015. An institutional analysis of Payment for Environmental
   Services on collectively managed lands in Ecuador. Ecological Economics. 118:81-89.

Hoffmann, S., J. Boyd, and E. McCormich. 2006. Taxing Nutrient Loads. Journal of Soil and Water
    Conservation. 61(5):142A-147A.

Holland, D. S. 2018. Collective Rights-Based Fishery Management: A Path to Ecosystem-Based Fishery
    Management. Annual Review of Resource Economics. 10: 469-85.

Holland, D. S. , and J. E. Jannot. 2012. Bycatch Risk Pools for the U. S. West Coast Groundfish Fishery.
    Ecological Economics, 78: 132-47.

Holland, D. S. , and J. Wiersma. 2010. Free-form Property Rights for Fisheries: The Decentralized Design
    of Rights-based Management through Groundfish "Sectors" in New England. Marine Policy, 34(5):
    1076-81.

Holmstrom, B. 1982. Moral hazard in teams. Bell Journal of Economics. 13: 324-340.

Huang, L. , S. Ray, K. Segerson, and J. Walden. 2018. Impact of Collective Rights-based Fisheries
   Management: Evidence from the New England Groundfish Fishery. Marine Resource Economics,
   33(2): 177-201.

Ito, J. , H. N. Feuer, S. Kitano, and M. Komiyama. 2018. A Policy Evaluation of the Direct Payment Scheme
     for Collective Stewardship of Common Property Resources in Japan. Ecological Economics, 152: 141-
     51.


                                                    24
Kaczan, D. , A. Pfaff, L. Rodriguez, and W. Shapiro-Garza. 2017. Increasing the impact of collective
    incentives in payments for ecosystem services. Journal of Environmental Economics and
    Management. 86:48-67.

Kerr, J. M. , M. Vardhan, and R. Jindal. 2014. Incentives, conditionality and collective action in payment
    for environmental services. International Journal of the Commons, 8:595-616.

King, A. A. and M. J. Lenox. 2000. Industry self-regulation without sanctions: the chemical industry's
    Responsible Care Program. Academy of Management Journal. 43:698-716.

Kotchen, M. J. 2013. Voluntary- and information-based approaches to environmental management: a
    public economics perspective. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy. 7:276-295.

Kotchen, M. J. , and K. Segerson. 2018. On The use of group performance and rights for environmental
    protection and resource management. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. DOI:
    https://doi. org/10. 1073/pnas. 1802881115

Kotchen, M. J. , and K van `t Veld. 2011. Green clubs. Journal of Environmental Economics and
    Management. 62:209-322.

Lenox, M. J. 2006. The role of price decentralized institutions in sustaining industry self-regulation.
   Organization Science. 17:677-775.

Midler, E. , U. Pascual, A. G. Drucker, U. Narloch, and J. L. Soto. 2015. Unraveling the effects of payments
   for ecosystem services on motivations for collective action. Ecological Economics. 120:394-405.

Morgenstern, R. D. and W. A. Pizer. 2007. Reality Check. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future
   Press.

Munoz-Pina, C. , A. Guevara, J. M. Torres, and J. Brana. 2008. Paying for the hydrological services of
  Mexico's forests: Analysis, negotiations and results. Ecological Economics. 65:725-736.

Narloch, U. , U. Pascual, and A. G. Drucker. 2012. Collective Action Dynamics under External Rewards:
    Experimental Insights from Andean Farming Communities. World Development, 40(10): 2096-2107.

Narloch, U. , A. G. Drucker, and U. Pascual. 2017. What role for cooperation in conservation tenders?
    Paying farmer groups in the High Andes. Land Use Policy. 63:659-671.

Norton, D. J. , D. Atkinson, V. Cabrera-Stagno, B. Cleland, S. Furtak, C. McElhinney, and E. Monschein.
   2007. The TMDL Program results analysis project: matching results measures with program
   expectations. Proceedings: Water Environment Federation TMDL 2007 Conference, Bellevue,
   Washington, pp. 412-427.

Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action. Cambridge
    University Press.

Ostrom, E. 2000. Collective Action and the Evolution of Social Norms. Journal of Economic Perspectives.
    14(3):137-158.


                                                     25
Ovando, D. A. , R. T. Deacon, S. E. Lester, C. Costello, T. Van Leuvan, K. McIlwain, C. K. Strauss, M.
   Arbuckle, R. Fujita, S. Gelcich, and H. Uchida. 2013. Conservation Incentives and Collective Choices in
   Cooperative Fisheries. Marine Policy, 37: 132-40.

Pattanayak, S. K. , S. Wunder, and P. J. Ferraro. 2010. Show me the money: do payments supply
    environmental services in developing countries? Review of Environmental Economics and Policy.
    4:254-274.

Potoski, M. , and A. Praskash. 2005. Green Clubs and Voluntary Governance: ISO 14001 and Firms'
   Regulatory Compliance. American Journal of Political Science. 49:235-248. Segerson, K. 1988.
   Uncertainty and incentives for nonpoint pollution control. Journal of Environmental Economics and
   Management. 15:87-98.

Rodriguez, L. A. , A. Pfaff, and M. A. Velez. 2018. Collective Incentives for Cleaner Mining on Developing
   Frontiers: Rewarding Group Environmental Compliance in Columbia using Lab-in-Field Experiments
   with Artisanal Gold Miners. Working paper: Duke University, Durham, NC.

Reichhuber, A. , E. Camacho, and T. Requate. 2009. A framed field experiment on collective enforcement
    mechanisms with Ethiopian farmers. Environment and Development Economics. 14: 641-663.

Segerson, K. 1988. Uncertainty and Incentives for Nonpoint Pollution Control. Journal of Environmental
   Economics and Management, 15: 87-98.

Segerson, K. 2013. Voluntary approaches to environmental protection and resource management.
   Annual Review of Resource Economics. 5:161-180.

Segerson, K. 2017. Voluntary Pollution Control under Threat of Regulation. International Review of
   Environmental and Resource Economics, 11:145-92.

Spraggon, J. , and R. J. Oxoby. 2010. Ambient-based policy instruments: the role of recommendations
    and presentation. Agricultural and Resource Economics Review. 39:262-274.

Stewart, J. , and J. Leaver. 2016. Deemed Value Arbitrage in the New Zealand Annual Catch Entitlement
   Market. Marine Policy, 66: 1-7.

Suter, J. F. , C. A. Vosseler, and G. L. Poe. 2008. Experiments on damage-based ambient taxes for
    nonpoint source polluters. American Journal of Agricultural Economics. 90:86-102.

Townsend, R. , R. Shotton, and H. Uchida. 2008. Case Studies in Fisheries Self-Governance. FAO Fisheries
   Technical Paper No. 504. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Vossler, C. A. , G. L. Poe, W. D. Schulze, and K. Segerson. 2006. Communication and incentive
   mechanisms based on group performance: an experimental study of nonpoint pollution control.
   Economic Inquiry. 44:599-613.

WPRFMC. 2018. Scientists recommend new measures for the Hawaii shallow-set longline fishery. Press
  release. Western Pacific Regional Fishery Management Council. URL: http://www. wpcouncil.
  org/press-release-scientists-recommend-new-measures-for-the-hawaii-shallow-set-longline-fishery-
  10-june-2018/.
                                                    26
Wu, J. 2000. Slippage Effects of the Conservation Reserve Program. American Journal of Agricultural
   Economics, 82(4):979-992.

Xepapadeas, A. 2011. The economics of nonpoint pollution. Annual Review of Resource Economics.
   3:355-373.

Zabel A. , G. Bostedt, and S. Engel. 2014. Performance payments for groups: the case of carnivore
   conservation in northern Sweden. Environmental and Resource Economics. 59:613-631.

Zhou, R. , X. Bi, and K. Segerson. 2020. Evaluating Voluntary Environmental Programs with Spillovers.
   Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists. 7(1):145-180.

Zhou, R. , and K. Segerson. 2016. Individual vs. Collective Approaches to Fisheries Management. Marine
   Resource Economics, 31(2): 165-92.




                                                   27
