                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE IMPACT OF RETALIATORY TARIFFS ON
                          AGRICULTURAL AND FOOD TRADE

                                         Colin A. Carter
                                        Sandro Steinbach

                                      Working Paper 27147
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27147


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We thank Dongin Kim for his excellent assistance and Xi He for her contributions to an earlier
version of this paper. This work is supported by the Agriculture and Food Research Initiative
(Award Number 2019-67023-29343) from the National Institute of Food and Agriculture. Any
opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of the United States Department of Agriculture or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Colin A. Carter and Sandro Steinbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Retaliatory Tariffs on Agricultural and Food Trade
Colin A. Carter and Sandro Steinbach
NBER Working Paper No. 27147
May 2020
JEL No. F14,Q17,Q18

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the short-run trade effects of retaliatory tariffs against agriculture and food
exports from the United States. The results indicate that these tariffs caused a substantial decline
in U.S. agriculture and food exports and induced a reorientation of international trade patterns.
We find that losses in foreign trade with retaliatory countries outweigh the gains from trade with
non-retaliatory countries by more than USD 14.4 billion. Our results also indicate that non-
retaliatory countries accommodated the increased demand from retaliatory countries by
reorienting their trade relationships. We find that countries in South America and Europe
benefited the most from these adjustments gaining more than USD 13.5 billion in additional
foreign sales. The effects of retaliatory tariff increases across products vary substantially, with
soybeans and meat products experiencing the most considerable redistribution effects.


Colin A. Carter
Agricultural and Resource Economics
Giannini Foundation of Agricultural Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
colin@primal.ucdavis.edu

Sandro Steinbach
University of Connecticut
Department of Agricultural & Resource Economics
1376 Storrs Road, Unit 4021
Storrs, CT 06269-4021
sandro.steinbach@uconn.edu
1 Introduction

The era of trade liberalization came to an abrupt end in 2018 when the United States government

decided to enact several waves of tariff increases against its foreign trading partners. In response to

these tariff changes, several trading partners imposed retaliatory tariffs against products imported

from the United States. These counter measures increased the average tariff level from 7.5 percent

to 23.5 percent for 6,341 products covering about USD 124 billion (14.4 percent) of their pre-tariff

level of trade with the United States. The agricultural and food industry was more affected by these

policy changes than any other sector of the economy. Average foreign tariffs on U.S. agricultural

and food products increased from 8.3 percent to 28.6 percent. These tariff increases targeted 908

products and affected more than USD 32 billion (37.1 percent) of agricultural and food imports from

the United States. The return to protection is unprecedented in recent history due to the number of

countries and products involved as well as the magnitude of tariff increases. Despite the relevance of

these trade policy changes, little is known about the full impact of retaliatory tariffs on agricultural

and food trade.

The growing literature on the 2018 Trade War shows that retaliatory tariff increases had substantial

consequences for international trade. According to Fajgelbaum et al. (2019), the United States

reduced its imports of targeted products by 2.5 percent and its exports by more than 9.9 percent.

The magnitude of these effects depends on the size of the retaliatory tariff. Amiti, Redding and

Weinstein (2019) find that a ten percentage point foreign tariff increase is associated with a 32

percent trade decrease. While the export quantities decrease substantially due to retaliatory tariffs,

export prices show an increase of only one percentage point (Fajgelbaum et al., 2019). The tariff

increases depress U.S. exports of targeted and related products and, thereby, inhibit the ability of

U.S. producers to compete in international markets (Waugh, 2019). The trade war also affects trade

with non-retaliatory countries. Jiang et al. (2019) find that trade between the European Union (EU)

and China benefited substantially from the trade war between the United States and China. This

increase in Chinese trade with the EU comes at the expense of higher import prices and a damaged

domestic economy (Li, He and Lin, 2018). According to Xia et al. (2019), the trade war causes severe

market failures in the Chinese economy and losses that outweigh the potential benefits by far. Flaaen,

Hortacsu and Tintelnot (2019) show that tariff increases can induce a substantial reallocation of trade


                                                   1
and production. The effects of trade policy changes are likely non-linear with higher tariffs leading to

more significant trade and production redistribution effects (Baqaee and Farhi, 2019). Particularly

the trade redistribution effects of retaliatory tariffs remain poorly understood. The tariff increases

have substantial distributional consequences across products and, therefore, also between countries

with different patterns of comparative advantage and specialization (Fajgelbaum et al., 2019).

The effects of tariff increases translate to substantial effects on welfare and employment in the United

States. According to Amiti, Redding and Weinstein (2019), the 2018 tariffs imposed by the United

States against its foreign trading partners resulted in a reduction of real income by USD 1.4 billion

per month. The incidence of these tariff increases fell entirely on domestic consumers, and the

price increases were almost fully passed through to total prices paid by importers (Cavallo et al.,

2019). Fajgelbaum et al. (2019) show that import prices of products targeted by tariffs did not

fall, resulting in welfare losses of more than USD 51 billion per year. Along these lines, Waugh

(2019) finds significant effects of retaliatory tariffs on domestic consumption. These consumption

effects translate into a significant decrease in employment growth in the manufacturing industry (Li,

Wang and Whalley, 2019). According to Fajgelbaum et al. (2019), counties that are dominated by

agricultural production are more affected by retaliatory tariffs than other counties, facing a significant

reduction in real income. Although there is a growing consensus regarding the impact of retaliatory

tariffs on consumption and production in the United States, little is known about how these policy

changes affected the competitiveness of companies operating in international markets.

In this paper, we quantify the impact of tariff increases on foreign trade with retaliatory and other

countries. We estimate export supply curves for the United States and non-retaliatory countries that

account for the reallocation of exported varieties between markets. We develop an oligopolistic trade

model to illustrate the trade effects of retaliatory tariffs. The model predicts a reduction in trade

of targeted agricultural and food products with retaliatory countries (trade destruction effect) and

an increase in trade with other countries (trade deflection effect). The theoretical model also allows

us to investigate the impact on foreign trade of non-retaliatory countries. We expect exports from

non-retaliatory to retaliatory countries to increase (trade diversion effect) and trade with the United

States to fall (trade depression effect). To measure the impact of tariff increases, we exploit product-

level variation (defined as 10-digit Harmonized System (HS) product codes) in export supply and


                                                    2
rely on tariff changes as the identifying source of variation. Tests for pre-existing trends and tariff

anticipation confirm the validity of this identification strategy. Since tariff increases are uncorrelated

with demand and supply shocks, we can use them to instrument for the foreign export supply curves.

This approach allows us to measure the partial redistribution effects of retaliatory tariffs.

Our reduced-form regression results indicate large and statistically significant trade effects of re-

taliatory tariff increases for the United States and non-retaliatory countries. The identification is

robust to pre-existing trends and anticipatory effects and reveals substantial heterogeneity between

products and trading partners. We find that the United States lost more than USD 15.6 billion in

trade with retaliatory countries. Soybeans, pork products, and coarse grains recorded the most sub-

stantial trade destruction effects. These losses are only partially compensated by additional exports

to non-retaliatory countries. At the same time, non-retaliatory countries were able to considerably

expand their trade with retaliatory countries. The analysis shows that these countries gained USD

13.5 billion in additional trade with retaliatory countries. The trade diversion effects are dominated

by increasing exports of soybeans and pork products. The primary beneficiaries of retaliatory tariff

increases are countries from South America such as Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. Retaliatory coun-

tries also increased their imports from Eastern Europe and the EU. These results indicate that the

2018 trade war had substantial redistribution effects for global agricultural and food trade.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the theoretical model used

to motivate the redistribution effects of retaliatory tariffs. Section 3 summarizes the data used

for the analysis, provides a timeline of key events, and presents descriptive evidence for the trade

effects. Section 4 discusses empirical methods. Section 5 presents regression results, introduces

several robustness checks, and details the results of the comparative statistics analysis. Section 5

concludes the paper.

2 Theoretical Model

We rely on an oligopolistic trade model to illustrate the impact of retaliatory tariffs on agricultural

and food trade. The choice of this theoretical framework is driven by the market characteristics

(Bown and Crowley, 2007). Our model builds on the assumption that the exporting firm exerts

market power in the import market. Although agricultural markets are usually perfectly competitive



                                                    3
at the producer level due to a large number of price-taking primary producers, the issue of market

power is still relevant because of the characteristics of the food supply chain. Notably, market

concentration beyond the farm gate is typically substantial (Howard, 2016). In particular, agricultural

and food trade is increasingly dominated by a few large trading companies and food processors.

These characteristics of the food supply chain make the oligopolistic competition setting a suitable

environment to study the impact of retaliatory tariffs on agricultural and food trade.

Assume there are three countries indexed i {A, B, C }. In each country, one firm, also indexed as

i, produces one good. Suppose for simplification that firm A is only serving its domestic market.

The quantity that is produced for domestic consumption is denoted qi , while exports are denoted qij ,

where i indicates the country of origin and j the country in which the good is consumed. Consumers

in the importing country consider the domestically produced good and the imported good as strategic

substitutes, i.e., they derive the same utility from the consumption of either good. We denote total

market supply in the home market as Qi =                     j qji   + qi and the supply in the foreign market as

Qj =                                                                                 = q + q . Each firm
           i qij   + qj , while total output in each country is therefore given by qi   ij  i

regards its domestic market and the foreign market as separated, implying that the quantity in each

market is allocated independently and firms are subject to Cournot perception.1

The same technology is used by each competitor and firms face an inverse demand function denoted

as p(Qi , Yi ), where Yi is a set of demand shifters such income. Production cost in i is represented
                       , W ), where W is a set of cost factors that occur with q  . We assume
by a cost function c(qi   i          i                                          i
                                             with c (q  , W ) > 0 and c (q  , W ) > 0 which reflects
that marginal costs are strictly convex in qi         i    i              i    i

increasing marginal cost. Now, suppose that there are no other trade costs between i and j than a

retaliatory tariff  , where ji denotes an ad-valorem tariff that j levied against i. We assume also

for simplicity that the burden of the retaliatory tariff falls entirely on the exporter. Thus, the profit

function can be expressed in its general form as follows:

                                                  Sales                            Costs
                                                                                 
                                i = p(Qi , Yi )qi + p(Qj , Yj )qij - ji qij - c(qi , Wi ),                      (1)
                                        in Home           in Foreign      Tariff    Production



1
    Cournot perception implies that the other firms will hold output fixed. We assume a Cournot-Nash equilibrium
    instead of a Bertrand-Nash equilibrium because agents regard the domestic and the foreign good as strategic sub-
    stitutes. This implies that firms compete in quantities and not in prices.


                                                             4
where sales are determined by sales at home and in the foreign country and costs are a function of

the retailiatory tariff and the production cost. Every firm's objective is to maximize its profits by

choosing the quantity of sales in each market such that


                                                                                                   (2)
                      max i = p(Qi , Yi )qi + p(Qj , Yj )qij - ji qij - c(qi , Wi ).


Suppose now that country A imposes an ad-valorem tariff against country B , then the first order

conditions for home markets are given by:

                   A                                       
                      = p(QA , YA ) + p (QA , YA )qA - c (qA , WA )  0                            (3a)
                   qA
                   B                                       
                      = p(QB , YB ) + p (QB , YB )qB - c (qB  , WB )  0                           (3b)
                   qB
                   C                                       
                      = p(QC , YC ) + p (QC , YC )qC - c (qC , WC )  0                            (3c)
                   qC

and the first order conditions for the profit maximizing quantity of exports for firms B and C are:

                       B                                                
                             = p(QA , YA ) + p (QA , YA )qBA - AB - c (qB , WB )  0               (4a)
                       qBA
                       B                                           
                             = p(QA , YA ) + p (QA , YA )qBC - c (qB , WB )  0                    (4b)
                       qBC
                       C                                           
                             = p(QA , YA ) + p (QA , YA )qCA - c (qC , WC )  0                    (4c)
                       qCA
                       C                                           
                             = p(QA , YA ) + p (QA , YA )qCB - c (qC , WC )  0                    (4d)
                       qCB

The solution to the first order conditions yields each firm's best reaction (or response) function with

respect to the sales decisions of the other firms, which can be expressed in the general form for the

home market as:
                                                                                                   (5)
                                      qi = Ri [p(Qi , Yi ), c(qi , Wi )],

and i's best reaction function for the foreign market is given by:


                                                                                                   (6)
                                   qij = Rij [p(Qj , Yj ), ji , c(qi , Wi )].


Solving the seven best reaction functions simultaneously yields the Cournot-Nash equilibrium quan-


                                                       5
                                                                                                  ,
tities which are sold by each firm in each market. Because marginal costs are strictly convex in qi

the exporting firms B and C will choose to allocate total sales between their home market and the

foreign market so that the net marginal revenue, which is defined as marginal revenue less the tariff

cost, is the same in the home and the foreign market. This is a crucial assumption because it forces

firms to reallocate their sales across markets when a retaliatory tariff is imposed.

The theoretical model allows us to state four propositions regarding the potential effects of retaliatory

tariff actions:


­ First, a retaliatory tariff levied by country A against exports from country B causes a decline in

  firm B 's exports to country A which is know as the trade destruction effect.

­ Second, a retaliatory tariff imposed by country A against exports from country B will cause an

  increase in firm B 's exports to country C which is called the trade deflection effect.

­ Third, a retaliatory tariff imposed by country A against exports from country B will cause an

  increase in firm C 's exports to country A which is called the trade diversion effect.

­ Fourth, a retaliatory tariff imposed by country A against exports from country B will cause a

  decrease in firm C 's exports to country B which is called the trade depression effect.


Figure 1 illustrates the trade effects of the retaliatory tariffs. The left panel shows the effects on

foreign sales in country A and the right panel the effects on trade between countries B and C . The

reaction function Rij represent a firm's best response to a decision of the other firm. The Cournot-
                                                ; q  ) and for trade between country B and country
Nash equilibrium for trade with country A is (qBA  CA

        ; q  ). Once country A imposes a retaliatory tariff against country B , sales of firm B in
C is (qCB  BC

                        . This effect is called the trade destruction effect. The introduction of a
country A decrease to qBA

retaliatory tariff by country A against country B will move the Cournot-Nash equilibrium for firm C
                   to q  . This effect is called the trade diversion effect. Moreover, a retaliatory
in market A from qCA   CA

tariff will also affect trade between country B and C . Sales of firm B in market C will increase from
  to q  (trade deflection effect) and will fall from q  to q  (trade depression effect) for firm C
qBC   BC                                              CB    CB

in market B .



                                                   6
3 Data and Timeline

This summary describes the data and provides a timeline of key events. We also present descrip-

tive evidence regarding the trade effects of retaliatory tariffs imposed against agricultural and food

products.

3.1 Tariff and Trade Data

We compile a monthly panel dataset of retaliatory tariffs on U.S. exports from official documents

published by the finance and trade ministries of Canada, China, the EU, India, Mexico, Russia, and

Turkey. These tariffs were entirely ad valorem and went into effect shortly after their announcement.2

We compute the retaliatory tariff increase by summing the effectively applied tariff and the announced

tariff change for each country pair at the tariff-line level. We use Most Favored Nation (MFN) tariff

rate data from the Consolidated Tariff Schedules (CTS) database (World Trade Organization, 2020).

All export tariffs are either measured at the HS-8 level or at the HS-10 level.3 The policy dataset is

matched to tariff-line level export data for 101 countries from the Global Trade Atlas (IHS Markit,

2020). This database provides monthly import and export flow data for the period from January

2017 to October 2019. The database covers approximately 95 percent of all global trade and provides

monthly information on the value and quantify of imports and exports.

3.2 Timeline

Table 1 provides the timeline of key events. The 2018 trade war comprises nine retaliatory tariff

actions against the United States announced between April 6, 2018, and September 24, 2018. Eight

of these tariff increases targeted agricultural and food products. The majority of tariff increases were

imposed by China, implementing four waves of tariff increases in 2018. Retaliatory countries levied

tariffs on 908 agricultural and food products worth more than USD 31.8 billion of imports from the

United States in 2017. Retaliatory tariffs disproportionally affected agricultural and food products.
2
    We assign the retaliatory tariff increase to the month when the policy change was announced. Since the tariff data
    are assigned to monthly trade data, we scale the tariff changes by the number of days the policy change was in effect
    (Fajgelbaum et al., 2019).
3
    The tariff-line level HS codes vary at the country level. While countries use the same classification system to define
    trade products at the HS-6 level, there are substantial differences in the HS coding at the more disaggregated level.
    For instance, while the United States sets its tariffs mostly at the 8-digit HS level, Turkey assigned its retaliatory
    tariffs at the 6-digit level. We account for this issue by using matching algorithms based on both exact and fuzzy
    matching methods that identify HS-8 and HS-10 tariff-line products of all exporting countries. Appendix (A) provides
    further details on data sources and Appendix (B) describes the matching procedure in more detail.


                                                             7
The share of targeted agricultural and food imports was 37.1 percent. At the same time, it was only

11.9 percent for all other products.4 Tariff increases for agricultural and food products are steeper

than for other products, with the average ad valorem tariff increasing from 8.3 to 28.6 percent. The

largest tariff increases were implemented by China, which imposed tariffs on more than USD 25.5

billion (80.1 percent) of U.S. agricultural and food imports in 2017.

3.3 Descriptive Evidence

Table 2 summarizes changes in the value of exports for the United States and non-retaliatory countries

before and after the retaliatory tariff increases. Panel (A) shows export trade flows of the United

States and Panel (B) export trade flows of countries not involved in the trade war. The export value

before and after the announcement of retaliatory tariff increases is calculated based on a twelve-month

window. Panel (A) shows evidence of substantial trade destruction. Agricultural and food exports

from the United States to retaliatory countries decreased in response to the tariff increases by USD

11.6 billion. There is also evidence of significant trade deflection effect sas U.S. agricultural and food

exports to non-retaliatory countries increased by USD 5.1 billion after the tariff changes. Similarly,

Panel (B) shows evidence of trade diversion effects. Agricultural and food exports of non-retaliatory

countries to retaliatory countries increased in response to tariff increases by USD 3.5 billion. There is

also strong evidence of trade depression as non-retaliatory countries exports to other non-retaliatory

countries decreased by 37.2 billion.5

Table 3 provides summary statistics of targeted varieties for the United States and non-retaliatory

countries. The table also shows the mean and standard deviation of tariff increases at the product

level. The data indicate substantial variation in treated varieties for the United States and non-

retaliatory countries. While the average ad valorem tariff increase amounts to 16.9 percent, there

is substantial variation between products. Distilled spirits report the largest increase in tariff rates

4
    Table A.1 in Appendix (C) provides a comparison with products that are not related to agriculture and food
    production.
5
    Table A.2 in Appendix (C) compares the export trade flows of the United States and non-retaliatory countries for
    products not related to agriculture and food production. The data provide clear evidence of trade destruction and
    trade deflection effects in Panel (A). U.S. exports to retaliatory countries dropped by USD 21.0 billion and increased
    by USD 5.0 billion for non-retaliatory countries. Panel (B) provides evidence of a substantial trade depression effect
    but provides no clear evidence of a significant trade diversion effect. The summary statistics show that exports of
    non-retaliatory countries to retaliatory countries decreased by USD 39.9 billion and also decreased by USD 299.9
    billion for exports to other non-retaliatory countries. These results imply that the trade effects of retaliatory tariff
    increases are more pronounced for agricultural and food products.


                                                              8
(40.0 percent) and planting seeds the lowest increase (0.3 percent). The significant variability in

treated varieties and retaliatory tariff increases provides a valid source of variation for identifying

trade effects associated with the 2018 trade war.

4 Empirical Methods

4.1 Event Study

We use an event-study framework to illustrate the impact of retaliatory tariff increases on agricultural

and food trade. The event study allows us to measure the contemporaneous effects of tariff increases

on targeted varieties, identify pre-trends and explore dynamic effects (MacKinlay, 1997). To assess

the impact of retaliatory tariff increases on export trade of the United States and non-retaliatory

countries, we exploit differences in export quantities, values, and unit values between targeted and

non-targeted varieties over time with the following specification:

                                                        12
 yijgt = exp ij + ig + it + jg + jt + gt +                   k Rl + k Rm × 1 Kt = k × Tg ijgt . (7)
                                                    k=-12


The exponential regression model includes exporter-by-importer (ij ), exporter-by-product (ig ),

exporter-by-time (it ), importer-by-product (jg ), importer-by-time (jt ), and product-by-time (gt )

fixed effects. The specification measures the impact on trade with retaliatory countries (Rl ) and non-

retaliatory countries (Rm ). The inclusion of fixed effects implies that the coefficients of interest (k

and k ) are identified by exploiting variation between targeted and non-targeted varieties (Tg ) over

time. The event time coefficients are captured by the indicator variables. We assign the event date

of targeted varieties to be the nearest full month by using the 15th of the month as the cutoff date.

Since we observe eight waves of retaliatory tariff increases for agricultural and food products in 2018,

we construct for each tariff increase an event window of twelve-months around the announcement

month. To estimate the trade destruction and trade deflection effects of retaliatory tariff increases, we

use U.S. export data and assign tariff increases at the ten-digit HS code level. For the identification of

the trade diversion and trade depression effects, we use export data for 104 non-retaliatory countries

and assign tariff increases at the tariff-line level. This assignment depends on the classification system

used by the exporting country. Because trade data is either available at the eight-digit or ten-digit

HS code level, we cluster standard errors at the tariff-line and country-pair level.


                                                    9
4.2 Reduced-Form Analysis

To measure differences in the impact of retaliatory tariff increases on foreign trade of the United

States and non-retaliatory countries according to the ad valorem tariff level, we adopt the following

regression specification:


    yijgt = exp ij + ig + it + jg + jt + gt + log(1 + ijgt ) × ( Rlt +  Rmt ) × Tg ijgt .           (8)


This exponential model controls for the same fixed effects as the event study and relies on variation

between targeted and non-targeted varieties (Tg ) and between retaliatory (Rlt ) and non-retaliatory

countries (Rmt ) over time to identify the coefficients of interest ( and  ). These coefficients measure

the trade destruction and trade deflection effects of retaliatory tariff increases with the U.S. export

panel and the trade diversion and trade depression effects with the export panel of non-retaliatory

countries. In this specification, we assign the event date of the targeted varieties according to

the month when the tariff increase was announced. We scale retaliatory tariff increases in the

announcement month according to the number of days in the month when the policy came in effect.

Standard errors are clustered at the tariff-line level and at the country-pair level. The specification

measures the response to tariff increases and allows us to quantify the contemporaneous trade effects

of the 2018 trade war. We also use this specification to explore differences in the trade effects

of retaliatory tariff increases according to product categories and the economic development stage

of trading partners. To identify the parameter of interest in all regression models, we rely on the

Poisson pseudo-maximum likelihood (PPML) estimator (Gong and Samaniego, 1981). This estimator

allows us to incorporate zero trade flows in our regressions and, thereby, improve the precision of

our coefficient estimates (Silva and Tenreyro, 2006). Because the estimation involves a large number

of high-dimensional fixed effects, we account for them by using a modified version of the iteratively

re-weighted least-squares (IRLS) algorithm that is robust to statistical separation and convergence

issues (Correia, Guimarães and Zylkin, 2019a,b).




                                                   10
5 Results

5.1 Event Study

Figure 2 illustrates the results of the event study of the impact of retaliatory tariffs on agricultural

and food exports from the United States. The coefficient estimates are transformed to percentage

changes to allow for comparison between outcomes. The left panel traces the trade destruction

effects and the right panel the trade deflection effects for export quantities, values, and unit values.

In response to the retaliatory tariffs, U.S. trade with retaliatory countries dropped substantially. The

adverse trade effects peaked five months after the tariff increases and started to recover after that.

Unit values initially increased significantly after the tariff increases and began to fall after the first

month.6 U.S. trade with non-retaliatory countries saw a substantial increase after the tariff increases

were announced. We find evidence for statistically significant trade deflection effects for the quantity

and value specifications. These effects increase in the first five months after the trade policy changes

and start to fall afterward. The magnitude of the trade deflection effects is substantially smaller

than the trade destruction effects. These results indicate that agricultural and food exporters in the

United States were unable to mitigate the adverse trade effects of retaliatory tariffs by expanding

sales to other markets. The elasticity of both trade effects is about -0.1, which implies that for every

ten percent of trade lost with retaliatory countries, the U.S. gained only one percent in trade with

non-retaliatory countries. The adjustment implies that exporters of agricultural and food products

mitigated the negative trade effects of retaliatory tariff increases primarily by storing or selling the

affected products in the domestic market.

Figure 3 plots the event study estimates for the trade effects of retaliatory tariff increases on non-

retaliatory countries. The left panel shows the trade diversion effects and the right panel the trade

depression effects. Non-retaliatory countries recorded a significant increase in their trade with re-

taliatory countries, providing evidence for substantial trade diversion effects. The change in export

quantities and values built up slowly and peaked after five months. These findings imply that the

adjustment of supply chains for retaliatory countries was not immediate and took non-retaliatory


6
    We find some evidence of anticipation effects in the quantity specification. These effects are largely driven by
    additional imports of pork meat due to the Chinese new year festivities in February 2018. Our results show no
    evidence of similar effects for the value and unit value specifications.


                                                         11
exporters by surprise.7 We find evidence for higher unit values after the announcement of retaliatory

tariff increases. Immediately after the imposition of new tariffs, unit values increased by 12.8 percent

and fell slowly afterward. The evidence for trade depression effects is not as clear. We find that the

quantity and value of trade with the United States and other non-retaliatory countries fell immedi-

ately after the tariff increases. One month after imposing new retaliatory tariffs on agricultural and

food products, the unit values fell by more than five percent, which indicates that non-retaliatory

exporters substituted products with a higher unit value between markets.

5.2 Reduced-Form Analysis

Table 4 reports the baseline estimates of trade effects associated with retaliatory tariffs against

agricultural and food products. Panel (A) presents the trade destruction and trade deflection effects

and Panel (B) the trade diversion and trade depression effects. The table compares estimates using

the dummy specification with estimates using the tariff specification. All regressions include the full

set of fixed effects as specified in Equation 8. Two-way standard errors clustered at the tariff-line

level and country-pair level are reported in parenthesis.

The regression results lend strong support for the existence of significant trade destruction and

trade deflection effects in Panel (A). The results for the dummy specification show that export

quantities fell by more than 6.0 percent and export values by more than 5.3 percent. Although there

is no evidence of a statistically significant impact on unit values, we find substantial evidence for

significant trade deflection effects. However, the trade deflection effect is twenty times smaller then

the trade destruction effect for the quantity specification. This difference shows that U.S. exporters

of agricultural and food products were unable to ramp-up trade with foreign countries. Accordingly,

we find an almost complete pass-through of retaliatory tariff increases to the domestic market. The

estimates for the tariff specification support this assessment and differ only in the way that we find

evidence for a significant effect on unit values. The estimates indicate that varieties with a high

unit value persisted in the market. The tariff increases caused a significant reduction in exports of

varieties with low unit values.


7
    We find inconclusive evidence regarding the presence of statistically significant anticipation effects for the trade
    diversion and trade depression estimates. Firms in non-retaliatory countries did not pre-emptively contest U.S.
    exporters of agricultural and food products in foreign markets.


                                                           12
Panel (B) provides evidence of significant trade diversion effects for the dummy and tariff specifi-

cations. These effects are statistically significant for all three outcomes. We find that exports of

targeted varieties increased by 2.8 percent for the quantity specification and 1.7 percent for the value

specification. We find that unit values for trade with retaliatory countries increased by 3.8 percent.

The baseline regression results for Panel (B) do not support the notion of substantial trade depression

effects as all coefficient estimates are statistically insignificant at the 10 percent confidence level.8

5.3 Heterogeneity Analysis

The average trade effects of the retaliatory tariffs presented in Table 4 could mask substantial het-

erogeneity. To explore this heterogeneity, we interact the treatment variables with product dummies

and measures of different sets of trading partners. This analysis will allow us to better understand

how the United States and non-retaliatory countries reacted to the retaliatory tariff increases and

what role the size of the ad valorem tariff played.

We first test differences in the trade effects according to agricultural product categories. We rely

on the classification framework used by the Global Agricultural Trade System to obtain four broad

product categories (United States Deparment of Agriculture, 2020). This classification system cat-

egorizes agricultural and food products according to their final use in agricultural-related products,

bulk products, consumer-oriented products, and intermediate products. The regressions include all

baseline fixed effects and standard errors that are clustered at the tariff-line and country-pair level.

Table 5 presents the estimates of these regressions for the United States and non-retaliatory countries.

The results show that the trade destruction effects operate primarily through bulk products. The

same observation can be made for the trade diversion effects. We find that primarily exporters of

bulk products and, to a lesser degree, also of consumer-oriented and intermediate products benefited

from retaliatory tariffs. The statistical evidence for significant trade deflection and trade depression

effects is weak as most coefficient estimates are statistically insignificant at the 10 percent confi-

dence level. Although most estimates have the expected sign, the limited statistical evidence for a

significant relationship allows us to conclude that there is only minimal evidence for such effects.

8
    Table A.3 in Appendix (C) summarizes the estimates for manufacturing products. The results provide strong
    evidence for significant trade destruction and trade diversion effects. We find that the coefficient estimates are larger
    for agricultural and food products. Moreover, the estimates for manufacturing provide limited evidence for significant
    price effects.


                                                             13
While the estimates for the tariff specification convey a similar picture, the parameter estimates are

significantly larger. This difference raises the question of whether non-linearity in the trade effects is

of relevance.9

We now investigate differences in the trade effects of retaliatory tariff increases at the product level.

These regressions rely on the baseline model specification and cluster standard errors at the tariff-line

and country-pair level. We focus this analysis on the dummy specification and discuss percentage

trade effects. Figure 6 plots the estimates for the value specification and highlights products with the

largest trade effects. We sort the estimates according to the value-weighted tariff change (in percent)

and represent the average trade effects with dotted horizontal lines. The results presented in Panel

(A) indicate that U.S. exports of tobacco and wheat products saw the largest trade destruction

effects. At the same time, several products recorded positive trade effects in response to retaliatory

tariffs. For instance, while we find a negative trade effect on soybeans, there is strong evidence

for a positive effect on soybean meal, which faces a significantly lower tariff than soybeans. These

results imply substitution between products with low and high tariffs. At the same time, the United

States increased its exports of soybeans to other markets (Panel (B)), and non-retaliatory countries

reduced their exports of soybean meal to retaliatory countries (Panel (C)). Another insightful pattern

relates to coarse grains. The estimates show evidence for a negative trade destruction effect and a

positive trade diversion effect. Non-retaliatory countries reacted to the tariff increases by reducing

their exports of coarse grains to other non-retaliatory countries (Panel (D)). This reduction in trade

flows provides strong evidence for heterogeneity in the trade effects. The results imply that the 2018

trade war induced significant adjustments of global supply chains that extend far beyond the primary

effects on trade between the United States and retaliatory countries.

A further source of heterogeneity relates to the economic development stage of trading partners. To

account for these differences, we interact the coefficients of interest with dummy variables for the

economic development stage.10 We report the estimates for these regressions in Table 6. The results

indicate that the trade destruction effects operate primarily through a reduction in trade with lesser

9
   We find only limited evidence for non-linear trade effects with the baseline regression model. The quadratic terms
   have a small impact on the estimated trade effects. These regression results are available upon request from the
   authors.
10
   We proxy the economic development by classifying countries according to their membership in the Organisation for
   Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).


                                                         14
developed countries. We find that export quantities fell by more than 9.5 percent and export values

by more than 4.8 percent. Similar results can be found for the trade diversion effects of retaliatory

tariff increases. We find that lesser developed countries increased their exports to retaliatory countries

more than developed countries did. These estimates provide evidence for significant country-level

differences in the trade effects of retaliatory tariff increases.

5.4 Identification Issues

The statistical identification of the coefficients of interest in Equations (7) and (8) is threatened by

two potential sources of endogeneity. The first source relates to the presence of different pre-existing

trends in the export data for treated and untreated varieties and the second source to the presence of

anticipation effects. We use the event study specification to test if targeted and untreated varieties

have the same trend in the pre-treatment period. This assumption is important because tariff changes

must be uncorrelated with import demand and export supply shocks to identify the elasticities. This

framework also allows us to evaluate the presence of anticipation effects. The presence of such effects

would imply that exporters anticipated the retaliatory tariff increases and changed their purchasing

activities forward to avoid paying the tariffs. As indicated in Figures 2 and 3, there is some evidence

for the presence of pre-existing trends and anticipatory effects. To obtain additional insights, we apply

two formal tests to ensure that the estimated elasticities are not sensitive to concerns regarding the

presence of these sources of parameter bias.

As a formal test for the presence of pre-existing trends, we use the following model specification to

regress retaliatory tariff increases in 2018 on the quantity, value and unit value of exports of the

United States and non-retaliatory countries in 2017:



                           yijg = exp( log(1 + ijg ) + ij + ig + js ) ijg .                            (9)


The exponential regression model includes exporter-by-importer (ij ), exporter-by-product (ig ), and

importer-by-sector (it ) fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the country-pair and tariff-

line level. An insignificant coefficient of interest () indicates that retaliatory tariff increases are not

correlated with import demand and export supply shocks. The estimation results are summarized



                                                     15
in Table 7. For both panels, we find no evidence for significant coefficient estimates for  in all

regression specifications. Therefore, we can conclude that the elasticity estimates are not biased by

the presence of pre-existing trends in the trade data.

We formally test for the presence of anticipatory and delayed trade effects of retaliatory tariff increases

by allowing for lags and leads in the following regression specification:



              yijgt = exp ij + ig + it + jg + jt + gt

                           12                                                                         (10)
                      +           log(1 + ijgt ) × k Ri + k Rj × 1 Kt = k × Tg ijgt .
                          k=-12

This regression model allows for up to twelve months of leads and lags before and after the an-

nouncement of retaliatory tariff increases. The model includes all fixed effects from the baseline

specification. We cluster standard errors at the country-pair and tariff-line level. Figures 4 and 5

plot the cumulative coefficients for export quantities, values, and unit values. The results indicate no

quantitively large anticipatory trade destruction effects for the quantity and value specifications. We

find only limited evidence for lagged trade effects for all specifications. The cumulative coefficients

have a similar magnitude as the reduced-form estimates obtained with Equation 8. Therefore, the

results assure us that the elasticity estimates are not biased due to anticipatory and delayed effects.

5.5 Comparative Statistics Analysis

Table 8 presents the distributional trade effects of retaliatory tariffs against agricultural and food

products. The table shows point estimates and percentage changes by retaliatory policy changes.

Panel (A) shows the trade destruction and trade deflection effects and Panel (B) details the trade

diversion and trade depression effects. The results indicate that U.S. agricultural and food trade

faced a 55.1 percent decrease in trade with retaliatory countries. The decrease of export trade with

retaliatory countries outweighs the gains from additional export trade with non-retaliatory countries

by far. While the United States lost about USD 15.6 billion in trade with retaliatory countries, it only

gained USD 1.2 billion in trade with non-retaliatory countries. The non-retaliatory countries were

able to substantially expand their trade with retaliatory countries at the cost of the United States.

They increased their exports by USD 13.5 billion (30.9 percent) after the announcement of retaliatory


                                                    16
tariff increases against agricultural and food products. These results imply that retaliatory countries

substitute a large share of the losses that they faced in terms of trade with the United States by

additional imports from non-retaliatory countries.

Table 9 summarizes product-level differences in the distributional trade effects of retaliatory tariff

increases against agricultural and food products. The results indicate substantial evidence for trade

destruction at the product level. Soybeans (USD -7.1 billion), pork products (USD -0.8 billion), and

coarse grains (USD -0.6 billion) recorded substantial losses in trade volumes. These products saw only

a limit degree of trade deflection to non-retaliatory countries. U.S. exports of these products increased

by USD 113 million for soybeans, USD 93 million for pork products, and USD 2 million for coarse

grains, respectively. The negligible adjustment of export volumes implies that U.S. exporters faced

difficulties adapting their foreign supply chains to non-retaliatory countries. Therefore, a substantial

share of excess supply is stored or sold in the domestic market. Retaliatory countries were not

able to fully compensate for the losses in trade with the United States by additional imports from

non-retaliatory countries. The results show that retaliatory countries increased their imports from

non-retaliatory countries by USD 3.7 billion for soybeans, USD 1.5 billion for pork products, and

USD 1.0 billion for corn. The degree of trade diversion is substantial and implies that foreign firms

were able to benefit from retaliatory tariff increases by gaining a higher market share in retaliatory

countries.

Figure 7 compares the country-level trade effects of retaliatory tariff increases for agricultural and food

products. Panel (A) shows exports of the United States to non-retaliatory countries and panel (B)

exports of non-retaliatory countries to retaliatory countries. The data indicate that the United States

diverted its exports primarily to other developed countries such as Canada and the European Union.

These countries are the primary destination for the replacement of agricultural and food products

and accommodate the largest share of displaced soybean, pork, and coarse grain exports. We find

that countries in South America were the primary beneficiary of the retaliatory tariff increases. These

countries picked up a large share of the excess demand for soybeans and pork products. They also

benefited strongly from the increasing demand for fresh produce. We find that Chinese importers also

expanded their supply chains in Europe. Ukraine and Russia substantially increased their exports

of corn and coarse grains to retaliatory countries. Moreover, Australia and the European Union


                                                    17
benefited from the retaliatory tariffs as they were able to increase their exports of meat products

and grains. These results imply that the United States lost a significant stack in foreign markets and

foreign competitors filled the void by substantially expanding their exports to these markets.

6 Conclusion

This paper investigates the effects of the 2018 trade war on agricultural and food trade. To assess

the impact of retaliatory tariff increases on export trade of the United States and non-retaliatory

countries, we exploit differences in export quantities, values, and unit values between targeted and

non-targeted varieties over time. Our results indicate large and statistically highly significant trade

effects for the United States and non-retaliatory countries. The identification is robust to pre-existing

trends and anticipatory effects and reveals substantial heterogeneity between products and trading

partners. We find that the United States lost more than USD 15.6 billion in trade with retaliatory

countries. Soybeans, pork products, and coarse grains recorded the most substantial trade destruction

effects. Additional exports to non-retaliatory countries only partially compensated for these losses.

At the same time, non-retaliatory countries were able to expand their trade with retaliatory countries

significantly. These countries gained more than USD 13.5 billion in additional trade with retaliatory

countries. The trade diversion effects are dominated by increasing exports of soybeans and pork

products. The primary beneficiaries of retaliatory tariff increases are countries from South America

such as Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. Retaliatory countries also increased their imports from Eastern

Europe and the European Union. These results indicate that the retaliatory tariff increases in 2018

had substantial redistribution effects for global agricultural and food trade.




                                                   18
References

Amiti, Mary, Stephen J. Redding, and David E. Weinstein. 2019. "The Impact of the 2018

  Tariffs on Prices and Welfare." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(4): 187­210.

Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2019. "Networks, Barriers, and Trade." NBER Working

  Paper 26108.

Bown, Chad P., and Meredith A. Crowley. 2007. "Trade Deflection and Trade Depression."

  Journal of International Economics, 72(1): 176­201.

Cavallo, Alberto, Gita Gopinath, Brent Neiman, and Jenny Tang. 2019. "Tariff Passthrough

  at the Border and at the Store: Evidence from US Trade Policy." NBER Working Paper 26396.

Correia, Sergio, Paulo Guimarães, and Thomas Zylkin. 2019a. "ppmlhdfe: Fast Poisson

  Estimation with High-Dimensional Fixed Effects."

Correia, Sergio, Paulo Guimarães, and Thomas Zylkin. 2019b. "Verifying the Existence of

  Maximum Likelihood Estimates for Generalized Linear Models."

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Patrick J. Kennedy, and Amit K. Khandel-

  wal. 2019. "The Return to Protectionism." NBER Working Paper 25638. Forthcoming. Quarterly

  Journal of Economics.

Flaaen, Aaron B., Ali Hortacsu, and Felix Tintelnot. 2019. "The Production Relocation and

  Price Effects of U.S. Trade Policy: The Case of Washing Machines." NBER Working Paper 25767.

Gong, Gail, and Francisco J. Samaniego. 1981. "Pseudo Maximum Likelihood Estimation:

  Theory and Applications." Annals of Statistics, 9(4): 861­869.

Howard, Philip H. 2016. Concentration and power in the food system: Who controls what we eat?

  Vol. 3, Bloomsbury Publishing.

IHS Markit. 2020. "Global Trade Atlas."

Jiang, Xuemei, Yishu Kong, Xinru Li, Cuihong Yang, and Xikang Chen. 2019. "Re-

  estimation of China-EU Trade Balance." China Economic Review, 54: 350­366.


                                                19
Li, Chunding, Chuantian He, and Chuangwei Lin. 2018. "Economic Impacts of the Possible

  China­US Trade War." Emerging Markets Finance and Trade, 54(7): 1557­1577.

Li, Chunding, Jing Wang, and John Whalley. 2019. "Trade Protectionism and US Manufac-

  turing Employment." NBER Working Paper 25860.

MacKinlay, A. Craig. 1997. "Event Studies in Economics and Finance." Journal of Economic

  Literature, 35(1): 13­39.

Pierce, J. R, and P. K. Schott. 2012. "Concording U.S. Harmonized System Categories Over

  Time." Journal of Official Statistics, 28(1): 53­68.

Silva, J. M. C. Santos, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. "The Log of Gravity." The Review of

  Economics and Statistics, 88(4): 641­658.

United States Deparment of Agriculture. 2020. "Global Agricultural Trade System." URL:

  https://apps.fas.usda.gov/gats.

Waugh, Michael E. 2019. "The Consumption Response to Trade Shocks: Evidence from the US-

  China Trade War." NBER Working Paper 26353.

World Trade Organization. 2020. "Consolidated Tariff Schedules (CTS) database."

Xia, Yan, Yishu Kong, Qiang Ji, and Dayong Zhang. 2019. "Impacts of China-US Trade

  Conflicts on the Energy Sector." China Economic Review, 58: 101360.




                                                  20
7 Tables and Figures

Table 1: Timeline of Retaliatory Tariffs against Agricultural and Food Trade of the United States

                                                  U.S. Import Trade       Other Import Trade           Tariffs
 Retaliatory                      Products
 Country             Date Enacted (# HS-8)         Value       Share        Value       Share      Before   After

 China I                    April 6         61       780         3.0        8, 294       7.4       14.3      32.4
 Mexico                     June 5          15     2, 528       12.8           435       1.5       15.4      34.2
 Turkey                    June 21          58       325        18.0           788       5.8       24.0      45.3
 European Union            June 22          42       964         6.3       13, 899      58.4         3.2     28.2
 Canada                      July 1         27     2, 515       11.0           990       5.9         5.0     15.0
 China II                    July 2        307    19, 748       76.8       50, 627      45.4       10.5      35.5
 China III              August 23            2       <1       < 0.1              2     < 0.1         4.2     18.5
 China IV            September 24          396     5, 010       19.5       31, 986      28.7       14.1      23.5

 Total                                     908    31, 868       37.1      107, 021      14.1         8.3     28.6
Notes ­ This table summarizes the timeline of retaliatory tariffs against agricultural and food products of the
United States. All trade flows are measured in millions of USD, and shares are defined as the value of import trade
for affected products divided by the total import trade of agricultural and food products. The tariff changes are
trade-value weighted ad valorem tariff changes for affected products.




                                                        21
Table 2: Trade Flows of Agricultural and Food Products Before and After
the Imposition of Retaliatory Tariffs

                          With Retaliatory Country            With Other Countries

Retaliatory Country          Before             After         Before           After

                    Panel (A): Export Trade of the United States

China I                         855               574          16, 433         16, 030
Turkey                          527               342          19, 623         19, 693
European Union                2, 188            1, 493         13, 405         14, 727
Mexico                        2, 374            2, 025         11, 497         11, 792
Canada                        3, 729            3, 861          4, 280           4, 666
China II                     15, 056            5, 802         61, 416         64, 908
China III                       <1                <1              757              923
China IV                      4, 122            3, 171         37, 261         37, 082

Total                        28, 851          17, 268        164, 672         169, 821

               Panel (B): Export Trade of Non-Retaliatory Countries

China I                       4, 964            5, 257         54, 844         49, 866
Turkey                          342               298          13, 781         15, 444
European Union                5, 303            6, 508         27, 457         24, 443
Mexico                          524               614          39, 640         40, 047
Canada                        1, 315            1, 408         29, 343         33, 280
China II                     38, 411          41, 281        195, 431         177, 764
China III                       <1                <1            1, 398           1, 642
China IV                     13, 985          12, 908        213, 009         195, 212

Total                        64, 845          68, 276        574, 903         537, 698
Notes ­ The table shows export trade flows to retaliatory and other countries before
and after the imposition of retaliatory tariffs against agricultural and food products. We
summarize trade flows twelve month before and after the tariff increases for the United
States in Panel (A) and for other non-retaliatory countries in Panel (B). All trade values
are expressed in millions of USD.




                                           22
                       Table 3: Product-Level Variation in Tariff Rate Changes

                                         United States         Non-Retaliatory Countries    Tariff Change

Product Category                   # Products    # Varieties   # Products   # Varieties     ¯ig
                                                                                                    ig

                                Panel (A): Agricultural-Related Products

Biodiesel & Blends >B30                  1             22           7            37        10.00    0.00
Distilled Spirits                      10           687           153           467        40.00    0.00
Ethanol (non-bev.)                       3          149            13            76        11.24   15.03
Fish Products                         187         2, 913        1, 348        4, 543       22.56    7.43
Forest Products                        94         3, 256          572         2, 500        7.90    6.87

                                       Panel (B): Bulk Products

Coarse Grains (ex. corn)                 4             61          18            88        24.20    5.09
Corn                                     2          171            15            68        25.00    0.00
Cotton                                   4          170            17            75         9.40   13.98
Oilseeds (ex. soybean)                   7          148            45           228         6.12    5.26
Other Bulk Commodities                 30           779           232           866         7.68    4.00
Pulses                                 21           653            82           412        22.38    7.84
Rice                                     6          320            64           268        25.00    0.00
Soybeans                                 1             65           9            36        25.00    0.00
Tobacco                                14           183            36           170        25.00    0.00
Wheat                                    2             90          16            61        25.00    0.00

                                Panel (C): Consumer-Oriented Products

Beef & Beef Products                   17           876            89           430         3.55    8.74
Breakfast Cereals                        4          259            28           210        22.94    6.10
Chocolate & Cocoa Products             11           643            98           507         9.77    1.42
Condiments & Sauces                      6          603            53           338         9.86    0.89
Dairy Products                         42         2, 057          434         1, 835       17.74   10.14
Dog & Cat Food                           1          107            22            89        25.00    0.00
Eggs & Products                        12           389            55           295         0.85    2.51
Fresh Fruit                            31           921           226         1, 192       23.67    5.71

                                                                                Continues on Next Page




                                                  23
                                 Table 3 ­ Continued from Previous Page

                                             United States          Non-Retaliatory Countries      Tariff Change

Product Category                       # Products     # Varieties   # Products      # Varieties     ¯ig
                                                                                                            ig

Fresh Vegetables                            40           783            224           1, 335      21.96      8.28
Fruit & Vegetable Juices                    23           845            210             942       16.65      7.74
Meat Products NESOI                         20           435            162             537        8.34      7.97
Non-Alcoholic Bev. (ex. juices)             17           999            233             909        9.53      2.17
Other Consumer Oriented                     54         1, 148           382           1, 834       7.42      4.42
Pork & Pork Products                        26           937            146             520       22.37      6.42
Poultry Meat & Prods. (ex. eggs)            18           770            190             673       22.03      6.09
Prepared Food                               23         1, 613           202           1, 133      13.42      3.34
Processed Fruit                             40         1, 478           388           1, 630      16.89      9.18
Processed Vegetables                        61         2, 034           416           2, 037      16.89      7.33
Snack Foods NESOI                            8           570             85             521        9.92      0.98
Tree Nuts                                   28         1, 205           104             676       23.06      6.02
Wine & Beer                                 11           732            233             602        7.35      6.43

                                       Panel (D): Intermediate Products

Animal Fats                                 12           201             64             258        3.00      7.97
Distillers Grains                            1               51           4              26       25.00      0.00
Feeds & Fodders NESOI                       14           547            100             541       10.26     11.70
Hides & Skins                               30           212             78             285        4.60      2.77
Live Animals                                16           319             89             372        2.18      4.26
Other Intermediate Products                 90         3, 206           662           2, 982       6.99      3.72
Planting Seeds                              28         1, 072           139             588        0.26      2.56
Soybean Meal                                 2           140              9              71        8.10      5.55
Soybean Oil                                  2           108             12              91       10.00      0.00
Sugar, Sweeteners, Bev. Bases               16           739            107             562        9.35      2.44
Vegetable Oils (ex. soybean)                39         1, 560           356           1, 577       6.26      4.73

Total                                   1, 118        36, 517         8, 277        35, 493       16.98     10.40
Notes ­ The table shows the mean and standard deviation of tariff increases across agricultural and food products
classified according to the Global Agricultural Trade System (United States Deparment of Agriculture, 2020). Mean
and standard deviation are calculated as the value-weighted tariff increases. The table also presents the number of
products and traded varieties by agricultural and food product category for the United States and non-retaliatory
countries.



                                                        24
                            Table 4: Trade Effects of Retaliatory Tariff Increases

                                      Dummy Specification                                Tariff Specification

                             Quantity          Value        Unit Value       Quantity           Value       Unit Value

                                  Panel (A): Export Trade of the United States

Trade Destruction ( )          -0.062***       -0.054***          0.017        -0.472***        -0.464***          0.224**
                                (0.023)         (0.015)          (0.012)        (0.121)          (0.075)          (0.106)
Trade Deflection ( )             0.003*          0.005**        -0.000           0.019*           0.042*         -0.006
                                (0.002)         (0.003)          (0.001)        (0.011)          (0.022)          (0.006)

Observations                  8,916,809       8,916,809         4,064,906     8,916,809        8,916,809        4,064,906
R-squared                        0.961           0.955            0.963          0.961            0.955            0.963

                             Panel (B): Export Trade of Non-Retaliatory Countries

Trade Diversion ( )              0.028           0.017**          0.038**        0.143*           0.134**          0.368***
                                (0.017)         (0.008)          (0.018)        (0.079)          (0.057)          (0.135)
Trade Depression ( )           -0.001            0.001          -0.035           0.002            0.007          -0.100
                                (0.007)         (0.004)          (0.023)        (0.045)          (0.025)          (0.094)

Observations                 16,266,860     16,266,860       9,070,496      16,266,860        16,266,860        9,070,496
R-squared                        0.991           0.987            0.975          0.991            0.987            0.975
Notes ­ The table presents the estimation results of trade destruction and trade deflection effects using export data for
the United States and trade diversion and trade depression effects export data for other non-retaliatory countries. The
estimates of trade effects for the dummy specification are reported in columns (3)-(5) and for the tariff specification
in columns (6)-(8). Standard errors are clustered at the country-pair and tariff-line level (HS-8 or HS-10).




                                                           25
   Table 5: Product-Category Differences in the Trade Effects of Retaliatory Tariff Increases

                                     Dummy Specification                    Tariff Specification

                                Quantity     Value       Unit Value   Quantity       Value       Unit Value

                             Panel (A): Export Trade of the United States

Trade Destruction
Agricultural-Related Products    -0.476*     -0.038*        0.018      -1.874       -0.208          0.154
                                 (0.261)     (0.020)       (0.018)     (1.143)       (0.136)       (0.146)
Bulk Products                    -0.402**    -0.272***      0.064      -1.832**     -1.221***       0.220
                                 (0.165)     (0.091)       (0.049)     (0.849)       (0.406)       (0.186)
Consumer-Oriented Products        0.012       0.048         0.081**     0.060         0.324         0.364**
                                 (0.033)     (0.048)       (0.034)     (0.231)       (0.297)       (0.161)
Intermediate Products             0.035       0.139***      0.002       0.573         0.518***      0.292
                                 (0.075)     (0.037)       (0.029)     (0.759)       (0.179)       (0.343)
Trade Deflection
Agricultural-Related Products     0.008       0.007        -0.001       0.039         0.024        -0.010
                                 (0.009)     (0.006)       (0.001)     (0.044)       (0.022)       (0.009)
Bulk products                     0.011       0.029        -0.002       0.052         0.133        -0.007
                                 (0.008)     (0.020)       (0.002)     (0.036)       (0.090)       (0.005)
Consumer-Oriented Products       -0.001      -0.004        -0.001      -0.004       -0.022         -0.006
                                 (0.003)     (0.005)       (0.002)     (0.016)       (0.028)       (0.008)
Intermediate Products            -0.000      -0.010         0.000      -0.004       -0.034         -0.003
                                 (0.001)     (0.009)       (0.001)     (0.005)       (0.029)       (0.008)

Observations                    8,916,809   8,916,809     4,064,906   8,916,809     8,916,809     4,064,906
R-squared                         0.961       0.955         0.963       0.961         0.955         0.963

                        Panel (B): Export Trade of Non-Retaliatory Countries

Trade Diversion
Agricultural-Related Products    -0.044       0.069         0.076       0.030         0.552**       0.395
                                 (0.082)     (0.050)       (0.059)     (0.535)       (0.270)       (0.303)
Bulk Products                     0.035       0.033**      -0.087       0.156         0.149**      -1.145

                                                                                  Continues on Next Page




                                                 26
                                 Table 5 ­ Continued from Previous Page

                                           Dummy Specification                       Tariff Specification

                                    Quantity       Value      Unit Value     Quantity        Value     Unit Value

                                      (0.027)       (0.014)       (0.090)      (0.120)       (0.064)        (0.829)
Consumer-Oriented Products           -0.004        -0.002          0.069*** -0.000            0.058         0.451***
                                      (0.031)       (0.017)       (0.027)      (0.148)       (0.085)        (0.164)
Intermediate Products                  0.007       -0.053        -0.049         0.121       -0.557        -0.465
                                      (0.036)       (0.034)       (0.033)      (0.357)       (0.366)        (0.393)
Trade Depression
Agricultural-Related Products        -0.017          0.007       -0.006         0.032         0.080       -0.010
                                      (0.023)       (0.010)       (0.010)      (0.148)       (0.061)        (0.041)
Bulk Products                          0.019         0.011         0.010        0.058       -0.001          0.027
                                      (0.016)       (0.022)       (0.018)      (0.063)       (0.142)        (0.076)
Consumer-Oriented Products           -0.002        -0.004        -0.058       -0.011        -0.030        -0.181
                                      (0.009)       (0.006)       (0.041)      (0.056)       (0.036)        (0.179)
Intermediate Products                  0.014         0.023       -0.051         0.103         0.208       -0.686
                                      (0.045)       (0.019)       (0.031)      (0.267)       (0.217)        (0.435)

Observations                       16,266,860 16,266,860       9,070,496    16,266,860 16,266,860       9,070,496
R-squared                              0.991         0.987         0.975        0.991         0.987         0.975
Notes ­ The table reports the trade effects of retaliatory tariff increases according to the product classification.
The same fixed effects as for the baseline specification are included. Two-way standard errors are clustered at the
country-pair and tariff-line level (HS-8 or HS-10).




                                                        27
         Table 6: Economic Development and Trade Effects of Retaliatory Tariff Increases

                                 Dummy Specification                               Tariff Specification

                        Quantity         Value        Unit Value      Quantity            Value       Unit Value

                                Panel (A): Export Trade of the United States

 Trade Destruction
 Non-OECD                 -0.100**       -0.049***          0.024**     -0.613**         -0.440***           0.302***
                           (0.047)        (0.019)        (0.011)         (0.247)          (0.131)           (0.112)
 OECD                       0.055        -0.012         -0.051            0.238          -0.073            -0.412*
                           (0.060)        (0.040)        (0.034)         (0.307)          (0.244)           (0.241)
 Trade Deflection
 Non-OECD                   0.018***       0.006        -0.006            0.106**          0.031           -0.017
                           (0.006)        (0.010)        (0.006)         (0.050)          (0.056)           (0.047)
 OECD                     -0.021***      -0.001             0.011       -0.127**           0.017             0.023
                           (0.008)        (0.014)        (0.009)         (0.061)          (0.067)           (0.097)

 Observations            8,916,809      8,916,809       4,064,906      8,916,809        8,916,809         4,064,906
 R-squared                  0.961          0.955            0.963         0.961            0.955             0.963

                           Panel (B): Export Trade of Non-Retaliatory Countries

 Trade Diversion
 Non-OECD                   0.028*         0.012            0.038**       0.141*           0.113**           0.371***
                           (0.016)        (0.008)        (0.018)         (0.075)          (0.050)           (0.137)
 OECD                     -0.001           0.039        -0.021            0.081            0.217           -0.565
                           (0.032)        (0.046)        (0.070)         (0.211)          (0.273)           (0.465)
 Trade Depression
 Non-OECD                   0.003          0.004        -0.035            0.010            0.022           -0.096
                           (0.015)        (0.006)        (0.024)         (0.092)          (0.042)           (0.092)
 OECD                     -0.007         -0.008             0.009       -0.014           -0.035            -0.352
                           (0.016)        (0.008)        (0.049)         (0.094)          (0.050)           (0.433)

 Observations           16,266,860     16,266,860      9,070,496      16,266,860       16,266,860         9,070,496
 R-squared                  0.991          0.987            0.975         0.991            0.987             0.975
Notes ­ The table reports the trade effects of retaliatory tariff increases according to the economic development
stage of trading partners. The same fixed effects as for the baseline specification are included. Two-way standard
errors are clustered at the country-pair and tariff-line level (HS-8 or HS-10).



                                                       28
                 Table 7: Pre-Existing Trend Tests

                             Value            Quantity         Unit Value

            Panel (A): Export Trade of the United States

                              0.093              0.263              0.067
                             (0.085)            (0.292)            (0.106)

Observations                401,256            401,256            395,541
Pseudo R-squared              0.925              0.936              0.951

       Panel (B): Export Trade of Non-Retaliatory Countries

                            -0.049               0.079            -0.005
                             (0.037)            (0.059)            (0.013)

Observations                873,836            873,836            860,028
Pseudo R-squared              0.948              0.971              0.954
Notes ­ This table summarizes the estimates of the pre-existing trend test
for retaliatory tariff increases on agricultural and food products. We regress
the 2018 retaliatory tariff increases on the 2017 value, quantity, and unit
value of U.S. exports in Panel (A) and non-retaliatory countries exports
in Panel (B). The regressions include exporter-by-importer, exporter-by-
product and importer-by-sector fixed effects. Two-way standard errors
clustered at the country-pair and tariff-line (HS-8 or HS-10) level.




                                       29
               Table 8: Comparative Statistics Effects

              Panel (A): Export Trade of the United States

                            Trade Destruction           Trade Deflection

 Retaliatory Country      Absolute    Percentage     Absolute    Percentage

 China I                    -604       -59.28           107           0.66
 Turkey                       -8           -2.24        107           0.55
 European Union             -329       -17.00           136           0.94
 Mexico                     -172           -8.00         82           0.70
 Canada                  -1, 658       -30.58            19           0.40
 China II                -9, 381       -61.60           608           0.95
 China III                    <1       -59.78              9          0.95
 China IV                -3, 407       -54.53           159           0.43

 Total                  -15, 558       -55.09         1, 227          0.79

          Panel (B): Export Trade of Non-Retaliatory Countries

                             Trade Diversion           Trade Depression

 Retaliatory Country      Absolute    Percentage     Absolute    Percentage

 China I                   1, 977          59.82         10           0.02
 Turkey                        16           5.43           3          0.02
 European Union               186          14.59           5          0.01
 Mexico                       140          32.30           9          0.02
 Canada                    2, 172          52.32           2          0.01
 China II                  6, 345          18.44         37           0.02
 China III                      1          53.43        <1            0.01
 China IV                  2, 637          22.79         26           0.01

 Total                    13, 474          30.91         92           0.02
Notes ­ This table presents the comparative statistics effects of retaliatory
tariff increases for agricultural and food products. The comparative statistics
estimates are based on the baseline model specification. All effect estimates
are expressed in Millions of USD.




                                      30
                                Table 9: Product-Level Differences in Comparative Statistics Effects

                                         Trade Destruction        Trade Deflection          Trade Diversion       Trade Depression

     Product                           Absolute    Percentage   Absolute   Percentage   Absolute   Percentage   Absolute   Percentage

                                                 Panel (A): Agricultural-Related Products

     Biodiesel & Blends >B30            < -1        -42.97           2        0.57            1        6.88       <1          0.02
     Distilled Spirits                   -355       -24.45          66        1.07          124       19.20         7         0.03
     Ethanol (non-bev.)                  -100       -65.34          18        0.76           29       58.77       <1          0.02
     Fish Products                       -262       -48.08          19        0.95          687       29.77        11         0.04
     Forest Products                   -1, 414      -53.61          28        0.57          537       29.65         4         0.02

                                                        Panel (B): Bulk Products
31




     Coarse Grains (ex. corn)            -616       -75.05           2        0.95           63       29.64       <1          0.00
     Corn                                 -73       -24.28         188        0.95          971       30.39       <1          0.00
     Cotton                                -7       -15.59           3        0.95          127       34.01       <1          0.00
     Oilseeds (ex. soybean)                -1       -33.70           2        0.43           31       93.58       <1          0.00
     Other Bulk Commodities               -36       -55.55           3        0.46           27       20.18         2         0.02
     Pulses                               -24       -20.95           5        0.95          <1         0.16       <1          0.01
     Rice                                  -2        -4.63          31        0.87            1        0.28         1         0.00
     Soybeans                          -7, 074      -64.21         113        0.95      3, 685        19.42       <1          0.00
     Tobacco                              -71       -60.28          13        0.95           66       19.84         1         0.02
     Wheat                               -111       -59.24          57        0.95           62       84.82       <1          0.00

                                                                                                              Continues on Next Page
                                                 Table 9 ­ Continued from Previous Page

                                         Trade Destruction         Trade Deflection        Trade Diversion         Trade Depression

     Product                            Absolute    Percentage   Absolute   Percentage   Absolute   Percentage   Absolute   Percentage

                                                   Panel (C): Consumer-Oriented Products

     Beef & Beef Products                 -68        -34.95         10         0.88        661        20.49          2         0.01
     Breakfast Cereals                    -19        -44.47          8         0.72          5        11.36        <1          0.01
     Chocolate & Cocoa Products           -97        -42.51         10         0.47         92        25.51          1         0.01
     Condiments & Sauces                 -310        -33.78         12         0.43         54        11.88          1         0.01
     Dairy Products                      -367        -40.43         43         0.81      1, 380       33.50          2         0.01
     Dog & Cat Food                        -7        -60.45         15         0.95          5        32.90        <1          0.01
     Eggs & Products                       -2        -46.30        <1          0.34        <1         34.97        <1          0.00
32




     Fresh Fruit                            51         15.14        47         0.77      1, 234       48.37         16         0.03
     Fresh Vegetables                        0       -57.58         23         0.95          1        29.10          6         0.07
     Fruit & Vegetable Juices             -74        -27.05          8         0.72          7         0.60          2         0.03
     Meat Products NESOI                < -1         -50.08        <1          0.63         15        11.52        <1          0.00
     Non-Alcoholic Bev. (ex. juices)     -271        -31.38          7         0.47         80        16.84          3         0.01
     Other Consumer Oriented               -1        -57.25          2         0.47         16        24.79          1         0.02
     Pork & Pork Products                -828        -39.43         93         0.88      1, 456       29.65          2         0.01
     Poultry Meat & Prods. (ex. eggs)     -52        -20.50         32         0.79        183        19.89        <1          0.00
     Prepared Food                       -327        -18.23         60         0.48        163        12.05         11         0.02
     Processed Fruit                     -158        -38.59         17         0.71         78        17.83          1         0.02
     Processed Vegetables                -119        -31.77         22         0.56         79        16.47          4         0.02

                                                                                                              Continues on Next Page
                                                       Table 9 ­ Continued from Previous Page

                                               Trade Destruction           Trade Deflection           Trade Diversion           Trade Depression

     Product                                 Absolute     Percentage    Absolute    Percentage     Absolute    Percentage     Absolute    Percentage

     Snack Foods NESOI                         -145        -33.66             4          0.47           33        19.32             1          0.01
     Tree Nuts                                 -473        -46.51          136           0.58         223         31.42             3          0.01
     Wine & Beer                                -39        -62.99             7          0.54         258         37.00             4          0.03

                                                           Panel (D): Intermediate Products

     Animal Fats                                  -1       -54.67          <1            0.79            1        34.01          <1            0.01
     Distillers Grains                          -33        -58.03            22          0.95           11        31.51          <1            0.00
     Feeds & Fodders NESOI                     -383        -54.03            13          0.70         103         31.20          <1            0.00
     Hides & Skins                             -531        -61.77             1          0.26           61        27.08          <1            0.00
33




     Live Animals                             < -1         -67.37             1          0.45            3        36.48          <1            0.04
     Other Intermediate Products               -331        -46.52            21          0.36         315         18.01             3          0.01
     Planting Seeds                           < -1         -40.43          <1            0.95         <1          16.98          <1            0.08
     Soybean Meal                                 -1       -60.08            17          0.49            5        21.01          <1            0.00
     Soybean Oil                                  -2       -71.68             3          0.49           19        18.39          <1            0.00
     Sugar, Sweeteners, Bev. Bases              -16        -52.68             5          0.49           50        26.39          <1            0.01
     Vegetable Oils (ex. soybean)               -38        -56.62             6          0.46         470         26.91             1          0.02
     Notes ­ The table shows the product-level estimates of trade effects caused by retaliatory tariffs imposed against agricultural and food products.
     The comparative statistics estimates are based on the baseline tariff specification. All effect estimates are expressed in Millions of USD.
7.1 Figures

    qCA                                                             qBC
            RBA



                                                                           RCB


  
 qCA                                                               
                                                                  qBC

                                                                                                                  
                                                  RCA                                                           RBC
                                                                  qBC
  
 qCA                                                                                                            RBC
                                                  RCA
                                                       qBA                                                           qCB
                             
                            qBA                                                         
                                                                                       qCB         
                                       qBA                                                        qCB


    Panel (A): Trade Destruction and Diversion                      Panel (B): Trade Deflection and Depression

                           Figure 1: Trade Effects of Retaliatory Tariff Increases
Notes ­ The figure plots the trade effects of retaliatory tariff increases. The left panel shows the effects of retaliatory
tariffs on trade with country A and the right panel the effects on trade between country B and C .




                                                             34
                                                           Quantity                                                                                                     Quantity
                    50                                                                                                          5.0




                    25                                                                                                          2.5
Percentage Change




                                                                                                            Percentage Change
                     0                                                                                                          0.0




                    -25                                                                                                         -2.5




                    -50                                                                                                         -5.0
                          -12   -10   -8   -6      -4    -2     0     2     4        6   8   10   12                                   -12   -10   -8   -6      -4    -2     0     2     4        6   8   10   12
                                                Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                           Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                                              Value                                                                                                        Value
                    50                                                                                                          5.0




                    25                                                                                                          2.5
Percentage Change




                                                                                                            Percentage Change



                     0                                                                                                          0.0




                    -25                                                                                                         -2.5




                    -50                                                                                                         -5.0
                          -12   -10   -8   -6      -4    -2     0     2     4        6   8   10   12                                   -12   -10   -8   -6      -4    -2     0     2     4        6   8   10   12
                                                Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                           Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                                          Unit Value                                                                                                   Unit Value
                    50                                                                                                          5.0




                    25                                                                                                          2.5
Percentage Change




                                                                                                            Percentage Change




                     0                                                                                                          0.0




                    -25                                                                                                         -2.5




                    -50                                                                                                         -5.0
                          -12   -10   -8   -6      -4    -2     0     2     4        6   8   10   12                                   -12   -10   -8   -6      -4    -2     0     2     4        6   8   10   12
                                                Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                           Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                       Panel (A): Trade Destruction                                                                                      Panel (B): Trade Deflection

                                      Figure 2: Trade Destruction and Deflection Effects of Retaliatory Tariff Increases
         Notes ­ The figure plots the event study estimates for the trade destruction and trade diversion effects of retaliatory tariff
         increases against agricultural and food exports of the United States. All regressions include fixed effects, as specified in the
         baseline model. The standard errors are clustered at the country-pair and tariff-line level. Error bands indicate 95 percent
         confidence intervals.


                                                                                                       35
                                                               Quantity                                                                                                           Quantity
                    100                                                                                                          30




                     50                                                                                                          15
Percentage Change




                                                                                                             Percentage Change
                      0                                                                                                           0




                     -50                                                                                                         -15




                    -100                                                                                                         -30
                           -12   -10   -8   -6     -4     -2      0       2   4       6   8   10   12                                      -12    -10    -8    -6     -4     -2      0       2    4      6   8   10   12
                                                 Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                                 Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                                                Value                                                                                                              Value
                    100                                                                                                          20




                     50                                                                                                          10
Percentage Change




                                                                                                             Percentage Change



                      0                                                                                                           0




                     -50                                                                                                         -10




                    -100                                                                                                         -20
                           -12   -10   -8   -6     -4     -2      0       2   4       6   8   10   12                                      -12    -10    -8    -6     -4     -2      0       2    4      6   8   10   12
                                                 Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                                 Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                                           Unit Value                                                                                                          Unit Value
                    100                                                                                                          100




                     50                                                                                                           50
Percentage Change




                                                                                                             Percentage Change




                      0                                                                                                                0




                     -50                                                                                                          -50




                    -100                                                                                                         -100
                           -12   -10   -8   -6     -4     -2      0       2   4       6   8   10   12                                       -12    -10    -8   -6      -4    -2       0      2    4      6   8   10   12
                                                 Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                                 Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                        Panel (A): Trade Diversion                                                                                             Panel (B): Trade Depression

                                       Figure 3: Trade Diversion and Depression Effects of Retaliatory Tariff Increases
         Notes ­ The figure plots the event study estimates for the trade diversion and trade depression effects of retaliatory tariff
         increases against agricultural and food exports of the United States. All regressions include fixed effects, as specified in the
         baseline model. The standard errors are clustered at the country-pair and tariff-line level. Error bands indicate 95 percent
         confidence intervals. Data sources are described in the text.


                                                                                                        36
                                                           Quantity                                                                                                  Quantity
                    5                                                                                                           0.50




                    3                                                                                                           0.25
Percentage Change




                                                                                                            Percentage Change
                    0                                                                                                           0.00




                -3                                                                                                              -0.25




                -5                                                                                                              -0.50
                        -12   -10   -8     -6      -4    -2     0     2      4       6   8   10   12                                    -12   -10   -8   -6   -4    -2     0     2    4        6   8   10   12
                                                Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                        Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                                              Value                                                                                                      Value
                    5                                                                                                           0.50




                    3                                                                                                           0.25
Percentage Change




                                                                                                            Percentage Change



                    0                                                                                                           0.00




                -3                                                                                                              -0.25




                -5                                                                                                              -0.50
                        -12   -10   -8     -6      -4    -2     0     2      4       6   8   10   12                                    -12   -10   -8   -6   -4    -2     0     2    4        6   8   10   12
                                                Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                        Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                                          Unit Value                                                                                                Unit Value
                    5                                                                                                           0.50




                    3                                                                                                           0.25
Percentage Change




                                                                                                            Percentage Change




                    0                                                                                                           0.00




                -3                                                                                                              -0.25




                -5                                                                                                              -0.50
                        -12   -10   -8     -6      -4    -2     0     2      4       6   8   10   12                                    -12   -10   -8   -6   -4    -2     0     2    4        6   8   10   12
                                                Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                        Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                         Panel (A): Trade Destruction                                                                                    Panel (B): Trade Deflection

                                     Figure 4: Dynamic Estimation of Trade Destruction and Trade Deflection Effects
         Notes ­ The figure plots the dynamic estimates for the trade destruction and trade deflection effects of retaliatory tariff
         increases against agricultural and food exports of the United States.The figures plot the cumulative sum of coefficient
         estimates for dynamic model specification. All regressions include fixed effects, as specified in the baseline model. The
         standard errors are clustered at the country-pair and tariff-line level. Error bands indicate 95 percent confidence intervals.


                                                                                                       37
                                                             Quantity                                                                                                    Quantity
                    10                                                                                                            10




                     5                                                                                                             5
Percentage Change




                                                                                                              Percentage Change
                     0                                                                                                             0




                     -5                                                                                                            -5




                    -10                                                                                                           -10
                          -12   -10   -8     -6      -4    -2     0     2     4        6   8   10   12                                  -12   -10   -8   -6      -4    -2     0     2     4        6   8   10   12
                                                  Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                          Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                                                Value                                                                                                       Value
                    10                                                                                                            10




                     5                                                                                                             5
Percentage Change




                                                                                                              Percentage Change



                     0                                                                                                             0




                     -5                                                                                                            -5




                    -10                                                                                                           -10
                          -12   -10   -8     -6      -4    -2     0     2     4        6   8   10   12                                  -12   -10   -8   -6      -4    -2     0     2     4        6   8   10   12
                                                  Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                          Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                                            Unit Value                                                                                                  Unit Value
                    10                                                                                                            10




                     5                                                                                                             5
Percentage Change




                                                                                                              Percentage Change




                     0                                                                                                             0




                     -5                                                                                                            -5




                    -10                                                                                                           -10
                          -12   -10   -8     -6      -4    -2     0     2     4        6   8   10   12                                  -12   -10   -8   -6      -4    -2     0     2     4        6   8   10   12
                                                  Months Relative to Tariff Increase                                                                          Months Relative to Tariff Increase


                                           Panel (A): Trade Diversion                                                                                    Panel (B): Trade Depression

                                           Figure 5: Dynamic Estimation of Trade Diversion and Trade Depression Effects
         Notes ­ The figure plots the dynamic estimates for the trade diversion and trade depression effects of retaliatory tariff
         increases against agricultural and food exports of the United States.The figures plot the cumulative sum of coefficient
         estimates for dynamic model specification. All regressions include fixed effects, as specified in the baseline model. The
         standard errors are clustered at the country-pair and tariff-line level. Error bands indicate 95 percent confidence intervals.


                                                                                                         38
                    300           Live Animals                                                                                               10



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Soybeans
                    150                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                 Cotton
                                                 Soybean Meal                                                                                                                                                             Tobacco
Percentage Change




                                                                                                                         Percentage Change
                                                                                      Dog & Cat Food                                                                                   Ethanol (non-bev.)
                                               Other Consumer Oriented                Distillers Grains                                                                       Forest Products
                      0                                                                                                                       0                                                                                           Average
                                                                                                          Average                                                                                                 Pork & Pork Products
                                                                                                                                                                           Other Intermediate Products
                                      Biodiesel & Blends > B30                                                                                                                                                    Fish Products
                                                                                      Tobacco
                               Oilseeds (ex. soybean) Ethanol (non-bev.)      Wheat

                    -150                                                                                                                      -5
                                                                                                                                                           Planting Seeds
                                                                                                                                                             Hides & Skins


                    -300                                                                                                                     -10
                           0                      10                     20                     30             40                                      0                         10                      20                          30        40
                                                         Value-Weighted Tariff Increase                                                                                                 Value-Weighted Tariff Increase


                                          Panel (A): Trade Destruction                                                                                                             Panel (B): Trade Deflection


                    200                                                                                                                      100

                                              Coarse Grains (ex. corn)


                    100                                                                                                                       50
                                           Animal Fats
                                                                                                                                                                    Hides & Skins
Percentage Change




                                                                                                                         Percentage Change



                                                                         Cotton Tree Nuts                                                                         Sugar, Sweeteners, Bev. Bases
                                                                                     Dog & Cat Food                                                            Live Animals
                                                                                                                                                                     Meat Products NESOI                                  Rice
                      0                                                                                   Average                                  0                                                                                      Average
                                                 Chocolate & Cocoa Products                                                                                                                                               Soybeans
                                           Biodiesel & Blends > B30                                                                                                                                               Wheat

                               Eggs & Products                                                                                                                               Coarse Grains (ex. corn)
                    -100       Live Animals        Soybean Meal                                                                               -50
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cotton


                                                                                                                                                               Eggs & Products
                    -200                                                                                                                     -100
                           0                      10                     20                     30             40                                          0                      10                        20                       30        40
                                                         Value-Weighted Tariff Increase                                                                                                   Value-Weighted Tariff Increase


                                              Panel (C): Trade Diversion                                                                                                         Panel (D): Trade Depression

                                    Figure 6: Product-Level Differences in the Trade Effects of Retaliatory Tariff Increases
         Notes ­ The figures plot the trade effects of retaliatory tariffs increases at the product level. We include fixed effects according
         to the baseline specification. Standard errors are clustered at the country-pair and tariff-line level. The horizontal dashed
         line in each figure denotes the overall average impact.




                                                                                                                    39
                                       200                                                                                                                       3,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Chile      Brazil
                                                                                           Canada
Absolute Change (in Millions of USD)




                                                                                                                          Absolute Change (in Millions of USD)
                                                                                        Mexico European Union

                                       150                                              Japan                                                                    2,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ukraine


                                                                                                                                                                                              European Union        Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Argentina
                                       100                                                                                                                       1,000

                                                                                           South Korea


                                       50                                                                                                                            0




                                        0                                                                                                                        -1,000
                                             5   10         15         20          25               30          35                                                        0   5       10         15            20               25          30
                                                          Value-Weighted Tariff Increase                                                                                            Value-Weighted Tariff Increase


                                                      Panel (A): Trade Deflection                                                                                                 Panel (B): Trade Diversion

                                       Figure 7: Country-Level Differences in the Distributional Trade Effects of Retaliatory Tariff Increases
                   Notes ­ The figures plot the simulated trade gains due to retaliatory tariffs imposed against agricultural and food exports of
                   the United States. Panel (A) shows the change in export trade of the United States with non-retaliatory countries and panel
                   (B) the change in export trade of non-retaliatory countries with retaliatory countries. The comparative statistics analysis is
                   based on the baseline regression specification.




                                                                                                                     40
         The Impact of Retaliatory Tariffs on Agricultural and Food Trade
                                  Supplementary Materials
                                Colin A. Carter and Sandro Steinbach


Supplementary                                                                             Materials
Appendix (A) ­ Data

We collect data on eight waves of retaliatory tariff increases imposed against agricultural and food

exports of the United States and match this policy data to monthly import and export trade data

and tariff data for the United States and 101 non-retaliatory countries.

Trade Data

Monthly import and export data come from the U.S. Census Bureau and the Global Trade Atlas

(IHS Markit, 2020). The trade data used to investigate trade destruction and trade deflection effects

are from monthly administrative data published by the U.S. Census Bureau, which provides values

and quantities of trade flows at the HS-10 codes and across countries from April 1990 to October

2019. Trade data used to investigate the trade diversion and trade depression effects come from the

Global Trade Atlas, which includes monthly import and export data of 101 countries at the tariff-line

level. The trade data in the Global Trade Atlas covers about 95 percent of all global trade and is

available until July 2019. Our sample period covers 12 months before and up to 12 months after

retaliatory tariff increases.

Because U.S. Schedule B numbers change over time, we develop a method to concord U.S. schedule B

numbers over time and create time-consistent U.S. export flow data. We collect the obsolete-to-new

codes from the U.S. Census Bureau and follow the approach of Pierce and Schott (2012) to obtain

consistent trade flows of Schedule B codes over time.

Retaliatory Tariffs

The retaliatory tariff database is a monthly panel dataset of retaliatory tariff increases against U.S.

exports during 2018. The database constructed by collecting data from foreign finance ministries

describing retaliatory tariff actions due to the trade war. There are eight waves of retaliatory tariff

increases: China announced four waves of retaliatory tariff increases in April, July, August, and

September 2018; Mexico, Turkey, and European Union announced retaliatory tariff increases in June

                                                  41
2018; Canada announced retaliatory tariff increases in July 2018. For the retaliatory tariff increases

announced by China in September, China reinstated the MFN tariff rate on US autos and auto parts

as a result of negotiations in January 2019. Mexico and Canada removed their retaliatory tariffs in

May 2019.

Import Tariffs

To assess the magnitude of the retaliatory tariffs, we also collect baseline tariff rates of all countries

using ad valorem equivalent MFN rates from the most recent data in the Consolidated Tariff Schedules

(CTS) database (World Trade Organization, 2020).




                                                   42
Appendix (B) ­ HS Code Matching between Countries

Trade partners of the United States impose retaliatory tariffs using their version of the HS code

system. To measure the trade destruction and trade deflection effects of retaliatory tariff increases,

we need to identify the corresponding U.S. Schedule B numbers. Because HS codes are harmonized

across countries up to the 6-digit HS code level, we develop a method to determine the U.S. schedule

B codes that are affected by retaliatory tariff increases. Depending on the number of digits of targeted

products, the approach used to identify the corresponding U.S. products is as follows:

Step 1

For products at the 4- or 6-digit level, we assign all HS-10 schedule B numbers that belong to the

same 4 or 6-digit HS codes in non-retaliatory countries as affected products.

Step 2

For products with more than 6-digit HS numbers, we develop a token-based matching method to

identify the corresponding U.S. Schedule B numbers. Specifically, we first match the product codes

in a retaliatory country to all potential HS codes with the same six-digit number in non-retaliatory

countries. If there is only one 10-digit U.S. HS code that can be matched, then the corresponding

10-digit HS code is the code under investigation.

Step 3

For codes with multiple potentially matched 10-digit HS codes, depending on the descriptions of the

products, we obtain a similarity score for each potential pair of product codes using a token based

matching approach. We then choose the pair with the highest matching score as the matched product

codes.

Step 4

Considering that some countries, China, for instance, impose tariffs on the US at the 8-digit level,

we also assign schedule B numbers that share the same 8-digit numbers as the selected schedule B

numbers as affected products.

Matching Results

                                                    43
There is a total number of 6,950 products in the trade policy dataset in 2018. The matching process

generates a total number of 7,521 Schedule B numbers that are affected. This set forms the basis of

targeted products in our analysis. However, 324 policy codes cannot be matched with U.S. Schedule

B numbers because the first six digits of the policy codes cannot be matched with any of the first

six-digit of U.S. Schedule B numbers.

Caveats

The matching has several caveats. First, the token-based approach can generate mismatched pairs,

and, for some products, matching based on description might not be appropriate. Future research

can combine other methods, like data-driven approaches that rely on the similarity of trade flows

of products, to match HS codes across countries. Second, 324 policy codes cannot be matched with

any U.S. schedule B numbers. Future research efforts should be directed to investigate whether these

policies are wrongly specified.

The method outlined above develops a concordance between U.S. schedule B numbers and HS codes

of retaliatory countries to investigate the trade destruction and trade deflection effects. We use the

same approach to develop a concordance between other non-retaliatory and retaliatory countries to

investigate the trade diversion and trade depression effects.




                                                  44
Appendix (C) ­ Tables and Figures

   Table A.1: Timeline of Retaliatory Tariffs against Manufacturing Trade of the United States

                                                  U.S. Import Trade       Other Import Trade          Tariffs
 Retaliatory                      Products
 Country             Date Enacted (# HS-8)         Value       Share        Value       Share     Before   After

 China I                    April 6         28        120        0.1        2, 801       0.2        7.7     22.7
 Mexico                      June 5         54     1, 021        0.6        1, 956       0.9        9.6     30.8
 Turkey                     June 21         85        651        6.6       14, 193       7.6        1.5     17.3
 European Union             June 22        263     5, 012        1.8     264, 229        5.6        3.2     26.5
 Canada                      July 1        198     9, 727        5.0        6, 653       3.5        2.0     18.6
 China II                    July 2         90    13, 308      10.7        30, 113       2.0       23.9     48.9
 China III               August 23         236    14, 108      11.4      154, 531      10.2         4.5     29.5
 China IV            September 24        4, 735   48, 263      38.9      703, 660      46.4         5.0     11.8
 Russia                   August 6          66        358        4.2        3, 381       1.9        4.3     34.4

 Total                                   5, 755   92, 559      11.9    1, 181, 515     16.8         7.3     21.7
 Notes ­ This table summarizes the timeline of retaliatory tariffs against manufacturing products of the United
 States. All trade flows are measured in millions of USD, and shares are defined as the value of import trade for
 affected products divided by the total import trade of manufacturing products. The tariff changes are trade-value
 weighted ad valorem tariff changes for affected products.




                                                        45
Table A.2: Global Trade Flows of Manufacturing Products Before and After
the Imposition of Retaliatory Tariffs

                    Panel (A): Export Trade of the United States

                           With Retaliatory Country             With Other Countries

Retaliatory Country           Before              After         Before            After

China I                        1, 348               610           2, 262           2, 676
Turkey                         1, 150               837          97, 689          95, 901
European Union                 6, 975             6, 029         38, 186          36, 225
Mexico                         1, 687             1, 686          4, 524           3, 956
Canada                        13, 784          12, 334           17, 130          18, 497
China II                       9, 006             5, 696         33, 875          38, 413
China III                     18, 107             9, 198       169, 890          176, 539
Russia                           214                100          15, 943          15, 881
China IV                      43, 536          38, 281         648, 531          644, 894

Total                         95, 808          74, 772       1, 028, 030      1, 032, 981

               Panel (B): Export Trade of Non-Retaliatory Countries

                           With Retaliatory Country             With Other Countries

Retaliatory Country           Before              After         Before            After

China I                         1867               1200            8861              9648
Turkey                          2250               1787          64, 534          66, 452
European Union                64, 915          62, 903         214, 350          216, 864
Mexico                         1, 604             1, 797         77, 276          79, 794
Canada                         7, 684             8, 145       192, 069          213, 044
China II                      36, 467          30, 500         220, 973          195, 882
China III                     75, 999          66, 673         808, 043          740, 000
Russia                         4, 171             3, 858         94, 584          92, 338
China IV                    275, 452          252, 645       2, 493, 281      2, 260, 097

Total                       470, 409          429, 507       4, 173, 970      3, 874, 118
Notes ­ The table shows export trade flows to retaliatory and other countries before and
after the imposition of retaliatory tariffs against manufacturing products. We summarize
trade flows twelve month before and after the tariff increases for the United States in Panel
(A) and for other non-retaliatory countries in Panel (B). All trade values are expressed in
millions of USD.




                                             46
         Table A.3: Trade Effects of Retaliatory Tariff Increases for Manufacturing Products

                                       Dummy Specification                               Tariff Specification

                             Quantity          Value         Unit Value       Quantity          Value        Unit Value

                                   Panel (A): Export Trade of the United States

Trade Destruction ( )          -0.065**        -0.044**          0.016         -0.758**         -0.519***          0.108
                                (0.025)         (0.022)         (0.016)         (0.321)         (0.091)           (0.129)
Trade Deflection ( )             0.004           0.003          -0.000           0.042           0.036            -0.001
                                (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.001)         (0.035)         (0.023)           (0.003)

Observations                 59,904,640      59,904,640      21,371,833      59,904,640      59,904,640         21,371,833
R-squared                        0.984           0.964           0.957           0.984           0.964             0.957

                              Panel (B): Export Trade of Non-Retaliatory Countries

Trade Diversion ( )              0.032           0.017           0.004           0.156*          0.233**           0.005
                                (0.023)         (0.016)         (0.017)         (0.082)         (0.105)           (0.210)
Trade Depression ( )           -0.003          -0.004            0.006           0.068           0.019            -0.108
                                (0.008)         (0.006)         (0.012)         (0.076)         (0.032)           (0.170)

Observations                 96,659,118      96,659,118      54,233,887      96,659,118      96,659,118         54,233,887
R-squared                        0.995           0.988           0.981           0.995           0.988             0.981
Notes ­ The table presents the estimation results of trade destruction and trade deflection effects using export data for
the United States and trade diversion and trade depression effects export data for other non-retaliatory countries. The
estimates of trade effects for the dummy specification are reported in columns (3)-(5) and for the tariff specification
in columns (6)-(8). Standard errors are clustered at the country-pair and tariff-line level (HS-8 or HS-10).




                                                           47
