                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          SYSTEMIC CREDIT FREEZES IN FINANCIAL LENDING NETWORKS

                                      Daron Acemoglu
                                     Asuman Ozdaglar
                                        James Siderius
                                    Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi

                                     Working Paper 27149
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27149


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We are grateful to Celso Brunetti, Sebastian Infante, Borghan Narajabad, and Carlos Ramirez for
helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Daron Acemoglu, Asuman Ozdaglar, James Siderius, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Systemic Credit Freezes in Financial Lending Networks
Daron Acemoglu, Asuman Ozdaglar, James Siderius, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi
NBER Working Paper No. 27149
May 2020
JEL No. D85,G01

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper develops a network model of interbank lending, in which banks decide to extend
credit to their potential borrowers. Borrowers are subject to shocks that may force them to default
on their loans. In contrast to much of the previous literature on financial networks, we focus on
how anticipation of future defaults may result in ex ante "credit freezes," whereby banks refuse to
extend credit to one another. We first characterize the terms of the interbank contracts and the
patterns of interbank lending that emerge in equilibrium. We then study how shifts in the
distribution of shocks can result in complex credit freezes that travel throughout the network. We
use this framework to analyze the effects of various policy interventions on systemic credit
freezes.

Daron Acemoglu                                   James Siderius
Department of Economics                          Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
MIT                                              77 Massachusetts Ave
50 Memorial Drive                                 32-D640
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347                         Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER                                         USA
daron@mit.edu                                    siderius@mit.edu

Asuman Ozdaglar                                  Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi
Dept of Electrical Engineering                   Kellogg School of Management
and Computer Science                             Northwestern University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology            2211 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208
77 Massachusetts Ave, E40-130                    alirezat@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Cambridge, MA 02139
asuman@mit.edu
1        Introduction

By the onset of the financial crisis of 2008, the U.S. financial system had become greatly
interconnected. This not only reflected complex relations in interbank and overnight lending, but
also various kinds of securitized lending relations including in the repo market (Gorton and Metrick,
2012). A distinguishing feature of many of these transactions was the need for the lenders to assess not
just their borrowers' credit worthiness but also the creditworthiness of their borrowers' borrowers and
so on. These variegated credit relations ground to a halt following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in
September 2008, as many institutions found their access to credit to be frozen (Brunnermeier, 2009;
Adrian et al., 2013).
        Although these events have triggered a growing literature investigating the possibility of contagion
in financial networks, the main focus so far has been on ex post contagion, i.e., the possibility that
the failure of an institution triggers financial distress for its counterparties or for other companies
holding its shares.1 However, an even more important dynamic during the crisis was driven by ex ante
considerations: credit freezes induced by the fear that the future liquidity or profitability of borrowers
would be compromised (Afonso et al., 2010; Adrian et al., 2013). Such fears were visible even before the
collapse of Lehman Brothers. The run on Bear Stearns, which started on March 12, 2008, was initiated
by its inability to secure funding in the repo market (Brunnermeier, 2009). This episode was followed
by some hedge funds' inability to trade outstanding Bear Stearns debt (Kelly, 2008; Burroughs, 2008;
Gorton and Metrick, 2012), largely because institutions such as Goldman Sachs, Credit Suisse, and
Deutsche Bank had "little or no interest to renew repos in the face of concerns over the dealer bank's
solvency" (Duffie, 2010). Subsequently, the bankruptcy of the hedge fund Carlyle Corporation as well
as the severe distress felt by Merrill Lynch, Washington Mutual, and Wachovia -- which led to their
acquisition by other institutions -- were triggered by similar credit freezes, even though they did not
have any direct counterparty exposure to Lehman Brothers. A similar credit freeze appears to have
been important in the downfall of the UK bank Northern Rock (Brunnermeier, 2009). Some authors,
such as Allen and Babus (2009), suggest interbank credit freezes may have begun as early as August
2007.
        In this paper, we develop an elementary model of ex ante credit freezes. We consider an economy
consisting of depositors with access to funds and entrepreneurs with access to profitable investment
opportunities. The economy also consists of a collection of banks that can intermediate between
the depositors and the entrepreneurs. We capture the possibility of financial intermediation by a
network, according to which each bank can lend to any bank or entrepreneur it is connected to.
The connections in this network may represent existing relationships or trust between the parties.
Interbank contracts are determined by potential lenders making offers to potential borrowers. We
focus on fixed-interest-rate contracts, according to which the lender commits to a pre-specified
interest rate and the borrower can decide to borrow as much as it desires at that rate. A borrower that
is unable to meet its borrowing obligations (say, due to a liquidity shock) defaults and repays nothing
to any of it creditors. Therefore, in anticipation of such an event, a potential lender may alternatively
    1
   For example, see Acemoglu et al. (2015), Cabrales et al. (2016), Elliott et al. (2014), Gai and Kapadia (2010), Jorion and
Zhang (2009), and Allen and Gale (2000).


                                                             1
decide to "freeze" the borrower's access to credit in order to avoid potential future losses.
   We start by analyzing subgame perfect equilibria of the lending and borrowing game described
above under sequential offers and borrowing, characterizing the terms of the interbank contracts and
the patterns of interbank lending. Though there are many subgame perfect equilibria, we show that
there exists a unique "strong" equilibrium in pure strategies, where decisions to offer and borrow are
robust to other banks deviating slightly from their equilibrium strategies. While the details of this
unique equilibrium may differ depending on the order of offers made, we show that whether there is
ultimately lending to entrepreneurs (who are located at the leaves of the network) is not sensitive to
this choice. We then proceed to characterize the structure of equilibria and conditions for different
types of credit freezes in response to changes in the distribution of future liquidity shocks, which may
increase banks' default probabilities.
   In networks with a single entrepreneur, we show that all credit freezes are monotone and systemic :
an adverse shift in the distribution of shocks can only induce more credit freezes throughout the
economy and, in the extreme, cuts all banks' access to credit. We further show that credit freezes
in tree networks (where each bank can borrow from at most one other bank) are "simple" in the sense
that they remain confined to the branch of the financial network that experienced the adverse shift.
For a chain (where each bank borrows from and lends to at most one other bank), we provide a tight
characterization of the likelihood of credit freezes in response to changes in the distribution of shocks.
   With multiple entrepreneurs, however, the form of potential credit freezes becomes significantly
richer. First, credit freezes may originate not with the affected bank but somewhere else in the
network. Such complex freezes arise because an anticipated (future) liquidity shock to a bank affects
the profitability of banks in very different parts of the network, pushing some of those from a safe
into a precarious position. In particular, one risky bank may cause other banks to have their credit
frozen, even though the afflicted bank, and all of its lenders and borrowers, do not lose access to credit.
Second, the effects of adverse shifts can be non-monotonic, in the sense that greater risks for some
banks can increase overall lending in the network. Such an outcome may arise when the worsening
situation of a bank allows a competitor to take over some of its customers, improve its riskiness and
creditworthiness, and then expand further.
   We conclude the paper by considering the role of policy in reducing the extent of credit freezes
in a lending network. Specifically, we allow the central bank to offer assistance to a subset of banks
in the form of a discount window or through asset purchases. When a freeze occurs in a chain, we
show that an untargeted policy, where the central bank improves financial conditions as a whole --
for example, by subsidizing interest rates -- does no worse than a targeted policy, which attempts to
alleviate distress in the most vulnerable part of the network. Beyond chains, however, a targeted policy
can be more effective. When freezes are simple, we show that the best targeted policy helps the branch
of the network with banks experiencing a credit freeze. In contrast, with complex freezes, optimal
targeted policies may need to be directed to parts of the network not suffering from credit freezes
(because these seemingly unaffected banks may still be at the epicenter of the crisis). These results
suggest that, as the network becomes more interconnected, the optimal policy response becomes
increasingly more complex and is more sensitive to the underlying financial network structure.



                                                    2
Related Literature     In addition to the literature on ex post contagion in financial networks mentioned
earlier, our paper is related to a growing literature that emphasizes how ex ante fears of declining asset
values or fire sales can induce credit freezes.2 For example, Diamond and Rajan (2011) develop a
model of market freeze based on fears of future fire sales, while Caballero and Simsek (2013) provide
a model of liquidity hoarding where banks that are uninformed about the health of their borrowers'
borrowers may come to fear future contagion and start offloading risky assets for protection. Similar
to our work, credit freezes in these models have their origins in the interconnections in the financial
system. However, and in contrast to the prior literature, our main focus is on how the structural
properties of the financial network shape the fear of contagion and the nature of resulting credit
freezes.
      A related strand of literature focuses on endogenous formation of financial networks and the
extent of systemic risk when banks strategically choose their trading partners (Ahnert and Georg, 2018;
Leitner, 2005; Acemoglu et al., 2014; Blume et al., 2011).3 We build on this literature by developing a
framework in which banks endogenously choose the terms of interbank contracts, while taking into
account the potential for future defaults. However, in contrast to this previous work, our focus is on
how these considerations can lead to widespread credit freezes prior, at the network formation stage.
      Most immediately related to our work is Anand, Gai, and Marsili (2012), where lending decisions
take the form of a coordination game: banks decide whether to rollover short-term credit when facing
the risk of the borrower defaulting if it cannot secure enough funding from other lenders. Using the
setting proposed by Allen and Babus (2009), they show that an uptick in the risk of a few counterparties
can lead to widespread credit freezes. Similar mechanisms are explored by Ahnert (2016), Infante and
Vardoulakis (2019), Zhou (2016), and Liu (2019). In contrast to these papers, credit freezes in our model
are driven entirely by fundamentals.
      Our model of credit freeze combines many of the ideas from this literature, but provides the
following new contribution: in an interconnected financial system, the fear of ex post default cascades
can lead to ex ante credit freezes. These credit freezes negatively impact market liquidity and can
prevent safe institutions from having access to short-term funding. Because of the interconnectedness
of the financial system, decisions to reduce lending can invoke responses from other banks to do
the same. As a result, the propagation of credit freeze throughout the system can destroy the many
benefits of financial interconnectivity. For example, freezes in the interbank lending market can
reduce efficiency for business loans due to monopolistic pricing (as in Corbae and Gofman (2019))
or restrict the redistribution of liquidity to meet reserve/capital requirements (Freixas et al., 2011).
Finally, in contrast to Anand, Gai, and Marsili (2012) and others, we link banks' ex ante lending
decisions -- including the possibility of credit freezes -- to models of ex post contagion studied
extensively in earlier literature.
  2
   Brunnermeier (2009) and Duffie (2010) for general discussions.
  3
    Also see Zawadowski (2013), Farboodi (2017), and Erol (2019), who study how endogenous formation of financial
networks can shape systemic risk.




                                                       3
2      Model

Consider an economy consisting of a collection of risk-neutral financial institutions denoted by B =
{1, . . . , n}, a unit mass of identical depositors indexed 0, and a finite collection of entrepreneurs E . The
economy lasts for three periods, t = 0, 1, 2. At the initial period, agents can enter into pairwise lending
agreements that specify the interest rates at which they can borrow from one another; borrowing and
lending occur at t = 1 according to the terms specified at t = 0; and all debts are due at t = 2.
      The representative depositor is endowed with an unlimited supply of funds at t = 0 and has
access to a linear risk-free technology with a (gross) rate of return r0 , which is realized at t = 2. Each
entrepreneur j  E , on the other hand, has access to a safe but "bulky" investment opportunity of size
                           , realized at t = 2. Thus, as long as r  > r , there are gains from trade (for one
$1 with a rate of return ri                                       i    0
unit of investment) between entrepreneur i and the representative depositor.
      In addition to the depositors and the entrepreneurs, the economy comprises a collection
of financial institutions B (banks, for short) that can serve as potential intermediaries between
depositors and entrepreneurs. Each bank i  B has an asset with random return i that is realized
at t = 2. These assets represent the uncertain returns of all outside projects undertaken by the banks
that are not captured in our stylized lending market. Furthermore, every bank i has an outside liability
with face value vi > 0 due at t = 2, which is senior to its all other obligations. These liabilities
may represent employee wages, operational costs, or any other form of senior debt. We refer to the
difference zi = i - vi as the (liquidity) shock to bank i and assume that z = (zi )iB is distributed
independently across banks according to some probability distribution Q, which we refer to as the
economy's risk profile.
      While there are potential gains from trade between entrepreneurs and depositors, the parties may
not be able to trade with one another directly. We assume that each agent can only enter into pairwise
contracts with a subset of other agents in the economy. Such intermediation frictions may arise due
to transaction costs, agency problems, search frictions, or regulatory restrictions. We represent these
trading frictions by an exogenously-given directed network G of potential lending opportunities, or
(opportunity) network, with each vertex corresponding to an agent (bank, depositor, or entrepreneur)
in the economy. A directed edge is present from agent i to agent j (denoted by i  j ) if i and j can
enter into a bilateral contract, with i serving as a lender to j . Given the network of possible trading
relationships G, we define Nin (j ) = {i : i  j  G} and Nout (j ) = {k : j  k  G} as the sets of
potential lenders and borrowers of j , respectively. We impose the natural assumption that Nout (i) = 
for all entrepreneurs i  E and Nin (0) =  for the representative depositor.

2.1     Timing and Interbank Contracts

At t = 0, each agent can offer take-it-or-leave-it fixed-interest rate lending contracts to its potential
borrowers in network G, whereby the lender commits to provide the borrower with as much funds
as desired at the offered interest rate. These offers are made sequentially according to a pre-specified
order, but can be withdrawn at the end of the period.
      Formally, we assume that period t = 0 consists of 2n + 2 sub-periods denoted by  = 1, . . . , 2n + 2.


                                                      4
In sub-period   n + 1, agent j = O( ) has the option to make an offer with a constant interest rate
Rj k to any potential borrower k  Nout (j ), where O : {1, . . . , n + 1}  B  {0} is a mapping that
specifies the order at which agents can make offers to one another at t = 0. The contract with face
value Rj k is a commitment by j to lend to k at the fixed interest rate Rj k . We use Rj k =  to
denote the scenario in which j refuses to make any offer to k . While lenders cannot revise the terms
of the contracts they offer to their potential borrowers, we assume they can opt out of any contract in
the second half of the period once all offers are made. More specifically, in sub-period  > n + 1, bank
j = O( - n - 1) can choose to withdraw any of the contracts Rj k made to its potential borrowers
k  Nout (j ), in which case, Rj k =  (which take place in the same order O with which offers are
made). Otherwise, bank j remains committed to lending to k at interest rate Rj k .4
       Once the contracting stage at t = 0 is over, each agent can borrow as much as desired from its
potential lenders at t = 1. The borrowing decisions are made sequentially according to a pre-specified
order L. More specifically, we assume that period t = 1 consists of n + |E| sub-periods and that, at
sub-period  , agent j = L( ) chooses to borrow xij units of funds from each bank i  Nin (j ) at the
pre-specified rate Rij , provided that Rij = . Throughout, we assume that if the lender i cannot
meet its commitments to deliver the funds to all its borrowers at t = 1, it faces a prohibitively large
cost (imposed, say, by a regulator). This assumption therefore guarantees that, in any equilibrium,

                                                         xij                 xj k .                                       (1)
                                             iNin (j )          kNout (j )

       The final period, t = 2, corresponds to the time period at which the value of all outside investments
are realized and all debts are due. More specifically, we assume that after the realization of z, each bank
j chooses an amount yj i to repay its obligation Rij xij to any lender i that it has borrowed from.
To make these repayments, j may use funds generated from its net outside investments zj = j - vj
and its own receivable payments,             kNout (j ) ykj .   Throughout, we assume that j 's failure to meet its
t = 2 obligations results in two types of costs. First, any shortfall in j 's payments to its creditors results
in a costly liquidation process, which prevents j from paying anything to any of its creditors, that is,
yj i = 0 if zj +       k ykj   <     k   Rkj xkj .5 Second, we assume that if the borrower j defaults on its
obligation to i, it faces an exogenous bankruptcy cost F  0, which may correspond to reputational
costs and legal fees associated with bankruptcy.
   4
     This stage is introduced to rule out equilibria that may arise due to coordination failures: banks may refuse to extend
credit to others if they worry that no bank will subsequently extend them a credit line with sufficiently favorable terms. The
withdrawal stage in the model rules out the possibility of such miscoordinations. See Di Maggio and Tahbaz-Salehi (2014)
for a discussion.
   5
     This assumption thus rules out the possibility of "fractional defaults" as in Eisenberg and Noe (2001) and Acemoglu,
Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2015), whereby banks may only default on a fraction of their obligations to their creditors.




                                                              5
      Taken together, the net profit of bank j  B at the end of t = 2 is given by
                    
                       zj +    ykj -       Rij xij       if zj +    ykj         Rij xij
                    
                             k           i                       k            i
                    
               j = -F                                    yj i < Rij xij for any i  Nin (j )          (2)
                    
                                                         otherwise,
                    
                       0

with the convention that xij = 0 (and Rij xij = 0) if Rij = .

2.2     Financial Networks

The interest rate and borrowing decisions at t = 0 and t = 1 can be summarized by the pair
(R, x), where R and x denote the vectors of interest rates and borrowing decisions of all agents,
respectively. Throughout, and with some abuse of terminology, we refer to the tuple (R, x) as the
economy's financial network. Note that while the underlying (opportunity) network G is assumed to
be exogenous, the financial network (R, x) is an endogenous equilibrium object and depends on the
lenders' offered contracts as well as the borrowers' borrowing decisions.
      Any financial network (R, x) can alternatively be represented by a pair of directed, weighted
subnetworks of G, capturing the pairwise interest rates and quantities. More specifically, we define
the interest rate network R by removing all potential lender-borrower pairs i  j from G such that
Rij = . Hence, while G consists of all agents that can trade with one another at t = 0, the interest
rate network defined by R consists of agents that can trade with each other at t = 1. Similarly, we
define the borrowing network by removing all potential lender-borrower pairs i  j from G such that
xij = 0. Thus, the borrowing network captures the set of agents that end up trading with one another
at t = 1. Note that, by definition, the lending network is necessarily a subnetwork of the interest rate
network.
      We say that two financial networks are equivalent if (i) their corresponding borrowing networks
coincide and (ii) the corresponding interest rate networks coincide wherever there is an edge in their
(common) borrowing network. Put differently, (R, x) and (R , x ) are equivalent if x = x and Rij =
Rij whenever xij > 0. Note that two financial networks are equivalent even if their interest rate
networks differ, provided that these differences occur along edges of G where there is no borrowing.

2.3     Solution Concept

We conclude this section by defining our solution concept. Recall that all interest rate offers are made
at t = 0, the borrowing decisions are made at t = 1, and all repayments occur at t = 2. We therefore
proceed by defining and characterizing the equilibrium recursively using backward induction.
      We start by focusing on the economy at t = 2, when the financial network and hence all interest
rates R and borrowing decisions x are already determined. Recall that each bank j is committed
to repay Rij xij to each of its lender i  Nin (j ). The bank, however, may not be able to meet its
obligations, in which case it defaults. More specifically, if ykj denotes the amount that j receives

                                                     6
from its borrower k , then j defaults if zj +        kNout (j ) ykj   <    iNin (j ) Rij xij .   Furthermore, recall
that, by assumption, any shortfall in j 's payments to its creditors results in a costly liquidation process
that prevents j from paying anything to any of its creditors. Thus, the amount yj i that j is able to
repay bank i satisfies
                                    
                                    Rij xij            if zj +       ykj          Rij xij
                           yj i =                                k            i                                     (3)
                                                       otherwise,
                                    
                                    0

where zj denotes the shock to bank j . Since all repayments occur simultaneously, we can define the
following concept:

Definition 1. Given financial network (R, x) and vector of realized shocks z, a repayment equilibrium
is a collection of interbank repayments y = (yj i )(j i)G that satisfies the system of equations (3) for
all pairs of banks i and j .

    With the above notion in hand, we can now proceed to the borrowing stage at t = 1, when the
quantities are determined.

Definition 2. Given vector of interbank interest rates R, a borrowing equilibrium is a collection of
interbank borrowing decisions x and repayments y (R, x, z) such that

  (i) y (R, x, z) is a repayment equilibrium for financial network (R, x) and shock realization z;

 (ii) each bank j makes its borrowing decisions (xij )iNin (j ) to maximize its expected profits in (2).6

    Borrowing equilibria have two important properties. First, in any borrowing equilibrium, banks
borrow exactly as much as they lend out, that is, inequality (1) holds as an equality for all banks i. This
is consequence of the fact that both underborrowing and overborrowing are unprofitable: the former
results in a cost imposed by the regulator, whereas the latter requires the bank to pay interest on funds
that are not invested. Second, in any borrowing equilibrium, banks borrow this entire amount from
lenders with the best terms (i.e., lowest interest rate) and split their demand amongst multiple lenders
only if they offer the same exact interest rate.
    We are now ready to define the economy's full equilibrium, which endogenizes the terms of the
contracts at t = 0.

Definition 3. A (subgame perfect) equilibrium is a collection of interest rates R, borrowing decisions
x(R), and repayments y (R, x, z) such that

  (i) y (R, x, z) is a repayment equilibrium at t = 2 given the financial network (R, x) and any z;

 (ii) the tuple (x, y ) is a borrowing equilibrium at t = 1 given the interest rates R;

(iii) each bank i chooses the interest rates (Rij )j Nout (i) at t = 0 to maximize its expected profits.
   6
     This statement assumes that, given financial network (R, x), the repayment equilibrium at t = 2 is unique for all
realizations of z. We show in the Appendix that, for all z, the repayment equilibrium is indeed unique for any financial
network emerging in equilibrium.


                                                           7
        According to the above definition, each agent chooses an optimal interest rate for every observable
history in the sequential offering stage at t = 0, anticipating that the borrowing decisions and
repayments will be determined via borrowing and repayment equilibria, respectively.
        Unlike borrowing equilibria, the interest rate offers made in equilibrium can be quite complex.
For instance, the interest rate offered by bank i to a potential borrower j depends not only on
j 's counterparty risk, but also on the default risk of j 's potential borrowers, that of its borrowers'
borrowers, and so on. Furthermore, the face value of the interest rates also depends on the nature
of the competition induced by the network. Last but not least, there may be multiple subgame perfect
equilibria, as banks could play weakly dominated strategies as a best response.
        To rule out such economically uninteresting equilibria, we consider a refinement of our solution
concept defined in Definition 3. This refinement, which we refer to as strong equilibrium, is a variant
of agent-form trembling-hand perfect equilibrium, with the set of trembles restricted to thick-tailed
distributions.7 Importantly, our equilibrium notion implies that, at the sub-period with the option to
make an offer, each bank makes arbitrarily small trembles around its equilibrium offer.8 As we will
show in the subsequent sections, this refinement ensures essential uniqueness of equilibrium in our
game.


3        Equilibrium Characterization

In this section, we first establish the existence of an equilibrium in our environment and show that the
equilibrium financial network is generically unique. We then provide a characterization of financial
networks that are formed in equilibrium. These results will serve as the basis of our comparative statics
analyses in Section 4.

3.1       Existence and Uniqueness

We start with a general existence result.

Theorem 1. Let G denote an arbitrary network.

(a) There exists a repayment equilibrium for any financial network (R, x) and any vector of shocks z.

(b) There exists a borrowing equilibrium for any given vector of interest rates R.

(c) There exists a strong equilibrium in pure strategies.

        While Theorem 1 guarantees the existence of a strong equilibrium for any G, in general, the
equilibrium may not be unique. For instance, for any equilibrium in which bank i does not make
an offer to bank j , there are many other equilibria in which bank i makes an offer to bank j , but with a
prohibitively large interest rate; in either case, j will not borrow from i. To rule out such economically
uninteresting multiplicity, we define the following concept:
    7
      This restriction is introduced in order to ensure that the best response of banks when offering interest rates to their
potential borrowers converge to the equilibrium point in question as we take the limit of the trembles towards zero.
    8
      See Appendix A for a formal definition of strong equilibrium and more details on its implications for equilibrium
refinement. This concept is closely related to "trembling-hand perfect equilibrium" in extensive-form games.


                                                             8
Definition 4. An equilibrium is essentially unique if the financial networks corresponding to all
equilibria are equivalent.

Theorem 2. For any network G and a generic probability distribution Q(z), there is an essentially
unique strong equilibrium in pure strategies.9

       The above result thus establishes that, unlike many models of endogenous network formation,
the equilibrium financial network in our environment is essentially unique. In addition to providing
sharp predictions, this uniqueness result enables us to perform meaningful comparative statics on
how changes in the network structure and the economy's risk profile impact pairwise interest rates,
the extent of borrowing and lending, and defaults in the financial system.
       We note that the essential uniqueness result in Theorem 2 only applies to strong equilibria, and
indeed, there are often multiple subgame perfect equilibria: if interest rate trembles are ruled out,
there may be multiple best-response offers in weakly-dominated strategies. For instance, if a bank
anticipates that its contract will be undercut by a competing bank, it would be indifferent between not
offering any contracts and offering a contract at or above the equilibrium interest rate of its competitor
(including contracts that may be unprofitable). The resulting equilibrium rates and flow of funds in
the financial network depend on how such banks break these indifferences, which is pinned-down
only in a strong equilibrium.
       As a final remark, we note that the restriction that the probability distribution Q is generic cannot
be dispensed with. For instance, if two banks i and j with identical return distributions compete over
the same potential borrower k , any division of k 's borrowing decisions between i and j corresponds
to a different equilibrium. The genericity restriction on Q rules out such knife-edge indifference
situations that entail multiplicity of equilibria.

3.2      Equilibrium Financial Networks

With Theorems 1 and 2 in hand, we now proceed to characterize the financial networks that are formed
in equilibrium.

Theorem 3. Given any network G and a generic probability distribution Q(z), any strong equilibrium
is equivalent to a strong equilibrium (R , x ) such that
                                        
  (i) R and x agree, in the sense that Ri                      
                                          j =  if and only if xij > 0 for all pairs i and j ;

 (ii) the common network of R and x is a directed tree.

       Recall from Theorem 2 that, generically, all strong equilibria are equivalent to one another.
Theorem 3 provides a characterization of this equivalence class: all strong equilibria are the same
as an equilibrium in which the interest rates offered in equilibrium and all the borrowing occur along
the same directed tree that connects the representative depositor to the entrepreneurs, as depicted in
Figure 1. This is the case irrespective of whether the underlying network G is a directed tree or not.
   9
    Because the standard Lebesgue measure is not well-defined over the space of continuous probability distributions, we
use the notion of generic probability distribution from Ott and Yorke (2005). This notion is based on the use of "probes," such
as polynomial functions of order k as approximations to smooth probability distributions. Generic properties are those that
hold for almost all order k polynomials. See Appendix C for more details.


                                                              9
                                            1                          4
                                                                                    E1
                               0                          3            5
                                                                                    E2
                                            2                          6

Figure 1. This figure depicts the opportunity network G. Vertices E1 and E2 repressent two entrepreneurs and
vertex 0 represents to the depositor. Solid lines depict pairwise relationships with interest rate offers and positive
borrowing in equilibrium; dashed lines indicate relationships in G with no interest rates offered in equilibrium.


      To see the intuition for Theorem 3, first observe that the equilibrium financial network cannot
contain any directed cycles. Suppose to the contrary that there is strictly positive lending along a
(directed) cycle over the financial network. If so, all equilibrium interest rates on such a cycle must
be identical, as otherwise a bank would be lending at a rate that is strictly less than the rate it is
borrowing at. On the other hand, because there is a positive probability of default for all banks, any
bank that borrows and lends at the same exact interest rate is necessarily making negative expected
profits. Thus, the interest rates offered in any equilibrium have to induce an acyclic subnetwork over
G.
      The fact that the equilibrium financial network has a tree-like structure (and is therefore acyclic)
then follows from the fact that banks tremble around their interest rate offers. These trembles
guarantee that, no matter the structure of the underlying G, there always exists exactly one "most
competitive" lender for each bank, thus implying that the outcome that all banks except one withdraw
their offers is always an equilibrium.

3.3     Robustness

Recall from Section 2 that agents make offers to and borrow from one another sequentially according
to the exogenously-specified orders O and L, respectively. Even though Theorem 2 establishes that
the financial networks formed in the strong equilibria corresponding to a given pair of orders (O, L) all
coincide, in general, the equilibrium financial network may depend on the sequence at which banks
are able to take actions. Our next result establishes that, for networks with a single entrepreneur,
even though this dependence may matter for equilibrium interest rates and the patterns of interbank
lending, it does not impact whether the entrepreneur is eventually funded or not.

Theorem 4. Consider a financial network with a single entrepreneur and let (R, x) and (R , x ) denote
the financial networks in the essentially unique strong equilibria corresponding to order pairs (O, L)
and (O , L ), respectively. Then, the entrepreneur is funded in (R, x) if and only if it is funded in (R , x ).

      Recall that the entrepreneur has access to a bulky investment project, and so is either fully funded
or not at all in equilibrium. Theorem 4 thus establishes that the realized gains from trade between
the representative depositor and an entrepreneur, intermediated through the banking system, do not
depend on the order at which various agents can make or accept offers. As a result, whether an


                                                         10
entrepreneur is funded or not only depends on the nature of intermediation frictions (captured via
the network G) and the underlying distribution of shocks Q(z). However, the order at which various
agents can take their actions may impact how gains from trade are distributed in the economy and
which banks are more resilient to liquidity shocks at t = 2.


4      Credit Freezes in Single-Entrepreneur Economies

Having established the basic equilibrium properties, we now turn to investigating how the interaction
between the financial network architecture and distribution of shocks Q determines the possibility of
a credit freeze in the financial network, formally defined as follows:

Definition 5. Bank or entrepreneur j experiences a credit freeze in financial network (R, x) if all of
j 's potential lenders refuse to extend credit to j , i.e., if Rij =  for all j  Nin (j ). A credit freeze is
systemic if all entrepreneurs experience a credit freeze.10

      It is immediate that for any bank j experiencing a credit freeze, equilibrium borrowing satisfies
xij = xj k = 0 for all i  Nin (j ) and all k  Nout (j ). Therefore, such a bank j would be frozen out of
the borrowing network entirely, despite the possibility that there may be positive gains from trade.

4.1     Network Architecture

We start our analysis by providing comparative static results on how the economy's network can shape
the likelihood of credit freezes. To simplify the analysis, we restrict our attention to networks with a
single entrepreneur. While real-world financial networks are significantly more complex, focusing on
such networks enables us to demonstrate banks' ex ante incentives to borrow to and lend from one
another as well as the ex post consequences of such decisions in the most transparent manner. We
consider economies with multiple entrepreneurs in Section 5.
      As a first observation, note that Theorem 3(b) implies that in an economy with a single
entrepreneur, as long as there is systemic no credit freeze, the common network of R and x is
necessarily in the form of a directed chain network from the depositor to the entrepreneur. Our next
result then establishes when such an economy experiences a credit freeze.

Proposition 1. Let G contain a single entrepreneur. The entrepreneur experiences a credit freeze if and
only if it experiences a credit freeze for all chain subnetworks H  G.

      The importance of Proposition 1 is twofold. First, it establishes that, to determine whether the
economy's single entrepreneur experiences a credit freeze, it is sufficient to restrict attention to the
chain subnetworks that connect the depositor to the entrepreneur in G -- as depicted in Figure 2.
Second, it also implies that addition of new financial intermediation opportunities (in the form of
new edges in the network G) reduces the likelihood that the entrepreneur experiences a credit freeze,
as such a change can only increase the number of chain subnetworks through which credit can flow.




                                                     11
            0                 1                  2                    ···                 n                        E1


                                          Figure 2. Chain network with n banks.


The following corollary formalizes this observation:11

Corollary 1. Let G  G     ¯ denote two networks, each consisting of a single entrepreneur.                                If the
                                            ¯ , then it also experiences a credit freeze in G.
entrepreneur experiences a credit freeze in G

    In view of Proposition 1 and Corollary 1, we next turn our attention to chain networks similar to the
one depicted in Figure 2.12 It is easy to see that, in any such economy, all credit freezes are systemic, in
the sense that either the banking system functions as normal and the depositor (indirectly) funds the
entrepreneur, or all banks refuse to extend credit to their respective borrowers.13
    To express our next result, we say a risk profile Q is symmetric if Q(zi ) = Q(zj ) for all pairs of banks
i and j . We have the following result:

Theorem 5. Let G be a chain network. Then, for generic set of risk profiles Q,

                 ¯0 < r such that the economy experiences a systemic freeze if and only if r0 > r
(a) there exists r                                                                              ¯0 ;

(b) there exists r > r0 such that the economy experiences a systemic freeze if and only if r < r ;

(c) furthermore, if Q is symmetric, there exists n
                                                 ¯ such that the economy experiences a systemic freeze if
    and only if n  n
                   ¯.

    Taken together, the three parts of Theorem 5 indicate that, even when there are positive gains from
trade, the financial system may not be able to allocate depositors' excess funds to the entrepreneurs
if there are significant "intermediation frictions". In the context of the financial network in Figure 2,
intermediation frictions are captured by a long credit chain: adding one more bank to the credit chain
implies that there needs to be one more bank to intermediate funds between the depositor and the
borrower. Since each bank in the credit chain must be compensated for the risk of default in the system
-- and this compensation needs to take place via a gap between their borrowing and lending rates -- a
long enough credit chain exhausts the gains from trade between the depositor and the entrepreneur.14
Note that this is true even when all banks are almost perfectly safe. The following example clarifies the
working of this mechanism.
   10
      Throughout we refer to credit freezes in order to emphasize that following a change in the distribution of shocks Q, the
decision not to lend by some banks leads to stoppages in credit flows.
   11
      This result only holds for economies with a single entrepreneur. As we show in Section 5, the impact of increased
competition on lending is ambiguous when there are multiple entrepreneurs in the network.
   12
      Note, however, that the chain subnetwork along which lending takes place is endogenously determined, as it depends
on the structure of G and the shock distribution Q. Hence, limiting attention to arbitrary chain networks is not without loss
of generality.
   13
      Formally, there is always a strong equilibrium where either (i) $1 flows from the depositor to the entrepreneur or (ii)
there is a systemic credit freeze. However, there may be other equivalent strong equilibria, for instance, where bank 1 offers
a prohibitively large interest rate to bank 2, but with no flow of funds anywhere in the chain.
   14
      Notice the contrast with Corollary 1: while the corollary considers the addition of a link to a network (with a given set of
banks), this theorem considers adding a new bank to a chain network (which thus removes a link and adds two new links to
the new bank).


                                                               12
Example 1. Let G denote the n-bank chain with representative depositor 0, banks {1, . . . , n}, and a
single entrepreneur, as in Figure 2. Assume every bank is subject to i.i.d. shocks zi  {-M,  }, where
M is some large positive constant,   (0, 1), and return zi =  occurs with probability 1 - , for some
small  > 0.15 Thus, with a high probability, the bank has a moderate and positive return, but with
some small probability , the shock wipes out the bank. To simplify the analysis, we set the default
cost F to 0.
    Given the simple structure of the chain, we can solve for equilibrium interest rates recursively.
First, observe that if bank n lends to the entrepreneur, it demands an interest rate RnE = r , where
r is the rate of return on the entrepreneur's project. Also note that if bank n - 1 lends to bank n, it also
charges r , i.e., Rn-1n = r . This is because if n - 1 charges an interest rate above r , bank n prefers
not to engage in interbank lending at all. Next, consider the problem of bank n - i - 1 lending to bank
n - i. The former does not receive a repayment from the latter if any of the banks indexed n - i + 1
through n have a bad return, an event that occurs with probability 1 - (1 - )i . Therefore, bank n - i - 1
lends to bank n - i if and only if

                            (1 - )i+2 ( + Rn-i-1n-i - Rn-i-2n-i-1 )  (1 - ).

The left-hand side of the above equation is the expected profit of n - i - 1 of lending to n - i, whereas
the right-hand side is equal to the bank's expected profit if it does not engage in interbank lending and
borrowing. Consequently, the equilibrium interest rates satisfy the recursion
                                                                       1 - (1 - )i
                                   Rn-i-1n-i = Rn-in-i+1 -                         ,
                                                                         (1 - )i
which, coupled with the initial condition Rn-1n = r , leads to the following closed-form expression
for equilibrium interest rates
                                                                 (1 - (1 - )i )
                                      Rn-i-1n-i = r + i -
                                                                  (1 - )i-1                                            (4)
                                                     = r - i(i - 1)/2 + o().
Equation (4) illustrates that, for small values of , the interest rate markups needed to support
interbank lending grow quadratically in the length of the chain. This is because counterparty risk
intensifies with the length of the chain due to fears of downstream defaults. Therefore, holding the
aggregate gains from trade r - r0 fixed, a credit freeze arises for any interbank lending chain exceeding
length n
       ¯=       2(r - r0 )/().
    We conclude this discussion by noting that, while the breakdown of intermediation in long chains
predicted by Theorem 5 is similar to the results of Di Maggio and Tahbaz-Salehi (2014), the freezes
in the two models are driven by fundamentally different forces. As we argued already, in our model,
banks' refusal to extend credit lines to potential borrowers is driven by counterparty risk and the fear
of defaults by their direct or indirect borrowers. In contrast, credit freezes in Di Maggio and Tahbaz-
Salehi (2014) are due to the build up of moral hazard over intermediation chains: if intermediation
chains are long enough, the volume or distribution of collateralizable assets may not be sufficient to
counteract the agency problems.
  15
     We restrict  to be in (0, 1) so that no bank can fully absorb a counterparty loss. This assumption guarantees that any
default cascade that begins at some agent j propagates upstream to all its direct and indirect lenders.


                                                            13
4.2       Risk Profile

In our next set of results, we study how changes in the economy's risk profile -- that is, distribution Q
of shocks z -- shapes the likelihood and nature of credit freezes.

Definition 6. Risk profile Q stochastically dominates Q if Qi (zi ) first-order stochastically dominates
Qi (zi ) for all i. If, in addition, Qi (zi ) strictly dominates Qi (zi ), we say bank i experiences an adverse
shift in the distribution of shocks (or adverse shift for short) in response to a change from Q to Q.

       The notion of stochastic dominance defined above is weaker than the more restrictive notion of
statewise dominance, according to which, for any realized state of the world at t = 2, the liquidity
shocks under Q are always more favorable than those under Q for all banks. Furthermore, note that
following an adverse shift in the distribution of shocks, no bank has more liquidity under Q than under
Q (in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance) and every bank subject to an adverse shift has
strictly less liquidity in some states of the world at t = 2.

Proposition 2. Let G be a chain network with risk profile Q. If there is no systemic freeze, then there
       ¯ > 0 such that for all F > F
exists F                           ¯ , whenever Q stochastically dominates Q, there is no systemic freeze
under Q .

       Proposition 2 captures the intuitive result that systemic credit freezes are tightly linked to the risk
faced by the banks: a deterioration in the banks' returns (in the sense of Definition 6) can result in
more systemic freezes.
       We remark that the requirement of a large default cost F in Proposition 2 cannot be dispensed with.
On the one hand, a shift in the distribution of shocks towards a dominated distribution decreases the
profitability of bank i (holding the contracts and the borrowing decisions constant), which makes
bank i more likely to default. This, in turn, decreases the profitability of the loans made by i's direct
and indirect lenders, making lending on the whole less attractive. On the other hand, however, in the
response to such a shift in the risk profile, bank i's risk attitudes also change: bank i becomes less
averse to potential risky interbank lending. Although its direct and indirect borrowers are now more
likely to default, the limited liability constraint leads to an increase in i's risk appetite. When the bank
faces a large default cost F , the first effect dominates the second.

Definition 7. Risk profile Q has more tail risks than risk profile Q if

  (i) Qi (zi ) - Qi (zi ) is constant over zi  [-r , r ];

 (ii) Qi (zi ) single-crosses Qi (zi ) at some i  r ;16

for all i.

       The first part of the definition ensures that the two distributions are similar "in the middle". The
second part imposes that all corresponding marginal distributions single-cross at i  r and thus
guarantees that, while the likelihood of being at or below the single-crossing point i is the same for
  16
       See Chateauneuf et al. (2004).


                                                            14
both Qi (zi ) and Q (zi ), the liquidity shocks are more likely to take extreme values under Q than under
Q. Furthermore, the requirement that the single-crossing points i are sufficiently positive guarantees
that an increase in the tail risk in sense of Definition 7 does not increase bank i's likelihood of survival,
even in the event of downstream default. We have the following result:
Proposition 3. Let G be a chain network and suppose Q has more tail risks than Q. If there is a systemic
freeze under Q, then there is a systemic freeze under Q .
       The intuition underlying this result is straightforward. Limited liability implies that an increase
in the tail risk of a bank's investment (in the sense of Definition 7) (i) increases the bank's upside risk
conditional on survival, (ii) raises the likelihood of default, but (iii) has only a small impact on its
expected losses in case of default. As a result, an increase in the bank's tail risk makes lending to this
bank less attractive, while also increasing the likelihood of default cascades to its direct and indirect
lenders. Proposition 3 therefore suggests that any change in market conditions that raises tail risks --
such as greater volatility in the values of the held by the banks -- will increase the likelihood of credit
freezes.17
       So far we have assumed that liquidity shocks across banks are independent. Next, we study how
the nature of credit freezes depends on the correlation across banks' liquidity shocks. To simplify
the analysis, we assume that liquidity shocks z = (z1 , . . . , zn ) are jointly normally distributed with
common mean E[zi ] = µ > 0, common variance var(zi ) =  2 , and pairwise correlations  > -1/(n - 1).
By Proposition 3, credit freezes become more likely as  increases. This is a consequence of the fact
that the probability of a tail event that leads to a default is growing in  . Our next result relates the
likelihood of a credit freeze to the correlation parameter .
Proposition 4. Suppose that banks' liquidity shocks are jointly normally distributed. Then, there exists
F > 0 and ¯ < 1 such that there is no credit freeze if  > ¯ and F < F .
       The above result is related to the risk-stacking mechanism of Elliot, Hazell, and Georg (2018) and
Jackson and Pernoud (2019). When banks' liquidity shocks are highly correlated, interbank lending
is less risky: all banks fail in the same states of the world, irrespective of whether they enter into
interbank lending contracts or not. Default cascades are therefore immaterial in the sense that
they do not pose any extra risk on the banks. Banks will then be willing to extend lending to their
potential borrowers. Conversely, as the asset returns become less correlated (or negatively correlated),
interbank loans become less profitable, as this increases the likelihood of a default contagion in
the states of the world where bank i's returns are positive. Consequently, a sufficient reduction in
correlation  results in a credit freeze.18
       We conclude this discussion by going beyond the chain network structure and considering credit
freezes in the more general class of economies with a single entrepreneur. To this end, we focus on
adverse shifts to a specific subset of banks, which enables us to isolate credit freezes arising from
network effects from those driven entirely by immediate counterparty concerns.
  17
      These observations also imply that if we allow banks to choose the riskiness of their outside investments, limited liability
may push them towards riskier assets, but with significant negative systemic implications.
   18
      A high bankruptcy cost F encourages banks to diversify in order to avoid costly default. Our assumption that F < F
ensures that the lack of diversification as shocks become more correlated does not dominate the increase in expected profits
from making the loans.


                                                               15
Proposition 5. Suppose the economy consists of a single entrepreneur and consider adverse shifts to a
                                          ¯ such that for all F > F
subset of banks R  B . Then, there exists F                       ¯ credit freezes are monotone in the
sense that

(a) if all banks j  R experienced a credit freeze before the adverse shift, all banks in R continue to
         experience a credit freeze;

(b) total lending to the entrepreneur never increases.

         Statement (a) of the above proposition establishes the intuitive result that a deterioration in a
bank's distribution of liquidity shocks cannot result in access to new credit: the bank's potential
creditors can only face higher risks and hence will be less likely to extend it a credit line. Statement (b)
of Proposition 5 then illustrates that the consequences of such deterioration may propagate further
downstream in the credit chain and potentially lead to a credit freeze for the entrepreneur. This result
is a consequence of the fact that lending in a single-entrepreneur economy is always in the form of a
single intermediation chain from the depositor to the entrepreneur, irrespective of the structure of the
network (Theorem 3). As a result, adverse shifts in the distribution of shocks in the sense of Definition
6 can only divert incentives away from lending along this path of the financial network.19


5         Credit Freezes with Multiple Entrepreneurs

In Section 4, we focused on economies with a single entrepreneur and showed that credit freezes are
systemic (Proposition 1) and monotone (Proposition 5). In this section, we show that in economies
with multiple entrepreneurs, credit freezes may take more complex forms. In particular, we show that,
in the presence of multiple entrepreneurs, credit freezes are not necessarily systemic (in the sense
that only some part of the financial network may come to a standstill), they may occur in the part
of the network not affected by adverse shifts, and that the response to an adverse shift may be non-
monotone. We establish these results by means of a series of examples.

5.1        Simple Freezes

We first focus on networks G in the form of directed trees by assuming that every bank has exactly one
potential lender, though it may have multiple potential borrowers.20 This structural restriction shuts
down any effect arising from competition between banks over lending contracts. We investigate the
effect of competition in the next subsection.

Definition 8. Consider adverse shifts to a subset of banks R  B. We say any resulting freeze is simple
if, for each bank j  R there exists a bank j   B such that:

    (i) bank j is a direct or indirect borrower of j  ;
    19
     Note that, in this proposition, we assume large values of F to control for risk attitudes, as in Proposition 2 (see the
discussion in Section 4.2).
  20
     Recall from Theorem 3 that while, in equilibrium, interbank borrowing and lending always occurs in a tree structure, the
opportunity network G need not be a tree. We now separately consider the implications of a tree opportunity network.


                                                             16
 (ii) all banks experiencing a credit freeze after the adverse shift are also (direct or indirect) borrowers
     of j  .

   In the context of the directed tree networks we consider in this subsection, a simple freeze
corresponds to a scenario in which all banks belong to the same subtree of the network. From
Proposition 1, since all credit freezes with a single entrepreneur are systemic, they are also simple.

Proposition 6. If G is a directed tree, adverse shifts in the distribution of shocks induce only simple
freezes.

   To illustrate the nature of credit freezes and how they may propagate in directed trees, we next
provide two examples. Our first example illustrates how an adverse shift to bank i can cause credit
freezes to initiate at bank i, and then propagate upstream and downstream to its potential lenders
and borrowers, leading to a credit freeze in an entire subtree of the network. Our second example
shows why, even though freezes are simple in tree networks, an adverse shift may lead to an increase
in total lending (regardless of F ), an outcome that is impossible in single-entrepreneur economies
(Proposition 5).


                    0                                                     0


                    1                                                     1


               2            3                                       2             3


               4    5       6                                       4     5       6


               E1   E2      E3    E4                                E1    E2     E3     E4

                         (a) before the distributional shock                   (b) after the distributional shock

Figure 3. The financial network before (panel a) and after (panel b) an adverse distributional shock to
bank 6. Solid lines depict relationships in interbank lending in equilibrium, whereas dashed lines represent
relationships in G (i.e., opportunities) which are not used in equilibrium (i.e., credit freezes).


Example 2 (Propagation of simple freezes). Consider the network in Figure 3(a) and suppose the
parameters are such that all banks lend to their designated borrowers in equilibrium. Next, consider
an adverse shift to bank 6 that increases the bank's likelihood of default. A sufficient increase in bank
6's default likelihood would make it unprofitable for bank 3 to lend to bank 6, thus resulting in a credit
freeze for entrepreneurs E3 and E4 .
   But note that the adverse shift to bank 6 may also result in a credit freeze for entrepreneur E2 , as
depicted in Figure 3(b), even though there is no direct or indirect lending relationship between bank

                                                        17
6 and E2 . To see this possibility, note that before the shift in the shock distribution, bank 3 (indirectly)
funded the three entrepreneurs and all these loans were profitable. After the adverse shift, however,
the only profitable lending available to bank 3 would be to fund E2 via bank 5. However, this reduction
in bank 3's profitability reduces bank 1's incentive to lend to bank 3: bank 3 is less profitable, while
facing the same or even perhaps higher default risk. This may make the loan to bank 3 unprofitable
at any interest rate, thereby creating a freeze from bank 1 to bank 3. As bank 3 loses access to credit,
bank 5 and entrepreneur E2 also experience a credit freeze.



                     0                                                      0


                            1                                                      1


              E1            3            2                            E1           3            2


              E2            4                                         E2           4

                         (a) before the distributional shock                    (b) after the distributional shock

Figure 4. The financial network before (panel a) and after (panel b) a shock to bank 3. Solid lines depict
relationships in interbank lending in equilibrium, while dashed lines represent relationships in G that are not
used in equilibrium (i.e., credit freezes).


Example 3 (Non-monotone freeze in trees). Consider the economy depicted in Figure 4. To directly
contrast with Proposition 2, suppose that F  , so that default is very costly. Let the liquidity shock
to each bank i be zi  {-i , +} for some            0, where both outcomes are equally likely. Furthermore,
let us assume that 1 = 3 = 0, and that 0 < 2 < 4 < 1.
   In such an economy, bank 1 faces a trade-off between the volume of the loan and the interest rate
it can charge. On the one hand, if bank 1 charges R12 = r - 2 , then bank 2 charges R23 = r to
bank 3 but does not offer a credit line to bank 4. On the other hand, if bank 1 charges R12 = r - 4 ,
then bank 2 will still charge bank 3 an interest rate of R23 = r but in addition offers a contract with
interest rate R24 = r - 4 to bank 4, thus, effectively, doubling the loan amount from bank 1 to bank
2. Hence, if the gains from trade satisfy (r - r0 ) < 24 - 2 , then bank 1 will charge R12 = r - 2
and bank 2 only makes an offer to bank 3, with the resulting equilibrium financial network depicted
in Figure 4(a).
   Now suppose we introduce a positive shift in the distribution of shocks for bank 3 that increases
the magnitude of the negative shock from 3 = 0 to 3 = 4 - 2 > 0. As long as 4 < (r - r0 ) < 24 - 2 ,
bank 1 will offer the contract R12 = r - 4 (or infinitesimally less) and bank 2 offers the contracts of
R23 = r - 3 and R24 = r - 4 to banks 3 and 4, respectively. Because the lending path through
bank 3 is more risky, bank 1 must charge a lower interest rate to bank 2 to support lending along


                                                        18
any path, which now makes the larger loan volume more attractive. This results in the equilibrium
financial network depicted in Figure 4(b).
      To summarize, even though freezes in trees are simple, the propagation of adverse shifts is
substantially richer than in networks with a single entrepreneur. First, credit freezes can spread both
upstream and downstream in the network. Second, adverse shifts can increase, rather than reduce,
lending, because they change the relative profitability of different banks in the network, potentially
shifting funding towards banks that can then significantly expand their own lending.

5.2     Complex Freezes

We now turn our attention to more general network structures and show that freezes can be complex
in non-tree-like economies, in the sense that properties (i) or (ii) of Definition 8 may no longer be
satisfied.
      We illustrate such a possibility with three examples. First, we demonstrate how an adverse shift
in the distribution of shocks in one part of the network can lead to a freeze in an entirely different
segment. Second, we provide an example where a bank experiencing an adverse shift may not lose
credit but can cause a freeze for other banks. And lastly, much like in Example 3, we show how an
adverse shift in one part of the network can induce more lending somewhere else.
Example 4 (Freezes in multiple branches). Consider the economy depicted in Figure 5. Similarly to
Example 1, assume that zi =  > 0 with probability pi and zi = -M with probability 1 - pi , where
M is some large positive constant. We assume that p1 = p2 = p4 = p6 = 1, thus implying that
the corresponding banks are always safe (conditional on no downstream defaults). Additionally, we
assume that banks A, B , and C never default so that R0A = R0B = R0C = r0 . Finally, we assume
that p5 < p3 < 1, so that there is only a small probability banks 3 and 5 experience a bad liquidity
shock, but bank 5 is riskier than bank 3.
      Suppose the equilibrium financial network before the adverse shift is pictured in Figure 5(a). The
chain from bank A to entrepreneur 2 poses no risk, so bank A would be willing to charge r0 +  for
any  > 0 which will undercut bank B given the risk from bank 3. As long as bank 5 is not too risky,
bank C has an incentive to lend to bank 5 and capture the profits from both entrepreneurs (E3 and
E4 ), despite the competition from bank 3 who only offers a loan to E3 . As long as bank 3 presents
some risk, it can be shown that bank C will be willing to undercut bank B 's offer to bank 3 because the
existence of an additional entrepreneur boosts profits.
      Now suppose we introduce an adverse shift in the distribution of shocks to bank 2. For simplicity,
suppose the asset it is holding is revealed as very toxic, so it is believed that p2  0. The equilibrium
lending network is now given by Figure 5(b). The reasoning is as follows. Bank 1 will never lend to
bank 2 since it will almost certainly default. This implies that bank B no longer faces competition in
its lending along the chain to E2 via banks 3 and 4. Since the risk of bank 3 is lower than that of bank
5, and bank B has (indirect) monopolistic access to E2 , the loan is profitable enough that it can now
compete with bank C over bank 6 (and indirectly, E3 ) as well. Given that bank 5 will not be able to
compete with bank 3 over bank 6, bank C may find the loan to bank 5 no longer profitable, resulting
in a credit freeze for E4 .

                                                    19
                                                                    E4
                                       C            5                    6            E3




                           0            B           3                    4            E2
                                                               2

                                        A           1                    E1

                                                     (a) before the distributional shock



                                                                    E4
                                        C            5                    6            E3




                           0            B            3                    4            E2
                                                               2

                                        A            1                   E1

                               (b) after the distributional shock

Figure 5. The financial network before (panel a) and after (panel b) an adverse distributional shock to
bank 2. Solid lines depict relationships in interbank lending in equilibrium, whereas dashed lines represent
relationships in G that are not used in equilibrium (i.e., credit freezes).


      In summary, unlike the simple freezes in Definition 8, an adverse shift for bank 2 results not only in
credit freezes in the branch of the financial network that bank 2 belongs to (i.e., A), but also in a credit
freeze in branch C , with E4 losing access to funding as a result.



                                       E4                                                                 E4
              C            3                                                    C            3
                                       E3                                                                 E3


0             B            2                                        0           B            2

                                       E2                                                                 E2
              A            1                                                    A            1
                                       E1                                                                 E1

            (a) before the distributional shock                               (b) after the distributional shock

    Figure 6. The financial network before (panel a) and after (panel b) an adverse distributional shock to bank 1.




                                                          20
Example 5 (Freeze only in an unaffected branch). Consider the economy depicted in Figure 6(a),
                                                                              ). Let us again use the
where the larger entrepreneur denotes a more profitable one (i.e., a larger ri
setup of the previous example, with zi  {-M,  } and zi =  with probability pi , all independently
distributed. Also suppose that banks A, B , and C never default (so that R0A = R0B = R0C = r0 )
and that bank 1 is perfectly safe conditional on no downstream defaults (i.e., p1 = 1). Finally, suppose
p3 < p2 < 1.
   Because bank 2 is safer than bank 3, bank B may be able to undercut the interest rate bank C
charges to bank 3, thereby making bank 2 more competitive over E3 . On the other hand, it cannot
undercut the interest rate bank A charges bank 1, therefore bank B will provide at most a $1 loan,
which indirectly funds E3 . However, for sufficiently low p2 , it may be the case that such a loan is not
profitable enough to warrant lending given the risk from bank 2. Therefore, bank B will freeze credit
to bank 2. Because the branch funded by bank C has access to two entrepreneurs (one of which is
monopolistic, E4 ), lending is still profitable to E3 . All entrepreneurs receive access to funding, as
pictured in Figure 6(a).
   Now suppose we introduce a small adverse shift in the distribution of shocks to bank 1, say, by
increasing its probability of a bad return so that p1 < p3 < p2 < 1. The branch funded by bank B may
now be able to compete over E2 , which increases the profitability of the loan. Since bank 2 is also less
risky than bank 3, this implies that it can compete over E3 , which may in turn induce a freeze from
bank C. As a consequence, bank 3 (and E4 ) lose access to credit, despite the fact that the adverse shift
occurs at bank 1, who continues to have access to credit from bank A, as seen in Figure 6(b).
   We observe that after an adverse shift to bank 1, bank A continues to lend to bank 1 and
entrepreneur E1 still obtains funding along the branch with bank A. However, entrepreneur E4 and
banks C and 3 lose access to credit, despite experiencing no change in riskiness along their branch.



        0                                                          0


  1             2                                            1            2


  3             4                                            3            4


 E1     E2     E3                                           E1     E2    E3


             (a) before the distributional shock                              (b) after the distributional shock

 Figure 7. The financial network before (panel a) and after (panel b) an adverse distributional shock to bank 3.


Example 6 (Non-monotone freezes). This example illustrates another type of non-monotone freezes,
whereby adverse shifts, by removing previous lending opportunities, actually improve overall lending.
As such, it is also a bridge to our discussion in the next subsection on the relationship between

                                                       21
competition and credit.
      Consider the economy depicted in Figure 7. As before, let zi  {-M,  } for some large positive
constant M and zi =  with probability pi . Suppose banks 1 and 2 never default and that p4 < p3 < 1
initially. In equilibrium, bank 3 will be more competitive than bank 4: R13  R24 . With only E3 ,
it may be unprofitable for bank 2 to lend to bank 4 altogether, so entrepreneur 3 is not funded. Now
suppose bank 3 experiences and adverse shift, which allows bank 4 to be more competitive over E2
because it will receive R13  R24 . This may be sufficient to make the loan profitable (which now
funds both E2 and E3 ). As long as the risk of bank 3 does not increase too much, E1 will still be funded
(because this loan is initially sufficiently profitable). Hence, the increase in risk to bank 3 increases the
total amount of lending in the system, and in particular allows bank 4 to gain access to credit. In other
words, introducing greater risk into the system may lead to a counterintuitive increase in lending.

5.3     Competition and Freezes

In this subsection, we study the consequences of increasing competition in the network.                   As
demonstrated in Section 4, with a single entrepreneur, increasing the number of links within a given
network of banks makes credit freezes less likely. Similarly, the same logic implies that in an economy
with multiple entrepreneurs, reducing intermediation frictions can create less risky intermediation
chains between a depositor and an entrepreneur, thereby alleviating credit freezes. However, there is
also a counteracting effect from adding new links, which arises from competition. As a consequence of
this latter effect, a reduction in the intermediation frictions between the depositor and entrepreneurs
-- in the form of adding additional lending opportunities -- does not guarantee an increase in
aggregate lending. The following example illustrates such a possibility.


          0                                                      0


  1            2                                           1           2


  3            4                                           3           4


 E1      E2    E3                                         E1    E2     E3


                    (a) Before 4  E2                                             (b) After 4  E2

Figure 8. The opportunity network before (panel a) and after (panel b) adding the opportunity 4  E2 , under
risk profile Q .


Example 7 (Effects from competition). Consider the economy depicted in Figure 8, where we define
risk profile Q as the one where bank 4 is more likely to default than bank 3, and banks 1 and 2 never
default. By adding a link from bank 4 to E2 , E3 gains access to credit and no agent loses access to


                                                     22
           0                                                    0


    1           2                                         1           2


    3           4                                         3           4


 E1       E2    E3                                       E1    E2    E3


                     (a) Before 3  E2                                           (b) After 3  E2

Figure 9. The opportunity network before (panel a) and after (panel b) adding the opportunity 3  E2 , under
risk profile Q .


credit. The mechanism for this expansion of credit is different than the one we saw in Section 4, which
was to shorten the chain along which credit travel to the entrepreneur. In contrast, here the new link
to entrepreneur E2 makes bank 4 more profitable and this then enables it to also fund entrepreneur
E3 .
       Conversely, Figure 9 shows how competition can reduce lending. Now, under risk profile Q bank
3 is slightly more likely to default than bank 4, and banks 1 and 2 never default. Consequently, before
the new link is added, bank 4 has monopolistic access over E2 and E3 . However, after, bank 3 is able
to undercut bank 4, which reduces the profits from the loans made by bank 4. This may induce bank
2 to freeze credit to bank 4, with E3 losing credit. In this case, adding a new link made total lending
decrease.
       Therefore, even though adding new links only decreases the intermediation frictions between
depositors and entrepreneurs, the impact on total lending is ambiguous because competition impacts
the profitability of different banks' loans.


6       Extensions

We consider two short extensions of interest.        First, we show that the fear of future liquidity
problems can trigger additional financial intermediation in order to insulate small institutions from
counterparty risk. This endogenous intermediation takes the form of a large institution bearing the
risk from smaller banks' potential defaults. However, this redistribution of risk in the network can lead
to a systemic credit freeze if the large bank's future solvency becomes questionable. Second, we show
that more complex financial networks may emerge when banks are allowed to offer more complex
lending contracts. However, our earlier qualitative results on credit freezes remain robust to such
changes.




                                                    23
6.1     Risk-Bearing Capacity

Recall from Theorem 5(c) that, as long as the risk profile Q is symmetric, the likelihood of a systemic
credit freeze increases in the length of the chain. This, however, is no longer true if the risk profile is
not symmetric. To illustrate such a possibility, we define a risk-bearing bank as a bank that is always
safe, regardless of whether its borrowers repay the loan. That is, bank i is risk-bearing if zi  r with
high probability, so that bank i will almost never default.

Proposition 7. Consider the chain network G with n banks and generate a new chain network G via
the subdivision of an arc i  (i + 1) in G by adding a risk-bearing bank j between i and i + 1 (i.e.,
i  j  (i + 1)). For sufficiently large F ,21 there is a credit freeze in G only if there is a credit freeze in
G.

      Therefore, Proposition 7 offers an alternative perspective to Theorem 5, in that additional
intermediation can reduce the likelihood of a credit freeze. This is a consequence of the fact that
risk-bearing banks act as firebreaks in the cascade of defaults. Channeling funds through such banks
thus reduces systemic risk and allows banks to borrow and lend profitably at lower interest rates.22




                                                           




                         0                                                                           E1


                                           Figure 10. Intermediation Network.

      For illustration, consider the network shown in Figure 10, where the initial network is a chain
consisting of two banks ( and  ). We now add a new bank  with high risk-bearing capacity, so that
bank , instead of providing funds directly to bank  , has to go through . Though this lengthens the
intermediation chain,  offers bank  protection against the potential default of  , making a systemic
freeze less likely. Thus, bank  here plays a role akin to the role played by dealer banks during times of
credit distress. As emphasized by Duffie (2010):

        "Other dealer banks are increasingly being asked to enter derivatives trades, called
        `novations,' that have the effect of inserting the other dealers between Beta and its original
        derivatives counterparties, insulating those counterparties from Beta's default risk."

      Viewed through the prism of the above quote, Proposition 7 shows the possibility for novations,
or channeling funds through an additional intermediary, can reduce the extent of credit freeze in
  21
     We require sufficiently large F for the same reason as in Proposition 2 and Proposition 5: bank  with high risk-bearing
capacity is more risk-averse to lending; this guarantees that there is no shift in risk attitudes by channeling funds through the
additional intermediary.
  22
     In the context of Example 1, inserting a risk-bearing bank resets the compensating interest rate differential between the
borrower and lender back to 0. Hence, if a fraction of the banks have risk-bearing capacity, then these differentials do not
grow unboundedly as the chain gets longer.


                                                               24
the network. This can also provide an alternative rationale for the endogenous emergence of core-
periphery structures in financial networks (Afonso et al. (2014), Gofman (2011), Bech and Atalay
(2010)).23 However, as the number of novations from other banks (other than ) to bank  increases,
or the solvency of bank  itself is called into question, its risk-bearing capacity may drop, potentially
triggering a systemic freeze.

6.2      Quantity Restrictions

We conclude this section by allowing banks to write contracts that not only specify the interest rate
but also the maximum amount they are willing to lend to each borrower. Formally, instead of each
bank i offering an interest rate Rij and allowing bank j to decide how much to borrow, bank i may
                            ¯ij for every potential borrower j  Nin (i). At t = 2, each bank j may
also specify an upper bound x
borrow as much as it desires up to the limit specified by the contract, i.e., xij  x
                                                                                   ¯ij .

Proposition 8. Suppose banks may limit the amount of lending to each borrower. Then,

(a) the equilibrium financial network is directed acyclic (and x and R agree);

(b) there is systemic freeze in the economy with quantity-restricted contracts only if there is systemic
       freeze in the original economy, without quantity-restricted contracts.

       Proposition 8(a) shows that under quantity-restricted contracts, the equilibrium financial network
is directed acyclic. This contrasts with our baseline framework, where the equilibrium financial
network is generically a tree. This is because, in general, one of the paths to an entrepreneur has a
lower cost than all other paths, ruling out the possibility that two banks are simultaneously supplying
credit to the entrepreneur or to a bank supplying credit to the entrepreneur, and so on. Even though
the form of the equilibrium financial network is more general under quantity restrictions, the major
properties of credit freezes, including examples of non-monotonicity and complex freeze, still hold
with contracts of this form.



                                                            2

                         0                 1                                 4                        E1


                                                            3

                                           Figure 11. Directed Acyclic Network.


  23
    Note that this effect is distinct from the one emphasized by Farboodi (2017). In Farboodi (2017), core banks have higher-
return but riskier projects, allowing peripheral banks to obtain intermediation rents using their own source of funds, which in
turn creates inefficient levels of systemic risk. In our case, we obtain essentially the opposite result: voluntary intermediation
comes from the fact that peripheral banks can insulate themselves and reduce potential default cascades by channeling
funds through larger "safer" intermediaries who are unlikely to default.




                                                                25
Example 8 (Directed acyclic networks with quantity-restrictions). Consider the network in Figure 11.
Suppose bank 1 is perfectly safe (i.e., z1 =              0), banks 2 and 3 have z2 = 2 < 1 and z3 = 3 < 1
(but with 2 + 3 > 1), and bank 4 has z4  {-M, } with equal probabilities, where M is some large
positive constant and             0. Then, bank 4 defaults with probability 1/2, and bank 2 (resp. bank 3)
defaults if bank 4 defaults when R12 x12 > 2 (resp. R13 x13 > 3 ). By setting x
                                                                              ¯12 < 2 and
¯13 < 3 , bank 1 ensures that it gets repaid with probability 1, which is strictly more profitable than
x
lending to only bank 2 or bank 3, who would then repay with probability only 1/2. However, when
no quantity restrictions are in place, bank 4 borrows from the bank offering a lower interest rate, thus
forcing either bank 2 or bank 3 to borrow the entire amount, which in turn generates repayment risk
to bank 1. This argument thus clarifies that the equilibrium financial network is not a directed tree,
but instead given by Figure 11.


7         Policy Responses

By definition, a credit freeze occurs when banks, despite the presence of gains from trade, refuse to
extend credit to their corresponding borrowers. As a result, credit freezes are in general inefficient. In
this section, we investigate potential policy responses by a regulator aimed at reducing inefficiencies
arising from freezes throughout the financial network.
         As illustrated by our various results and examples in Section 5, the extent and nature of credit
freezes can be quite complex. This makes characterizing the optimal policy response for a general
economy quite challenging. Instead of providing a detailed characterization of the optimal policy,
we take the approach of showing that as the financial system becomes more interconnected, the
policymaker must implement ever more sophisticated policies to handle credit freezes. Our results
thus indicate that knowledge of the underlying risks and the lending network is of critical importance
when conducting policy.
         We also demonstrate through analytical results and examples that naive policies can sometimes
exacerbate the likelihood of systemic credit freezes. Furthermore, we show that implementing the
wrong policy (e.g., one that treats a complex freeze as a simple freeze) can be worse than doing
nothing. We additionally show that, generally, the optimal policy can be significantly cheaper than
the overall amount of lending it restores, and even sometimes costless. This makes a strong case for
central bank involvement in the event of systemic freezes.24
         Our results follow the thread of Sections 4 and 5 by considering optimal policies in networks with a
single entrepreneur and then multiple entrepreneurs. Throughout, we assume that the regulator's
main policy instrument is liquidity injection, either in the form of asset purchases or a discount
window. In the context of our framework, we model such a liquidity injection policy by assuming
that the regulator can provide additional liquidity to bank j through a higher zj ; that is, a positive shift
in the distribution of shocks affecting bank j .
    24
   For discussions of optimal policies in models based on ex post contagion, see Bernard, Capponi, and Stiglitz (2019) and
Kanik (2019).




                                                           26
7.1      General Findings

Consider a central bank with a budget B > 0 and suppose the space of available policy options is
                                                                      n
a vector of interventions           = { 0, . . . ,   n}   such that   i=0 i    B . By intervening, the central bank
introduces a shift in the distribution of shocks, where zi = zi +                 i   for every bank i.25 A positive      i   can
be interpreted as providing funds directly to bank i, either to be lent out or to insulate the bank from
default, whereas      i   < 0 corresponds to a policy that absorbs liquidity at bank i (i.e., an asset sell-off ).26
Similarly,    0   > 0 represents a cash injection at the depositor, who is then required to invest in the
interbank market (and not the outside risk-free technology).27 Given the set of feasible policies, we
say the central bank implements an untargeted policy if it provides assistance to the economy only
through the depositor (i.e.,         0   = B ). Otherwise, we say it implements a targeted policy, providing
assistance directly to some banks in the network.
       Throughout, we assume the central bank's objective is to maximize the realized gains from trade,
given by                  - r0 ), where E  is the set of entrepreneurs that are able to fund their projects.
               j E  (rj

Proposition 9. An untargeted policy is optimal in networks with a single entrepreneur.

       The intuition for this result is as follows. An untargeted policy that allocates all the funds to the
depositor allows her to charge lower interest rates profitably, as these funds are provided at little
opportunity cost. This in turn induces all other lenders (which are direct and indirect borrowers of
the depositor) to also charge lower interest rates in equilibrium, facilitating lending throughout the
chain. Because interest rates at t = 0 can be used as a tool to redistribute future liquidity at t = 2, such
an untargeted policy can necessarily mimic a targeted policy, as interest rates adjust in equilibrium
to account for the differences. However, the converse is not necessarily true: by providing funds
further downstream, a bank cannot leverage the interest rate as an instrument to redistribute liquidity
further upstream. This is because the interest rate payment of a downstream bank is conditional on its
solvency at t = 2, whereas an adjustment of an upstream interest rate is equivalent to a cash transfer
at t = 0. Therefore, with a single entrepreneur, an untargeted policy outperforms all targeted policies.
       Our next result focuses on economies with multiple entrepreneurs and considers credit freezes
that arise in response to adverse shifts for a single bank. While the policymaker only observes the
realized equilibrium financial network and not the underlying opportunity network G, we identify an
effective rescue policy as if the central banker knew which bank experienced an adverse shift, or what
the underlying (opportunity) network G was.

Proposition 10. Suppose that a financial network experiences an adverse shift of the form zj = zj - 
  25
      For simplicity, we are modeling this policy intervention as a direct liquidity injection or transfer. It is equivalent to a
subsidized loan from the central bank. In particular, if the bank has to repay the central bank an amount ri i (where ri is the
discount interest rate from the central bank) at time t = 2, provided that doing so does not put the bank in default, then all
of our results apply identically.
   26
      While in reality asset purchases do not target a single bank, we think of such a policy as targeting the distressed assets
composing this bank's balance sheet. For instance, the Fed's policy to purchase mortgage-backed securities (MBS) during
the crisis was in-part designed to target large dealer banks whose balance sheets comprised of sizable MBS positions.
   27
      Providing the depositor with liquidity does not change her incentives for lending, so the central bank must condition
these funds on their use for interbank lending. The policy is equivalent to one where the central bank acts as a "depositor"
itself, and directly lends to banks connected to the depositor in G (but not others).



                                                                27
                                                                                       E4
                                                         C              3
                                                                                       E3


                                          0              B              2

                                                                                       E2
                                                         A              1
                                                                                      E1

                                              Figure 12. Example 9 after Policy.


for a single bank that leads to a simple freeze.28 Moreover, assume no bank linked to the depositor has
a credit freeze. Then there exists a budget B  and some bank j  that is a (direct or indirect) lender to all
banks with frozen credit, such that:

(a) A targeted policy which targets only (direct or indirect) borrowers of bank j  can restore all lending
       without introducing any additional credit freezes.

(b) Any untargeted policy restoring lending requires some budget B  > B  .

       The above result thus establishes that, when freezes are simple, there is a very natural policy to
restore full lending: the central bank should spend its entire budget on rescuing banks in distressed
parts of the network. While this policy is not necessarily optimal, it nonetheless outperforms the
untargeted policy and will not inadvertently lead to credit freeze elsewhere in the network.
       One consequence of the above result is that, even in the event of a simple freeze, having network
knowledge is crucial for conducting policy, though a policymaker may limit his or her scope to banks
without access to credit.29

7.2      Other Policy Features

In the case of complex freezes, it may be impossible to relieve all credit freezes by using the class of
policies in Proposition 10. We illustrate this insight below by revisiting Example 5.

Example 9 (Ineffective policy with complex freeze). Consider Figure 6(b) from Example 5, which is
the financial network after an adverse shift to bank 1.Recall that banks A, B, and C are always safe,
whereas banks 1, 2, and 3 receive a positive liquidity shock zi =  with probabilities p1 , p2 , and p3 ,
where p1 < p3 < p2 < 1. In this network, bank 3 and E4 lose access to credit after an adverse shift
to bank 1, despite the fact that bank 1 still has access to credit (i.e., Figure 6(b)). The only policy of
the form described in Proposition 10 is one that targets the distressed bank 3. When                              3   > 0 is small,
  28
      This adverse shift corresponds to a leftward shift of the distribution function Q(zj ). The amount of the shift,  , is the
anticipated liquidity shock bank j now faces.
   29
      This result is in the same spirit as Jackson and Pernoud (2019), but relates to ex ante rescue policies (before the realization
of liquidity shocks) to ensure lending markets continue to function when future solvencies are in-question.


                                                                28
the financial network remains as in Figure 6(b). When      3   is large, bank C becomes insulated from a
negative shock to bank 3, which allows it to lend profitably to bank 3 at a lower interest rate, who
will then also undercut bank 2 in lending to E3 . However, such a policy may make the chain from
bank B to bank 2 to E2 unprofitable. Furthermore, given the added risk at bank 1, the chain from
bank A abstains from lending to E2 altogether, resulting in the financial network pictured in Figure 12.
Therefore, under any policy that targets bank 3, either E2 or E4 does not have access to credit. A better
policy is to alleviate the risk at bank 1, which would obtain lending for all entrepreneurs, as pictured
in Figure 6(a).

   The above example illustrates that it may be necessary for the policymaker to intervene in counter-
intuitive ways, for example by targeting a bank with access to credit than one without. Because
central bank intervention can impact competition and the flow of profits from lending elsewhere
in the network, these interventions can have non-trivial impacts on credit freezes across the entire
system.
   Another policy option is to directly lend to entrepreneurs to ensure that their projects are funded.
In general, policy-makers may not have the know-how to identify high-quality entrepreneurs or may
lack the ability to monitor their post-borrowing behavior. In addition, the same economic mechanism
that makes optimal interventions sometimes take place away from the source of an adverse shift
also implies that it may be more efficient to intervene in the financial network as opposed to lend
directly to the entrepreneurs. The next example illustrates this point by showing that lending directly
to entrepreneurs may be much more expensive than optimally targeting part of the financial network,
as the latter strategy exploits the equilibrium responses of other banks following the intervention.



                                                          0


                                                          1


                                                          2


                                  3           4                  ···             m+2




                                 E1          E2                  ···             Em



                            Figure 13. Opportunity Network for Example 10.


Example 10 (Direct lending to entrepreneurs). Consider the tree opportunity network depicted in
Figure 13, consisting of m + 1 banks and m entrepreneurs. We assume that shock to bank 1 is given by

                                                   29
z1 = M          0 with probability 1, z2  {-, 0} where z2 = 0 with probability p, while zi = 0 for banks
i  {3, . . . , m + 2}. Also, let us assume F = 0, pr < r0 , and m(r - r0 ) <  . It is easy to verify that,
absent any interventions, no entrepreneur receives access to credit. This is because bank 2 defaults if
it is hit with a negative shock and bank 1 cannot be sufficiently compensated for this risk.
       Now consider a policy that provides funding directly to the entrepreneurs. The key observation
is that the central bank must provide the entire loan of $1 to an entrepreneur in order to ensure the
entrepreneur can invest in the project. To see this, note that if the central bank lends less than $1
to entrepreneur j , then the entrepreneur must raise the shortfall from bank j + 1. Clearly, the total
amount of the loans from each bank j + 1 to its corresponding entrepreneur j is equal to the amount
of loans from bank 2, which does not affect the probability that bank 2 will default on its repayment to
bank 1, as bank 2 defaults as long as it is hit with a negative shock. But since pr < r0 , and m(r - r0 ) <
 , bank 1 still does not find it profitable to lend to bank 2 (in any amount). Taken together, these
observations imply that, to alleviate all credit freezes by targeting entrepreneurs directly, the central
bank must spend a budget of m.
       Instead, consider a policy where the central bank provides funding to bank 2 for  to be repaid at
no interest (i.e., r2 = 1). Then banks 1, . . . , m + 2 are safe almost surely, and so all entrepreneurs have
access to credit following this policy, given that r - r0 > 0. Moreover, when r - r0       1,      m, which
implies that a policy targeting bank 2 does much better than one that provides the entrepreneurs with
funding directly. This example therefore shows that an intervention in parts of the network with the
bottleneck may be more cost-effective than directly lending to entrepreneurs because it encourages
additional lending by other banks.

       Finally, we end this subsection by comment on two (at first) counterintuitive aspects of policy.
First, when there are non-monotone freezes, optimal policy can increase lending in a costless manner.
Recall from Example 3 that removing liquidity from bank 3 actually increased the total amount of
lending in the system because it created incentives for banks to lower interest rates and increase loan
volume. Second, Example 6, also shows that policy interventions aimed at increasing lending can
backfire and reduce overall financial intermediation. In particular, a policy that provides a positive
shock to bank 3 prevents bank 4 from funding additional entrepreneurs due to competition effects.
While stylized, these examples indicate that certain policies that decrease the likelihood of survival
of certain banks (from, say, asset sales driving the price of assets down) can actually increase total
lending in the system. Liquidity injections by the central bank can lead to perverse effects, reduce
total lending, and exacerbate or even cause a credit freeze.

7.3      Large Exposure Limits

We conclude this section by briefly discussing a different form of policy, namely, exposure limits
chosen by means of prudential regulation. For simplicity, we assume exposure limit policies allow
the regulator to restrict the exposure between any pair of institutions, such as the current 15% limits
for G-SIB (globally systemically important financial institutions) to G-SIB exposures outlined by the
Basel Committee.30 By the means of an example, we show that an exposure limit imposed by a banking
  30
       See https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs283.pdf.


                                                     30
regulator can result in more lending. Importantly, this example demonstrates that, even if individual
banks can adopt such limits themselves, they may not have the incentives for doing so, thus indicating
the importance of imposing exposure limits by an outside regulator.



                           0                                                                 0


                           1                                                                 1
                                            E1                                                                 E1


                           2                                                                 2


3           4                    ···             m+2            3            4                    ···               m+2




                           E2                                                               E2


                (a) before the regulation                                        (b) after the regulation

     Figure 14. The financial network before (panel a) and after (panel b) large exposure limit regulations.


Example 11 (Exposure Limits). We suppose that banks use contracts of the form in Section 6.2, which
specify both an interest rate R and a quantity limit x
                                                     ¯ on lending. Consider the opportunity network
shown in Figure 14, where bank 1 has shock distribution z1 = M             0 almost surely, bank 2 has z2 = 0
almost surely, and banks 3 through m + 2 have zi  {-M, 0} where zi = 0 with probability p. For
simplicity, suppose F = 0.
    For any interest rate R12 < r offered to bank 2, bank 2's best response (without any quantity
restrictions) is to charge E1 exactly r and offer loans at the rate r only to one bank out of 3, . . . , m + 2
(say, bank 3) who lends to E2 . If bank 3 experiences a negative shock, then it fails to repay bank 2,
which in turn would fail to repay bank 1. Bank 1 may consider this unprofitable, thereby restricting
bank 2's contract to x
                     ¯12 = 1, so bank 2 only lends to entrepreneur E1 , and entrepreneur E2
experiences a credit freeze.
                                                            ¯2j = 1/m for all j  3. Then the
    Now suppose a regulator imposes exposure limits so that x
only way E2 can receive access to funding is if bank 2 lends exactly x2j = 1/m for all j . When m is
sufficiently large, this diversification guarantees that bank 2 will be repaid almost exactly pr , which
decreases the likelihood that bank 2 defaults. In this situation, bank 1 will offer x
                                                                                    ¯12 = 2 because the
additional loan reaching E2 no longer (severely) increases the default risk of bank 2. Therefore, after
imposing the exposure limits, E2 receives access to funding.
    When bank 1 extends credit to bank 2, it faces the following moral hazard problem: because bank 2
does not internalize the loss to bank 1 in its default, bank 2 maximizes its expected profit by exposing
itself to counterparty risk from only one bank. Because of this, bank 1 must discipline bank 2 by
restricting the size of the loan. However, exposure limits set by the regulator provide this discipline

                                                       31
exogenously: because bank 2 is now forced to diversify, she reduces her expected profits but decreases
her default likelihood at the same time. This allows bank 1 to extend additional credit to bank 2
knowing these regulatory limits will prevent bank 2 from taking excessive risk.


8    Conclusion

In this paper, we provided a model of ex ante credit freezes caused by fears of ex post contagion
over financial network. Our model is motivated by recent credit market turbulences. For example,
at the beginning of the 2008 financial crisis, many financial institutions had difficulty raising short-
term funding due to uncertainty about their and their counterparties' future solvency, which made
potential lenders stop lending or demand greater risk premia and haircuts. Fear of lenders about
future contagion also played a central role in the financial troubles of Bear Stearns even prior to the
collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008.
    In our model, a set of banks are connected to each other via an opportunity network. The
leaves of this network represent entrepreneurs in need of funding and at the root is a depositor
with sufficient funds. The network thus intermediates between the depositor and the entrepreneurs,
and the structure of the network captures both opportunities for intermediation and various types
of intermediation frictions (which preclude certain direct paths from being used because of lack of
reputation or working relationship between banks). Crucially, the structure of the network determines
both the interest rates that banks charge each other and to the entrepreneurs, and the exact path of
credit in equilibrium.
    We characterize the subgame perfect equilibria and a refinement thereof, strong equilibrium, in
this setup. We show that adverse shifts in the distribution of bank returns can cause ex ante credit
freezes. At the root of these freezes is the fear that negative shocks will lead to bank failures and thus
contagion. The nature of these freezes depends intricately on the structure of the financial network.
This is not only because the path of lending is determined by the financial network, but also because
interest rate markups, and thus bank profitability and likelihood of future collapse, depend on the
competition that financial interconnections induce among banks. These two channels together lead
to potentially complex credit freezes.
    We show that in networks with a single entrepreneur, all credit freezes are simple, in the sense
that they originate with banks that are directly affected by adverse shifts and impact only the single
branch of the network that was exposed to the adverse shift. However, in networks with a richer set
of interconnections, complex credit freezes can emerge. These may have their epicenters not with
the banks that are directly affected, but elsewhere in the network and may lead to a spillovers from
branch of the financial network to the other. Such complex freezes arise because adverse shifts in the
distribution of shocks change markups and the likelihood of survival of banks in different parts of the
network.
    We also show that complex freezes necessitate more nuanced policy interventions. In the case of
credit chains, untargeted policies are optimal. In more general networks, as long as credit freezes are
simple, targeted policies that directly help affected banks are optimal. If, however, credit freezes are
complex, targeted policies may need to be directed to different parts of the network.

                                                   32
   An interesting area of future research is to consider more general lending contracts as well as
dynamic lending relationships. Though in related models, more sophisticated lending contracts can
create greater resilience to shocks (by preventing inefficient liquidation), in our network setting more
sophisticated contracts can also open the way to even more complex financial freezes, because new
forces of competition and risk emerge. Our analysis highlights the need for future work focused
on empirically and theoretically investigating the nature of complex freezes and optimal policy
responses.




                                                  33
A     Appendix: Strong Equilibrium

In this appendix, we provide a refinement of the economy's (subgame perfect) equilibrium in
Definition 3 by considering a variant of agent-form trembling-hand perfect equilibrium, according
to which banks may tremble around the interest rates offered in equilibrium, with the set of trembles
restricted to thick-tailed distributions.
    To formalize this concept, let          m    = (   m,ij )(i,j )G   denote a vector of random variables with
distribution Hm , where each       m,ij   is drawn independently from a distribution with full support over
R+ and cumulative distribution function Hm,ij . We say the sequence {Hm }m=1 generates a sequence of
thick-tailed trembles if (i) limm         m,ij   = 0 almost surely for all i, (ii) limm (1 - Hm (x))/Hm (x) = 0,
and (iii) limm Hm (x)/Hm (x) <  for all x > 0.

Definition 9. Let {Hm }nm=1 denote any sequence of distribution functions generating a sequence of
                                                                                           ¯ , borrowing
thick-tailed trembles { m } . A strong equilibrium is a collection of interest rate offers R
                             m=1
decisions x(R), and repayments y (R, x, z), such that there exists a sequence (R   ¯ m , xm , ym ) where (i)
 ¯ m , xm , ym ) is a subgame perfect equilibrium subject to the trembles R
(R                                                                        ~ m,ij = R
                                                                                   ¯ m,ij + m,ij for all m,
                 ¯ m , xm , ym ) - (R
and (ii) limm ||(R                  ¯ , x, y )|| = 0.

    Recall from our discussion in Section 2 that there may be multiple subgame perfect equilibria,
as banks could play weakly dominated strategies as best responses. Allowing for trembles in the
strong equilibrium then rules out such equilibria. To see the role of thick-tailed trembles, note that,
in general, banks face a tradeoff whenever they offer a higher interest rate to a potential borrower. On
the one hand, conditional on being the most competitive lender, a higher rate ensures a higher profit
margin for the bank. On the other hand, the higher rate also increases the likelihood that the bank is
undercut by any of its competitors. Fat-tailed trembles ensure that the latter effect always dominates
the former. As a result, less competitive banks (i.e., those with higher borrowing costs themselves)
elect to charge just enough of a premium to break-even in expectation (accounting for the the risk of
lending).


B     Appendix: Proofs
Auxiliary Lemmas

Lemma 1. In every (strong) borrowing equilibrium:

                                   {i  Nin (j ) : xij > 0} = arg min Rij
                                                                        iNin (j )

and    iNin (j ) xij   =   kNout (j ) xj k .

Proof. We prove this by backward induction on L. For the last bank j  L to borrow, suppose that
bank j borrows some amount xij > 0 from a lender i with Rij > miniNin (j ) Rij . Since there are
no restrictions on borrowing, bank j could borrow x                   
                                                   ij from some bank i = arg miniNin (j ) Rij and
increase its profit by xij (Rij - Ri j ). This dominates borrowing from a more expensive lender, so
this cannot be the case in equilibrium. Similarly, if            iNin (j ) xij   <   kNout (j ) xj k ,   then bank j pays

                                                            34
the prohibitive shortfall cost, whereas if   iNin (j ) xij   + =    kNout (j ) xj k   for some  > 0, bank j
loses (Ri j - 1) whenever it does not default and nothing when it does. Since the former occurs with
positive probability (see Lemma 2), doing such is not profitable.
   Now consider some bank j borrowing at time  in L. By the inductive hypothesis, it is clear that
no bank borrowing after j conditions its borrowing decision on who bank j borrows from. Via the
same logic as before, it is clear then that bank j borrows entirely from bank i = arg miniNin (j ) Rij .
Similarly, by the inductive hypothesis, the borrowing decisions of any banks k  Nout (j ) are not
affected by bank j 's borrowing decision, except possibly if both j  k and k  j . Since in the
perturbed game we have Rj k = Rkj almost surely, it cannot be that both j = arg min Rj k and
k = arg min Rkj , so either xj k = 0 always or k does not condition its borrowing on the decision of
j . Therefore, just by the same reasoning as before, we must have      iNin (j ) xij   =   kNout (j ) xj k   for
bank j , completing the inductive step.

Lemma 2. If Q(z) is generic then for any K  B , the probability the set of banks K default and the set of
banks B\K do not default is always positive and never equal to 1.

Proof. By Example 3.9 in Ott and Yorke (2005), Q(zi ) must be unbounded for all zi . Since profits from
interbank lending for bank j ,    kNout (j ) ykj   are bounded above by (n + |E|)r , for every bank j we
know there exists probability pj > 0 such that zj < (n+|E|)r , and so bank j defaults. By independence,
the probability banks K default is at least (min pj )|K| . Similarly, the most bank j could owe (even
without repayments) is (n + |E|)r , and for every bank j we know there exists probability pj > 0 such
that zj > (n + |E|)r , and so bank j does not default. By independence, the probability some bank
i  K does not default is pi , so the set of banks K do not default with probability at least pi > 0.

Lemma 3. In any single-entrepreneur network G, there is a systemic freeze if and only if there
exists no path P = 0  i1  · · ·  ik  E (where E is an entrepreneur) with interest rates
{R0i1 , Ri1 i2 , · · · , Rik E }  RP such that E[j ]  E[(zj )+ ] for all agents j on P , given Rk = 
for all k  not on P (where E is over the realizations of z).

   Informally, this condition says there is a systemic freeze (i.e., no interbank lending) if and only if
we cannot construct a path from the depositor to the entrepreneur, such that all banks prefer to lend
at these interest rates than not engage in interbank lending at all.

Proof. For the "if" direction, we prove the contrapositive: if there is no systemic freeze, then there
must exist a path P = 0  i1  · · ·  ik  E where the interest rates RP give us E[j ]  E[(zj )+ ].
By Theorem 3, we know the financial network x is an intermediation path P from the depositor to
entrepreneur. Assume, however, this path has at least one bank j with E[j ] < E[(zj )+ ]. By definition of
the equilibrium, bank j is aware that no other bank in P acting later will withdraw its offer conditional
on j not withdrawing, and moreover, all banks will borrow and lend so that P is the financial network.
Therefore, it bank j has a profitable one-shot deviation to withdraw its offer, contradicting that this is
an equilibrium.
   For the "only if" direction, suppose there exists a path P = 0  i1  · · ·  ik  E where some
interest rates RP give us E[j ]  E[(zj )+ ] for all j  P . By means of contradiction, suppose there is


                                                      35
a systemic freeze. Consider the last agent i to act in O on the path P . Conditional on Rk =  for
all k  , and given the interest rates R                  
                                       P up until agent i (not necessarily equal to RP ) such that
agent i can offer some Ri and satisfy E[(zi )+ ]  E[i ] and E[(zj )+ ]  E[j ] for all banks j on P .
Then it is a best-response for bank i to offer some Ri , and no bank on P to withdraw (which does
at least as well as E[(zi )+ ]). By backward induction, we see that every bank i on this path P can offer
some Ri such that E[(zj )+ ]  E[j ] for all banks j  P , and that conditional on offering Ri , bank j
does (weakly) better than offering . Since these offers do affect those banks outside of P , it is still an
equilibrium for these banks to offer . However, repeating this argument, we see that the first bank to
offer according to O in P would prefer to offer to the next bank in P as opposed to not offer (i.e., offer
), and then not withdraw the contract. This contradicts the assumption that a systemic freeze was
the equilibrium.

Proof of Theorem 1

To prove part (a), we construct a repayment equilibrium for every realization of z, iteratively (let  be
the  th iteration). Let D  B  E be the set of entrepreneurs in default at iteration  . At  = 0, assume
D = B  E . At each   1, for each bank j , if zj +           kNout (j )\D -1   Rj k xj k        iNin (j ) Rij xij , then
do not include j in D -1 , otherwise do. For entrepreneur k , at each   1, if              r          j Nin (k) Rj k xj k ,
then do not include k in D -1 , otherwise do.
   We prove this algorithm constructs a repayment equilibrium. First notice that if j  D then j  D
for all    . This can be shown by induction: in the base case, the set of non-defaulting banks is
empty, so this set can only increase. At the inductive step, we note that                  kNout (j )\D -1   Rj k xj k 
  kNout (j )\D -2   Rj k xj k , so each bank (or entrepreneur) will be able to meet its obligations in all
   if it can at  . Since D is a decreasing set, and there are finitely many banks, we are guaranteed
this algorithm terminates at some   with either D  = D  -1 or D  = . In the latter case, we know
D  +1 = D  so it is without loss of generality to consider only the former. We claim this admits a
repayment equilibrium. For each bank j  D  we have:

             zj +                   Rj k xj k = zj +                      Rj k xj k                 Rij xij
                    kNout (j )\D                       kNout (j )\D  -1                 iNin (j )

and for each bank j  D  we have:

             zj +                   Rj k xj k = zj +                      Rj k xj k <               Rij xij
                    kNout (j )\D                       kNout (j )\D  -1                 iNin (j )

(and similar for entrepreneurs), which proves the claim.
   For any R, and given the existence of a repayment equilibrium, the borrowing stage is a finite
extensive-form game with perfect information (where the terminal nodes represent "random" payoffs,
but where the banks maximize according to expected utility of equation (2)). By Zermelo's theorem,
there exists a pure strategy borrowing equilibrium that can always be derived through backward
induction, which establishes part (b).
   Taking the borrowing equilibrium as given, the weak (subgame) perfect equilibrium also exists in
pure strategies by Zermelo's theorem. In the strong equilibrium, for every perturbed game, after each

                                                          36
offer, nature makes a move which perturbs the offer randomly (see Appendix A). To show this, we
amend Zermelo's theorem for every node in the game-tree. For agent j = O(n + 1) offering last, she
simply chooses:
                                           Rj  arg        max          E[j (R)|Hj ]
                                                       RR|Nout (j )|

where utility j is given in equation (2), Hj is the entire history of offers, and expectation is over the
interest rate trembles of agent j . For agent i = O(t) offering at time t, she simply chooses:

                                         Ri  arg        max        E[i (R, R-i )|Hi ]
                                                    RR|Nout (i)|

where utility i is given in equation (2) taking the actions R-i of all future agents {k : O-1 (k ) > O-1 (i)}
as given by backward-induction, hi is the history of offers for agents {k : O-1 (k ) < O-1 (i)}, and the
expectation is over the interest rate trembles of agent i and all future offering agents {k : O-1 (k ) 
O-1 (i)}. Both the interest rate offers and borrowing decisions are in pure strategies. Therefore, every
perturbed game has a (subgame perfect) equilibrium in pure strategies. By the convergence and
uniqueness of these equilibria in Theorem 2 with trembles given in Appendix A, we see there exists
a strong equilibrium in pure strategies.

Proof of Theorem 2

By Theorem 3,31 we know that the financial network (R , x ) is a directed tree. Let T be a strong
topological order on this network. Then working from the agents closest to the depositor, we can
solve for the unique repayment equilibrium via backward induction. In particular, for bank j at
topological index T (j ), we know that yj i = 0 for some bank i  Nin (j ) if zj +                          kNout (j ) ykj          -
  iNin (j ) Rij xij     < 0, otherwise yj i = Rij xij , where                 kNout (j ) ykj   is known because T (k ) >
T (j ) for all k  Nout (j ). Therefore, we can iteratively compute the repayment equilibrium for any z,
which is uniquely determined.
    For any set of interest rates R in a perturbed game, we know that with probability 1 no two interest
rates are identical, so borrowing takes the form given in Lemma 1 (i.e., a directed tree) . Let us consider
the set X , the lim supn of borrowing networks (i.e., the set of all equilibrium borrowing networks
which appear infinitely often as n  ). Such a set X is necessarily non-empty. Suppose there are
two distinct lending trees T, T appearing in X . Consider some bank j that lies at the intersection
of these trees but borrows from different lenders i and i in T and T , respectively. By construction
                 a.s.
of X , as    m    0, bank i lends to bank j  with positive probability and bank i lends to bank j  also
                                                                                                                            a.s.
with positive probability. It clearly cannot be the case that i and i make positive profits as                          m    0,
given the (strong) equilibrium interest rates R , R , respectively. Otherwise, whichever bank makes
                                                                                                                 a.s.
positive profits can reduce its interest rate by an arbitrarily small amount, which as                       m    0 would
guarantee that it has the unique lowest interest rate and makes arbitrarily close to the same (positive)
profits. Let mi (resp. mi ) denote the marginal profit of lending to bank j  for bank i (resp. bank
  31
     Note that we cite Theorem 2 in the proof of Theorem 3 to show it is a directed tree, but we are leveraging only uniqueness
of the interest rate and borrowing stages, and not the unique repayment equilibrium, which is the only time we use
Theorem 3 in this proof.




                                                              37
i ). Therefore, limm EQ [mi ] = EQ [mi ] = 0 is a necessary condition.32 For a generic Q and
a generic tuple of interest rates Rij , Ri j (holding others constant) this will not be satisfied (see
Appendix C, Proposition 12(c)). Thus, the tuple of Rij , Ri j where (marginal) profits for bank i
and bank i are zero, lie on a set of measure zero. Let us induct on the path from j  to the depositor
in both T and T . To do so, replace i with the unique lender of i in T (call it ) and replace i with
the unique lender of i in T (call it ). If these agents are not distinct, then we can replace j  from
before with        =     =     and repeat the above argument. Otherwise, by the same reasoning as the
above, it must be the case that and             do not make positive (marginal) profits when lending to i and
i , respectively. We can repeat this argument as needed until we either: (i) reach the depositor or
(ii) reach an intermediation chain from the depositor to some bank   which is the same in both T
and T . In the former case, for generic Q and a given risk-free rate r0 , the only interest rates charged
to banks in T and T that allow both to be strong equilibria lie on a set of measure zero. By similar
reasoning as before (using Ott and Yorke (2005)), the expected profit of the depositor is generically
larger either under T or T , and by charging an arbitrarily small difference in interest rate, can change
the equilibrium to either T or T with probability 1. Similarly, for the intermediation chain from the
depositor to bank   can be replaced by an "equivalent depositor" with a different risk-free rate r
                                                                                                 ~0 of
the outside technology. Therefore, both Q (on the rest of the network) and r
                                                                           ~0 are generic, so the same
argument applies. Finally, either   or the depositor is better of deviating to a marginally different
offer (which has an arbitrarily small impact on profits in either T or T ), but necessarily induces either
T or T to never be the borrowing network. This means in a strong equilibrium, there will be a unique
lending network x (i.e., the set X is a singleton).
       To show R is essentially unique in the strong equilibrium, it is enough to prove that no bank is
indifferent between offering any two interest rates whenever xij > 0 (the result then follows from
Zermelo's theorem and that other offers do not affect payoffs). We do this by backward induction on
                                                                                                ¯ j.
the offer order O. Consider some bank j who takes as given its interest rate offers and chooses R
Agent j maximizes its (marginal) profit of lending to bank k  Nout (j ), taking as given offers to banks
                                    ¯
k  Nout (j )\{k }. Then, it chooses R        arg max ~    E[j k (R ~ j k )]. If x     > 0 with positive
                                               j k                Rj k                            j k
                                                                                         ¯
                                                           0 it is clear by Lemma 1 that R
probability (bounded away from zero) as               m                                   j k  minj Rj k
(where the min includes competing banks j over k who do not immediately withdraw in the following
stage). Otherwise, as we concluded before, bank j 's offer to bank k does not affect the essential
uniqueness of R . For the inductive step, consider some other bank j that offers, taking as given
the history all interest rate offers, and all (relevant) future offers as known with certainty, given Rj (by
the inductive assumption, since no bank is indifferent when its offer is relevant). As before, agent
j maximizes its (marginal) profit of lending to bank k  Nout (j ), taking as given offers to banks
k  Nout (j )\{k }. If xj k > 0 with positive probability (bounded away from zero) as m  0, then
¯
Rj k  Rj k = arg maxRjk EQ [j k (Rj k )], which is unique by genericity of Q (and uniqueness of
         

  32
     Note that these expectations depend on the offer order O, but are simply integrals over realizations of liquidity shocks,
as is the form in Ott and Yorke (2005), given that banks are not indifferent between making multiple offers for Rij when
xij > 0 as shown in the following paragraph.




                                                             38
future "relevant" offers), see Proposition 12(d) in Appendix C. Otherwise, bank j 's offer solves:

 ¯  = arg max EQ [j k (R
 R                     ¯ j k +                                     j k,m )]
   j k               ¯ j k
                     R

          = arg max EQ j k (R
                            ¯ j k +                                    j k,m )
                                                                                   ¯ j k +
                                                                                   R              j k,m        min{R       ¯j
                                                                                                                   ~ j k , R                 ~
                                                                                                                                       k (Rj k )     +    j k,m }
                     ¯ j k
                     R                                                                                              j ,j

             ¯ j k +
          ·P R                     j k,m         min{R       ¯j
                                                     ~ j k , R                       ~
                                                                             k (Rj k )            +       j k,m }
                                                   j ,j

As   m    0, the above converges to:

¯  = arg max EQ j k (R
R                            ¯ j k  min{R
                     ¯ j k ) R          ~ j k , R
                                                ¯j                                                              ~
                                                                                                           k (Rj k )}
  j k              ¯ j k
                   R                                                        j ,j

            ¯ j k  min{R
         ·P R          ~ j k , R
                               ¯j                                  ¯
                                                          k (Rj k )}
                               j ,j

         = arg max                      ¯ j k )
                                   j k (R                                 ¯j
                                                                   1 - Hm R              k (Rj k )
                                                                                                  ¯           ¯ j k
                                                                                                             -R                dQ
                   ¯ j k
                   R           Q                           j
               j k                            ¯j                    ¯ j k )
 =             ¯ j k                  1 - Hm (R            k       -R
          Q   R                j
                                                       ¯ j k
                                                       R
                ¯ j k )
         + j k (R                              1-                ¯                            ¯             ¯ j k
                                                                                                           -R                       1 - Hm Rj             ¯ j k
                                                                                                                                                         -R         dQ = 0
                                                       R¯ j k Hm Rj                  k (Rj k )                                                       k
                                      j                                                                                    j =j

                                                                 ¯ j k )]  0 as m   in equilibrium
By the assumption on Hm in Appendix A, it is clear that EQ [j k (R
    ¯ j k / R
if  R       ¯ j k remains (sufficiently) bounded away from 1. For this consider j 's problem:

              ¯
              R            ~              = arg max EQ j                            ¯                                ¯j                          ~ j ,k
                                                                                                                                             min R
               j   k (Rj k )                       ¯j
                                                                            k (Rj k               +       j k,m )    R     k   +    j k,m
                                                   R      k
                                                                                                                                                 j

                                                  ¯j
                                               ·P R       k    +       j k,m
                                                                                        ~ j ,k
                                                                                    min R
                                                                                         j
                                                                             ~j
                                                                        minj R        ¯
                                                                                   k -Rj      k

                                          = arg max                                                   j      k (Rj k
                                                                                                                     ¯         + ) dH () dQ
                                                   ¯j
                                                   R      k    Q       -

By the fundamental theorem of calculus, our first-order condition reduces to:

                                    =              H      min R       ¯
                                                              ~ j k - R                               j     k
                                                                                                                         ~ j k
                                                                                                                     min R             =0
                                                                       j             k
                                               Q           j                                                           j

By the implicit function theorem, we observe that:
                                                                                                                                      ¯
                                                                                                                                      R
                                                      ¯
                                              ~ j k - R                                               ~ j k                            j    k
                               H          min R        j               k         j       k        min R                      1-
                      Q                    j                                                          j                                   ~ j k
                                                                                                                                     minj R

                                               ¯
                                       ~ j k - R                             j           k
                     +H            min R        j              k                                          dQ = 0
                                      j                                          ~ j k
                                                                            minj R
               ¯j
which implies  R                   k /
                                                    ~ j k is (sufficiently) bounded away from 1 as m  , given that
                                               minj R
limm Hm /Hm < , as assumed in Appendix A.
                                                                                   ¯ j k that gives bank j
     Finally, as we saw before, this implies by genericity there is a unique offer R
zero (expected) profits, via the inductive step and given the history of offers. Therefore, the interest
rates R are unique in the strong equilibrium.

                                                                                         39
Proof of Theorem 3

(i): Clearly if xij > 0 in the borrowing equilibrium, then Rij = . Otherwise if xij = 0 and
Rij = R =  (otherwise, we are done), consider the withdrawal decision of bank i in the offer stage.
Because the remaining subgame is perfect information, bank i's information set assigns probability 1
to bank i choosing xij = 0 in the borrowing stage. This means bank i is indifferent to offering R
and offering Rij =  (i.e., withdrawing). Moreover, by Lemma 1 this deviation does not affect the
future withdrawal decisions of banks k = i or the borrowing decisions of banks k = j . By induction, it
can therefore be established there exists a strong equilibrium where Rij =  if and only if xij = 0
(which is the contrapositive of the statement).
   (ii): We first claim the financial network cannot contain any directed cycles. Suppose to the
contrary we have a cycle of banks i0  i2  ik  i0 such that xi i+1 > 0 (with mod k ). Take
x = min xi i+1 > 0. Consider the case where Ri i+1  Ri+1 i+2 for some . Then after
observing all interest rate offers, bank i+1 's decision to not withdraw the offer to i+2 is dominated
by withdrawing. If bank i+1 withdraws, by Lemma 1 it can borrow xi i+1 > x less from its lenders
and lend less to bank i+1 by the same amount. In the event that bank i+1 is insolvent, both give the
same payoff; in the event that bank i+1 is solvent, bank i+1 gets at least as much payoff when bank
i+2 is solvent (and strictly more when Ri i+1 > Ri+1 i+2 ), and gains at least Ri i+1 · x > 0 when
bank i+2 is insolvent. Since the latter event occurs with positive probability by Lemma 2, withdrawing
dominates not withdrawing bank i+2 's offer, so in equilibrium we must have Ri i+1 < Ri+1 i+2
for all . But because this is a cycle starting and ending at the same bank i0 , this cannot be.
   Now by definition of strong equilibrium (Appendix A), for any perturbed game, no distinct interest
rate offers are identical with probability 1. By Lemma 1, the borrowing equilibrium consists of every
bank and entrepreneur borrowing from its cheapest lender. Therefore, every bank borrows from at
most one other bank, which implies x (and by part (a), R as well), is a directed tree. By Theorem 2,
the (unique) financial network of the strong equilibrium (which is the limit of perturbed games) must
also be a directed tree.

Proof of Theorem 4

In a single-entrepreneur network, this is a direct consequence of Lemma 3, since the existence of
a systemic freeze depends only the risk profile Q and the network G and not the order of actions
(O, L). For multiple entrepreneurs, identical reasoning as Lemma 3 can be extended to the case of
trees, which are guaranteed to be the structure of the financial network in Theorem 3, except where
we replace the profitable path P in Lemma 3 with profitable tree T .

Proof of Proposition 1

First, we show that if the entrepreneur has a credit freeze in G, then it has a credit freeze in every chain
subnetwork H  G. We prove the contrapositive: if there is lending to the entrepreneur in some chain
H, then there must be lending in G. By Lemma 3, we know there exist some interest rates RP along
the path P = H with E[j ]  E[(zj )+ ] for all j on this path. In G, because P  G, the same set of


                                                    40
interest rates RP along P does not change E[j ] (because Rk =  for all (k  )  G\H). Therefore,
applying Lemma 3 again, we see there is no systemic credit freeze in G, so the sole entrepreneur does
not experience a credit freeze in G.
   Next, we show if the entrepreneur has no credit freeze in G, then there exists some chain
subnetwork H  G where the entrepreneur does not experience a credit freeze. Consider the path
P guaranteed by Lemma 3 such that E[j ]  E[(zj )+ ] for some set of interest rates along this path.
Taking H = P , we note that these inequalities still hold in H for the same set of interest rates (neither
E[j ] nor E[(zj )+ ] change), so by Lemma 3, there is no credit freeze in H.

Proof of Corollary 1
                                                                     ¯ , then it experiences a credit freeze
By Proposition 1, if the entrepreneur experiences a credit freeze in G
for every chain subnetwork. Since every chain subnetwork in G is present in G      ¯ because G  G  ¯ , there
is a credit freeze for every chain subnetwork of G, so once again by Proposition 1, there is a (systemic)
credit freeze in G.

Proof of Theorem 5

For (a), we show that if G has no credit freeze with r0 , then it has no credit freeze in G with 1  r0  r0 .
Again, by Lemma 3 we have interest rates R01 , R12 , . . . , Rn(n+1) in G such that E[j ]  E[(zj )+ ]
for all j  {0, . . . , n + 1}. If we consider this same set of interest rates in G , then it is clear that
E[j ] = E[j ]  E[(zj )+ ] = E[(zj )+ ] for all j  {1, . . . , n}. Then:

                      0 = E[(z0 )+ ] = E[(z0 )+ ]  E[0 ] = E [(z0 + y10 - r0 )+ ]
                                                           E (z0 + y10 - r0 )+ = E[0 ]

By Lemma 3, there is no credit freeze in G with r0  r0 . Of course, setting r0 = r leads to a credit
freeze, so therefore there exists some r
                                       ¯0 where r0 > r
                                                     ¯0 leads to credit freeze. Finally, to note that
¯0 < r , by Lemma 2 bank 1 defaults and bank 2 survives with positive probability, so bank 2 must
r
make positive rents.
   For (b), we show that if G has no credit freeze with r , then there is no credit freeze in G with r 
r . We utilize Lemma 3 again; we have interest rates R01 , R12 , . . . , Rn(n+1) in G such that E[j ] 
E[(zj )+ ] for all j  {0, . . . , n + 1}. Because Rn(n+1)  r in equilibrium, we know that Rn(n+1)  r ,
so the entrepreneur is still solvent with probability 1 and has E[n+1 ] = r -Rn(n+1)  0 = E[(zn+1 )+ ].
Therefore, it is easy to see E[j ] = E[j ]  E[(zj )+ ] = E[(zj )+ ] for all j  {0, . . . , n + 1}. By Lemma 3,
there is no credit freeze in G with r  r . For the same reason as (a), it is clear that r > r0 , as bank 2
must make positive rents from lending to bank 1.
   For part (c), consider a chain of length n with no credit freeze. We first show that the chain of length
n - 1 will also not experience a credit freeze. By Lemma 3, in the n-bank chain G, there exist interest
rates R01 , R12 , . . . , Rn(n+1) such that E[j ]  E[(zj )+ ] for all j  {0, . . . , n + 1}. In the (n - 1)-bank
chain G , let us consider the same set of interest rates R01 , R12 , . . . , R(n-1)n (less the final offer,
which does not exist in the shorter chain). We first claim yj j -1 (under G ) FOSD yj j -1 (under G)
for all j  {1, . . . , n + 1} for these interest rates. It is sufficient to show probability of repayment in G

                                                         41
exceeds that in G. We prove this by induction. Since the entrepreneur repays with probability 1 when
R(n-1)n  r , the probability bank n - 1 repays to bank n - 2 is:

                 P[zn-1 + R(n-1)n  R(n-2)(n-1) ]  P[zn-1 + yn(n-1)  R(n-2)(n-1) ]

Suppose that yj j -1 FOSD yj j -1 . Then:

                    P[zj -1 + yj j -1  R(j -2)(j -1) ]  P[zj -1 + yj j -1  R(j -2)(j -1) ]

so yj -1j -2 FOSD yj -1j -2 . Finally, we see that for all j  {0, . . . , n}:

E[(zj )+ ] = E[(zj )+ ]  E[j ] = E    zj + y(j +1)j - R(j -1)j    +
                                                                         - F · P zj < R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j

                              E       zj + y(j +1)j - R(j -1)j            - F · P zj < R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j = E[j ]
                                                                     +

Therefore, by Lemma 3, there is no credit freeze in G , the (n - 1)-bank chain. Finally, by Lemma 2 note
there exist p, q > 0 (independent of i) such that probability that any bank (i - 1) on this chain defaults is
at least p > 0 and the probability bank i does not default is at least q > 0 (by symmetry). The probability
that both of these events occur simultaneously is at least pq by independence. Therefore, risk premia
in the chain must satisfy Ri(i+1)  R(i-1)i /(1 - pq ) to make nonnegative profits. Therefore, for
large enough n
             ¯ , given the depositor is lending at least r0 , it is clear the (minimum) interest rate needed
to charge the entrepreneur exceeds r , which implies by Lemma 3 there will be a credit freeze for all
nn
 ¯.

Proof of Proposition 2

Suppose there is no systemic credit freeze in Q, so by Lemma 3 there exist R01 , . . . , Rn(n+1) such
that:

              E[(zj )+ ]  E    zj + y(j +1)j - R(j -1)j     +
                                                                - F · P zj < R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j

for all j . If Q FOSD Q, we prove that yj +1j FOSD yj +1j . We do so by induction. Note the
entrepreneur always repays in equilibrium regardless of the risk profile. Bank j repays if and only
if zj  R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j . It is straightforward to see z-j is a sufficient statistic for y(j +1)j , and
y(j +1)j FOSD y(j +1)j (by assumption) so we know that:

                        P zj  R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j  P zj  R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j                                 (5)

which implies that yj (j -1) FOSD yj (j -1) by rearranging. It is clear the inequality is strict if the
conditional distribution zj |z-j under Q is different than under Q for some z-j (i.e., if bank j
experiences an adverse shift). For all banks j without an adverse shift, we have:

        E[(zj )+ ] = E[(zj )+ ]  E   zj + y(j +1)j - R(j -1)j    +
                                                                      - F · P zj < R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j

                              E      zj + y(j +1)j - R(j -1)j            - F · P zj < R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j
                                                                  +



                                                       42
For all banks j with an adverse shift, the inequality in (5) is strict, so we have for some  > 0:

   E[(zj )+ ] -   E[(zj )+ ]  E    zj + y(j +1)j - R(j -1)j    +
                                                                   - F · P zj < R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j

                            <E     zj + y(j +1)j - R(j -1)j        - F · P zj < R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j - 
                                                               +

for sufficiently large F . Killing the  expressions on both sides of the inequality, we see by Lemma 3,
we see there is no credit freeze under Q .

Proof of Proposition 3

First, consider the case of F = 0. Consider some risk profile Q that has more tail risks than Q . If Q has
no credit freeze, then by Lemma 3, there exist {R01 , . . . , Rn(n+1) } such that for all j  {0, . . . , n}:

                                E[(zj )+ ]  E   zj + y(j +1)j - R(j -1)j    +

Let us consider the same set of interest rates in the network with Q . First, we show by induction that
the single-crossing property means y(j +1)j FOSD y(j +1)j . Again, in equilibrium, the entrepreneur
always repays. Assuming y(j +1)j FOSD y(j +1)j , then:

          E[yj (j -1) ] = R(j -1)j P zj  R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j

                      = R(j -1)j P zj  R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j zj  r P[zj  r ]

                      + P zj  R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j zj < r P[zj < r ]

                      = R(j -1)j P[zj  r ] + P zj  R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j zj < r P[zj < r ]

                       R(j -1)j P[zj  r ] + P zj  R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j zj < r P[zj < r ]

                       R(j -1)j P[zj  r ] + P zj  R(j -1)j - y(j +1)j zj < r P[zj < r ]
                      = E[yj (j -1) ]

where the first inequality follows from single-crossing at   r and the second inequality follows from
the inductive hypothesis. Because yj (j -1) is binary, this is sufficient for FOSD. We have the following
realized values for (zj + y(j +1)j - R(j -1)j )+ - (zj )+ for bank j :
          
          Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j , if zj  0; y(j +1)j = Rj (j +1)
          
          Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j + zj , if R(j -1)j - Rj (j +1)  zj < 0; y(j +1)j = Rj (j +1)
          
          -R(j -1)j , if zj  R(j -1)j ; y(j +1)j = 0
          
          -zj , if 0  zj < R(j -1)j ; y(j +1)j = 0
          

Note z-j is a sufficient statistic for y(j +1)j and y(j +1)j . We can break the above into three regions:
(i) zj  R(j -1)j , (ii) 0  zj  R(j -1)j , and (iii) R(j -1)j - Rj (j +1)  zj < 0. In the first region, we




                                                      43
have:

        (Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j )P zj  R(j -1)j y(j +1)j = Rj j +1 P y(j +1)j = Rj j +1

    -R(j -1)j P zj  R(j -1)j y(j +1)j = 0 P y(j +1)j = 0
    =P zj  R(j -1)j       (Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j )P y(j +1)j = Rj j +1 - R(j -1)j P y(j +1)j = 0
    P zj  R(j -1)j        (Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j )P y(j +1)j = Rj j +1 - R(j -1)j P y(j +1)j = 0
    P zj  R(j -1)j        (Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j )P y(j +1)j = Rj j +1 - R(j -1)j P y(j +1)j = 0

where the equality is from independence, the first inequality is from single-crossing, and the second
inequality is from the previous intermediate result about repayment. For the second region, we have:

         (Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j )P 0  zj  R(j -1)j y(j +1)j = Rj j +1 P y(j +1)j = Rj j +1

        -E zj 0  zj  R(j -1)j ; y(j +1)j = 0 P 0  zj  R(j -1)j y(j +1)j = 0 P y(j +1)j = 0

          = P 0  zj  R(j -1)j       (Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j )P y(j +1)j = Rj j +1

          - E zj 0  zj  R(j -1)j P y(j +1)j = 0

          = P 0  zj  R(j -1)j       (Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j )P y(j +1)j = Rj j +1

          - E zj 0  zj  R(j -1)j P y(j +1)j = 0

           P 0  zj  R(j -1)j        (Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j )P y(j +1)j = Rj j +1

          - E zj 0  zj  R(j -1)j P y(j +1)j = 0

where the first equality follows from independence, the second equality follows from condition (i),
and the inequality follows from the intermediate result. Finally, in the third region:

                      Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j + E zj R(j -1)j - Rj (j +1)  zj < 0
                    ·P R(j -1)j - Rj (j +1)  zj < 0 P y(j +1)j = Rj (j +1)
                     = Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j + E zj R(j -1)j - Rj (j +1)  zj < 0
                    ·P R(j -1)j - Rj (j +1)  zj < 0 P y(j +1)j = Rj (j +1)
                      Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j + E zj R(j -1)j - Rj (j +1)  zj < 0

                    ·P R(j -1)j - Rj (j +1)  zj < 0 P y(j +1)j = Rj (j +1)

These together imply that E[j ] - E[(zj )+ ]  E[j ] - E[(zj )+ ]  0, so by Lemma 3, there is no credit
freeze under Q . To generalize to any F , simply note that because y(j +1)j FOSD y(j +1)j , the default
probability of any bank j is less with risk profile Q (less tail risks), so there continues to be no systemic
freeze even when F > 0.

Proof of Proposition 4

Consider some risk profile Q that is a normal distribution with common mean µ > 0, variance  > 0,
and correlation  for all banks. It is sufficient by continuity in the default cost F to take F = 0 and note

                                                     44
                                                                                                            
the result will still hold for all small values of F . Let us consider interest rates Ri(i+1) = r0 +(i+1)· rn-
                                                                                                             +1
                                                                                                               r0

for all i  {0, . . . , n}. Then the payoff of bank i is given by:

          E[j ] = E[(zj + y(j +1)j - R(j -1)j )+ ]
                = E (zj + Rj (j +1) - R(j -1)j )+ y(j +1)j = Rj (j +1) P y(j +1)j = Rj (j +1)

                + E (zj - R(j -1)j )+ y(j +1)j = 0 P y(j +1)j = 0

For every > 0, there exists  < 1 such that with correlation  >  , P[minj zj > 0|z1 > 0]  1 - and
P[maxj zj > 0|z1 > 0]  1 - . It is clear that when minj zj > 0, then y(j +1)j = Rj (j +1) and when
maxj zj < 0, then y(j +1)j = 0 for all j  {0, . . . , n}. Therefore, the above expression reduces to:

                                                                         r - r0
                              E[j ]  (1 - )P[z1 > 0] E[zj |zj > 0] +
                                                                          n+1

whereas

                           E[(zj )+ ]  E[zj |zj > 0]P[zj > 0] = E[zj |zj > 0]P[z1 > 0]

Taking    close enough to zero (by taking  close enough to 1), we obtain that E[j ]  E[(zj )+ ]. By
Lemma 3, there is no credit freeze with Q with  >  .

Proof of Proposition 5

For part (a), suppose lending path P gives us the borrowing network x before the adverse shifts. By
assumption of (a), Q(zi ) = Q (zi ) for all banks i along the path P , as all banks experiencing an adverse
shift experienced a credit freeze before the shift. We know the current lending path P satisfies the
                                                                         P ] - F · P[ P < 0] is the same
conditions of Lemma 3 both before and after the adverse shift, in that E[j           j
before and after the adverse shifts for all banks j  P , for any interest rates RP (as is E[(zj )+ ] for all
                                                                               P ] - F · P[ P < 0] is no
j  P ). For any other path P , the same logic as in Proposition 2 shows that E[j           j
                                                                 P ] - F · P[ P < 0] - E[(z ) ] does not
greater than before the adverse shifts for all j  P , and that E[j           j             j +
increase after the adverse shifts, given sufficiently large F . This establishes that x is the same before
and after the adverse shifts; in particular, no bank on P loses access to credit after the adverse shift.
   For (b), if the entrepreneur does not experience a credit freeze after the adverse shift, then by
Lemma 3, there exists a path in P isomorphic to the chain network with interest rates R such that
E[(zj )+ ]  E[j ] along this chain. Note that the chain network H  G thus does not experience
a credit freeze. By Proposition 2, when F is sufficiently large, there is no credit freeze in H before
the adverse shifts. By Proposition 1, this implies there is no systemic freeze in G after the adverse
shifts, and in particular Theorem 3 guarantees the entrepreneur still borrows $1. So lending does not
decrease before the adverse shifts.

Proof of Proposition 6

We prove this result by induction. Suppose there is just a single bank in j  R. Let j  be a borrower
of the depositor who also lends (directly or indirectly) to j . The choice of j  is unique because G is a


                                                        45
                                            , j  , consider two paths P , P that both have bank j on it, and
tree; to see this, if there were multiple j1   2                       1   2
by taking the first (topologically from the depositor) bank k  P1  P2 , we see that k has at least two
(potential) lenders, which is a contradiction. Consider all banks B  borrowing from the depositor. Let
dj denote the (random) binary variable of whether bank j defaults. For all k  B we have that:
        
                            {kB :R0k =} (R0k (1 - dk ({R0 } B )) - r0 )x0k
        max{R }  E
                 0k kB
E[0 ] =
                          {kB :R0k =} (R0k (1 - dk ({R0 } B )) - r0 )x0k  0  R0k  R0k for all k
         subject to E

Note that because G is a tree, dk ({R0 }      B )   = dk (R0k ). By linearity of expectation, we have:

            max{R0k }kB     {kB :R0k =} (R0k (1         - E[dk (R0k )]) - r0 )x0k
E[0 ] =
            subject to     {kB      :R0k =} ( R 0k (1 - E[dk (R0k )]) - r0 )x0k  0  R0k  R0k for all k

This is a separable problem because removing the depositor would disconnect the graph, and so the
interest rates charged to one bank have no bearing on the payoffs of the other banks linked to the
depositor. So, in particular:

                      {kB :R0k =} maxR0k (R0k (1 - E[dk (R0k )]) - r0 )x0k
          E[0 ] =
                    subject to (R0k (1 - E[dk (R0k )]) - r0 )x0k  0  R0k  R0k for all k

Since no adverse shifts occurred for any banks in the subtrees of k = j  , we know that E[dk (R0k )] is
the same before and after the adverse shift at bank j (for all R0k ). Because all of the above problems
are separable over k , it is clear the financial network (R , x ) in all subtrees except possibly the one
at bank j  remains the same. In particular, any of these banks experience a credit freeze if and only
if they did so before the adverse shift. Iteratively adding any banks j to R who experience an adverse
shift, and repeating the above argument gives the desired result.

Proof of Proposition 7

By Lemma 2, consider some set of contracts R01 , . . . , Rnn+1 such that E[k ]  E[(zk )+ ] for all banks
k before the addition of the risk-bearing bank. Note that because zj  r , then zj + y(i+1)j -
Rij  0, so bank j never defaults, even if (i + 1) does not repay j . Consider the set of contracts
R01 , . . . , R(i-1)i , Rij , Rj (i+1) , . . . , Rn(n+1) with Rkk+1 = Rkk+1 for all k = i and Rij =
R(i-1)i , Rj (i+1) = Ri(i+1) . As in Proposition 2, when F is large it is sufficient to check default
probabilities under these contracts are lower with risk-bearing bank i, then Lemma 2 guarantees there
will no systemic freeze.
   We prove y(k+1)k FOSD y(k+1)k for all k = i, that yj i FOSD y(i+1)i , and that E[(zj )+ ]  E[j ]. It
is clear that y(k+1)k = y(k+1)k for all k  {1, . . . , i - 1}. Since yj i = Rij almost surely, it FOSD all
other y , including y(i+1)i . We prove for k  {i + 1, . . . , 0} by induction. We see that:

                      E[y(k+1)k ] = Rk(k+1) P[zk+1 + y(k+2)(k+1) - Rk(k+1)  0]
                                       Rk(k+1) P[zk+1 + y(k+2)(k+1) - Rk(k+1)  0]
                                      = E[y(k+1)k ]




                                                       46
where the inequality follows from the inductive step. Lastly, we know that E[(zi +y(i+1)i -R(i-1)i )+ ]-
F · P[zi + y(i+1)i - R(i-1)i < 0]  0. This implies that for large enough F , we have:

                     E[j ] = E[zj + y(i+1)j - Rij ]  E[zj + y(i+1)j - R(i-1)i ]  E[zj ]

Thus, E[j ]  E[(zj )+ ] for bank j , and we have showed there is no systemic freeze.

Proof of Proposition 8

Part (a) of the result follows by the exact same reasoning as Theorem 3 for why in the original economy,
the network cannot contain directed cycles. For part (b), note that the contracts offered with quantity-
restrictions are a superset of those offered without them. Therefore, extending Lemma 3, if there exists
a path P and interest rates RP along this path such that the conditions of Lemma 3 hold, then for
the same path there exist a set of interest rates and quantity-restrictions given by (RP , |E| + 1) such
that the same conditions (i.e., willingness to lend) hold as well, as none of quantity restrictions bind.
Thus, there cannot be systemic freezes with quantity restrictions if there is not a systemic freeze in the
original economy.

Proof of Proposition 9

It is enough to prove that if there exists a budget B that restores lending, then giving B to the depositor
restores lending. Without loss of generality, suppose G is a chain. If B restores lending, then by
                               n
Lemma 3 there exists           i=0 i    B and (R01 , . . . , Rn(n+1) ) such that E[(zi +           i )+ ]    E[(zi +    i   +
y(i+1)i - R(i-1)i )+ ] for all i  {1, . . . , n + 1}, with E[       0   + y10 - r0 ]  0. Instead, consider giving B
                                                                                                       n-i-1
entirely to the depositor. Similarly, consider interest rates Ri(i+1) = Ri(i+1) -                      k=0   n-k     for all
i  {0, . . . , n - 1}. Then:

                         E[(zi )+ ]  E[(zi + i )+ ]  E[(zi +        i   + y(i+1)i - R(i-1)i )+ ]
                                                          = E[(zi + y(i+1)i - R(i-1)i )+ ]

for all i  {1, . . . , n}, where the equality follows from the fact that (y(i+1)i - R(i-1)i ) - (y(i+1)i -
R(i-1)i ) =    i   (and by simple induction, i.e., P[y(i+1)i = 0] = P[y(i+1)i = 0]). Finally, note that for
the depositor:
                                       0  E[     0   + y10 - r0 ]  E[B + y10 - r0 ]

which then implies by Lemma 3 there is no systemic freeze.

Proof of Proposition 10

By Definition 8, we know if bank j is hit with an adverse shift and the freeze is simple, there exists a
(direct or indirect) lender j  of j such that all banks with frozen credit are a (direct or indirect) borrower
of bank j  . Consider the distribution zj - zj , where zj is the (random) liquidity shock at bank j after
the adverse shift and zj is the liquidity shock before the distribution shift. Then setting                   j   = z j - zj
(which requires budget B  =            j)   reverses the effects of the shock and restores full lending.


                                                               47
    Consider B  to be the smallest budget needed to restore full lending in a targeted policy of the form
from (a). Let j  be the only bank the depositor lends to with (direct or indirect) borrowers whose credit
is frozen. Finally, let x > 0 be the amount lent to all other banks connected to the depositor, other
than j  . We claim that B   B  + x > B  is the minimum budget required to restore lending in the
untargeted policy (if it is possible). Because the freeze is simple, the depositor still uses funds x from
the central bank to lend to banks other than j  (i.e., the depositor does not change its lending decisions
after the intervention). Thus, for any B < B  + x , the depositor would set R0j  x0j  < max{0, B -
x } + R0j  x0j  , where denotes quantities after the rescue policy. By assumption,          kB (j  ) k  B
                                                                                                              

is a necessary condition to restore full lending to j  's (direct or indirect) borrowers, where B  (j  ) is the
set of (direct or indirect) borrowers of j  . By the same reasoning as in Proposition 9, there exists no set
of interest rates RB (j  ) in B  (j  ) that mimic such a policy given that   j   = max{0, B - x } < B  . Thus,
no untargeted policy that restores full lending with budget B  exists.


C    Appendix: Prevalence Theory

This section is dedicated to explaining the relevant details of Ott and Yorke (2005) needed for our
work. This is of importance when we discuss generic risk profiles Q, because the usual definition
of "genericity" does not extend well to infinite-dimensional spaces (such as probability distribution
functions). The rich theory of Ott and Yorke (2005) allows us to handle a wide range of risk profiles
(both discrete and continuous) throughout this paper.
    We begin with the following discussion from Ott and Yorke (2005) on the desirable properties of
geniricity. If X is a topological vector space, a sound theory of genericity for topological vector spaces
should satisfy the following genericity axioms.

 (i) A generic subset of X is dense in X .

 (ii) If L  G and G is generic, then L is generic.

(iii) A countable intersection of generic sets is generic.

(iv) Every translate of a generic set is generic.

 (v) A subset G of Rn is generic if and only if G is a set of full Lebesgue measure in Rn .

In standard measure-theoretic terms, a subset G  Rn is said to be generic if Rn \G has zero Lebesgue
measure. This has problems in infinite-dimensional spaces: every separable Banach space with a
translation-invariant Boreal measure (which is not identically zero) must assign infinite measure to
all open sets. The example provided is the following: take the open ball B (x, ). We can construct
infinitely many disjoint open balls of radius /4 containing with B (x, ). Each of the balls has the same
measure, and if the measure of B (x, ) is finite, these balls of radius /4 must have zero measure. But
then the entire space can be covered by ( /4)-radius balls, so the space must have measure 0 (which
fails to satisfy Axiom 5).

Definition 10 (Definition 3.1 in Ott and Yorke (2005)). Let X be a completely metrizable topological
vector space. A Borel set E  X is said to be prevalent if there exists a Borel measure µ on X such that:

                                                      48
(a) 0 < µ(C ) <  for some compact subset C of X , and

(b) the set E + x has full µ-measure (that is, the complement of E + x has measure zero) for all x  X .

   More generally, a subset F  X is prevalent if F contains a prevalent Borel set; we say that almost
every element of X lies in F or that F is generic.

Proposition 11 (Proposition 3.3 in Ott and Yorke (2005)). The theory of prevalence satisfies Axioms 1-5.

   Therefore, when we refer to a property holding for a generic risk profile Q, we mean the set of Q
where this property holds is prevalent in the space of probability distribution functions. We present
some useful facts which are useful and leveraged throughout the paper:

Proposition 12. The following are true:

(a) For any constant c, for almost all discrete probability distributions Q, EQ [zj ] = c.

(b) For any constant c, for almost all continuous (and differentiable) probability distributions Q,
    EQ [zj ] = c (consequence of Example 3.6).

(c) For almost all continuous (or countably discrete) probability distributions, Q is unbounded above
    and below (consequence of Example 3.9).

(d) For almost all continuous probability distributions Q and continuous (and sufficiently
    differentiable) functions f , EQ [f ()] has a unique global maximum in .

   For each of these, the trick is to find a finite-dimensional subspace P  X which is known as probe
for a set F  X . This holds whenever there exists a Borel set E  F such that E + x has full P -measure
for all x  X . This is a sufficient condition for a set F to be prevalent. Many genericity conditions in
infinite-dimensional spaces (such as those probability distributions) can be proven using prevalence.
See the paper Ott and Yorke (2005) for examples.




                                                     49
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2014), "Systemic risk in endogenous
  financial networks." Working paper.

Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2015), "Systemic risk and stability in
  financial networks." American Economic Review, 105(2), 564­608.

Adrian, Tobias, Brian Begalle, Adam Copeland, and Antoine Martin (2013), "Repo and securities
  lending." In Risk topography: Systemic risk and macro modeling, 131­148, University of Chicago
  Press.

Afonso, Gara, Anna Kovner, and Antoinette Schoar (2010), What happened to US Interbank lending in
  the financial crisis. Vox.

Afonso, Gara, Anna Kovner, and Antoinette Schoar (2014), "Trading partners in the interbank lending
  market." Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No. 620.

Ahnert, Toni (2016), "Rollover risk, liquidity and macroprudential regulation." Journal of Money, Credit
  and Banking, (8), 1753­1785.

Ahnert, Toni and Co-Pierre Georg (2018), "Information Contagion and Systemic Risk." Journal of
  Financial Stability, 35, 159­171.

Allen, Franklin and Ana Babus (2009), "Networks in finance." In Network-based Strategies and
  Competencies (P. Kleindorfer and J. Wind, eds.), 367­382.

Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale (2000), "Financial Contagion." Journal of Political Economy, 108(1),
  1­33.

Anand, Kartik, Prasanna Gai, and Matteo Marsili (2012), "Rollover risk, network structure and systemic
  financial crises." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36(8), 1088­1100.

Babus, Ana (2016), "The formation of financial networks." RAND Journal of Economics, 57, 239­272.

Bech, Morten L. and Enghin Atalay (2010), "The topology of the federal funds market." Physica A:
  Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 389(22), 5223­5246.

Bernard, B., Agostino Capponi, and Joseph Stiglitz (2019), "Bail-ins and bail-outs: Incentives,
  connectivity, and systemic stability." Working Paper.

Blume, Larry, David Easley, Jon Kleinberg, Robert Kleinberg, and Eva Tardos (2011), "Network
  Formation in the Presence of Contagious Risk." In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on
  Electronic Commerce, 1­10, ACM, New York, NY, USA.

Brunnermeier, Markus K. (2009), "Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007-2008." Journal of
  Economic perspectives, 23(1), 77­100.


                                                  50
Burroughs, Bryan (2008), "Bringing down bear stearns." Vanity Fair, 106­111.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Alp Simsek (2013), "Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity." The Journal of
  Finance, 68(6), 2549­2587.

Cabrales, Antonio, Douglas Gale, and Piero Gottardi (2016), "Financial contagion in networks." In The
  Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Networks (Yann Bramoull´
                                                             e, Andrea Galeotti, and Brian Rogers,
  eds.), Oxford University Press.

Chateauneuf, Alain, Michele Cohen, and Isaac Meilijson (2004), "Four notions of mean-preserving
  increase in risk, risk attitudes and applications to the rank-dependent expected utility model."
  Journal of Mathematical Economics, 40, 547­571.

Corbae, Dean and Michael Gofman (2019), "Interbank trading, collusion, and financial regulation."
  Working paper.

Di Maggio, Marco and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2014), "Financial intermediation networks." Columbia
  Business School Research Paper, 14­40.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Raghuram G. Rajan (2011), "Fear of fire sales, illiquidity seeking, and credit
  freezes." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), 557­591.

Duffie, Darrell (2010), How Big Banks Fail and What to Do about It. Princeton University Press.

Eisenberg, Larry and Thomas H. Noe (2001), "Systemic risk in financial systems." Management Science,
  47(2), 236­249.

Elliot, Matthew, Jonathon Hazell, and Co-Pierre Georg (2018), "Systemic risk-shifting in financial
  networks." SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2658249, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Elliott, Matthew, Benjamin Golub, and Matthew O. Jackson (2014), "Financial networks and
  contagion." American Economic Review, 104(10), 3115­53.

Erol, Selman (2019), "Network hazard and bailouts." Working paper.

Farboodi, Maryam (2017), "Intermediation and voluntary exposure to counterparty risk." Working
  paper.

Freixas, Xavier, Antoine Martin, and David Skeie (2011), "Bank Liquidity, Interbank Markets, and
  Monetary Policy." The Review of Financial Studies, 24(8), 2656­2692.

Gai, Prasanna and Sujit Kapadia (2010), "Contagion in financial networks." Proceedings of the Royal
  Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 466, 2401­2423.

Gofman, Michael (2011), "A network-based analysis of over-the-counter markets." Working paper.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick (2012), "Securitized banking and the run on repo." Journal of
  Financial economics, 104(3), 425­451.


                                                 51
Infante, Sebastian and Alexandros Vardoulakis (2019), "Collateral runs." Federal Reserve Board
  Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-022.

Jackson, Matthew O. and Agathe Pernoud (2019), "What makes financial networks special? Systemic
  risk and its measurement in financial networks." Working paper.

Jorion, Philippe and Gaiyan Zhang (2009), "Credit Contagion from Counterparty Risk." The Journal of
  Finance, 64(5), 2053­2087.

Kanik, Zafer (2019), "From Lombard Street to Wall Street: Systemic risk, rescues, and stability in
  financial networks." Working paper.

Kelly, Kate (2008), "Fear, rumors touched off fatal run on bear stearns." Wall Street Journal.

Leitner, Yaron (2005), "Financial networks: contagion, commitment, and private sector bailouts."
  Journal of Finance, 60(6), 2925­2953.

Liu, Xuewen (2019), "Diversification and systemic bank runs." Working paper.

Ott, William and James Yorke (2005), "Prevalence." Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society,
  42(3), 263­290.

Zawadowski, Adam (2013), "Entangled financial systems." Review of Financial Studies, 26(1), 1291­
  1323.

Zhou, Zhen (2016), "Systemic Bank Panics in Financial Networks." Working Paper.




                                                   52
