                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           TRADE IN TECHNOLOGY:
                       A POTENTIAL SOLUTION TO THE
               FOOD SECURITY CHALLENGES OF THE 21ST CENTURY

                                     Thomas W. Hertel
                                      Uris L.C. Baldos
                                      Keith O. Fuglie

                                    Working Paper 27148
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w27148


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   May 2020




Presented to the NBER Workshop on Agricultural Trade, May 1, 2020. Revised and extended
version of a paper first presented at the "New Malthusianism Conference" held at Cambridge
University, December 12-13, 2018. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the U.S.
Department of Agriculture or the Economic Research Service

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27148.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Thomas W. Hertel, Uris L.C. Baldos, and Keith O. Fuglie. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade in Technology: A Potential Solution to the Food Security Challenges of the 21st Century
Thomas W. Hertel, Uris L.C. Baldos, and Keith O. Fuglie
NBER Working Paper No. 27148
May 2020
JEL No. Q16,Q17,Q56

                                         ABSTRACT

The recent rise in caloric undernutrition in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) demonstrates the continued
relevance of the Malthusian footrace between food availability and population. Sluggish growth
in farm productivity in SSA has brought to the fore the key role of agricultural technology in
alleviating future food insecurity. We develop a model of technology, food security and
international trade with three distinct channels for technology reduce food insecurity in SSA. The
first is via greater domestic R&D investment. An alternative is to import technologies from other
countries with significant knowledge capital. The third role for technology to resolve the
Malthusian dilemma in SSA is that of `virtual technology trade', i.e., importing technological
investments undertaken elsewhere through cheaper imported food. To assess the relative
contribution of each channel to food security in Africa, we employ a partial equilibrium,
quantitative trade model, augmented by a temporal relationship between R&D investments,
knowledge capital and agricultural productivity. Over the historical period: 1991-2011 we find
that direct R&D investments in SSA have been the dominant vehicle for lowering food prices in
Africa. Looking forward to 2050, we find that virtual technology trade will be the most important
vehicle for reducing non-farm undernutrition in Africa.

Thomas W. Hertel                                Keith O. Fuglie
Department of Agricultural Economics            Department of Agriculture
Purdue University                               keith.fuglie@usda.gov
1145 Krannert Bldg. West
Lafayette, IN 47907
hertel@purdue.edu

Uris L.C. Baldos
Purdue University
403 W. State St.
West Lafayette, IN 47907
ubaldos@purdue.edu
1. Background and Motivation

With the path of 20th century food prices now comfortably in the rearview mirror (Figure 1), the

question of whether agricultural technological progress would be able to keep pace with growing

population appears to have been put to rest. The global agricultural price index in the year 2000

was only one-quarter of its value in 1900, and just 40% of its average value at the end of the 1970s.

This is clear evidence that, over the broad sweep of the 20th century, improvements in agricultural

technology led to strong output growth, outpacing population growth (Figure 1). Of course, there

were many commodity price spikes that arose during this time, with the most dramatic coming in

the wake of the Russian crop failure during the early 1970s when this price index more than

doubled. A later doubling occurred at the beginning of the 21st century, when a perfect storm of

growing bioenergy demands, low commodity stocks and crop failures led to the index rising from

less than 40 to more than 80 over a decade's time (Abbott, Hurt, and Tyner 2011). As with the

earlier price spikes, this led to a flurry of concern about Malthusian scarcity scenarios, and a burst

of investments in agricultural research and development (R&D). However, as with the earlier price

booms, all indications are that this one is also on the wane (Figure 1), aided by the slowing rate of

growth in global population (Baldos and Hertel 2016).

       While the outcome of the global footrace between food supply and demand seems no

longer in doubt, this is not the case within particular regions ­ most notably Sub Saharan Africa

(SSA), where virtually all of the world's net population growth between today and the end of this

century is expected to arise (UN Population Division 2015). Indeed, the reluctant decline in

fertility in this region has caused the United Nations Population Division to revise upward its

global population forecasts. Niger is the poster child for this challenge, with a fertility rate of 7.5

children per woman ­ a figure which has been found to be below the desired rate of fertility in

that country (INS/Niger and International 2013). If productivity growth in agriculture was also
                                                  2
proceeding at a record-breaking pace, this demographic anomaly would be of lesser concern.

However, lack of investment in national agricultural research, poor dissemination of new

technologies, weak institutions and civil unrest have resulted in below average rates of agricultural

productivity growth in the region (Fuglie and Rada 2013). It is this combination of high population

growth and low productivity growth that has allowed the Malthusian challenge to re-enter the

debate in SSA. Indeed, since 2011, rates of undernutrition in this region have begun to rise, after

more than a decade of steady decline (FAO et al. 2019).




Figure 1. Evolution of global population, cropland, and real agricultural output and price indices
since 1900. Source: Fuglie et al. (2019). The real agricultural price index is the Grilli-Yang price
index of traded agricultural commodities divided by the US GDP price index.

       Absent a dramatic shift on the demographic front, we must look to the technology side of

this regional footrace for a solution. Greater investment in national agricultural research

institutions in Africa is clearly an important part of picture. However, given the extremely long

lag between public R&D investment in agriculture and improved productivity growth ­ historically


                                                 3
in the United States it has taken two decades for R&D spending to achieve peak impact (Baldos et

al. 2019) ­ such investments will likely not solve the near-term challenge. This brings us to the

topic of trade ­ more specifically: trade in agricultural technology. In this paper we will distinguish

between two types of trade in technology. The first, dubbed direct trade in technology, focuses on

the transfer of knowledge from overseas. Historically, direct transfer of agricultural technology

has been hampered by the challenges of adapting solutions from one agro-ecosystem and economic

environment to another. Technologies developed for irrigated Asian agriculture have generally

proven ineffective in SSA (Pingali 2012), and the empirical evidence shows little in the way of

`technology spill-ins' from rich countries in temperate regions to tropical zones (Fuglie 2018;

Hayami and Ruttan 1985). However, R&D in the emerging economies may prove more

transferable to SSA given their closer environmental proximity. We focus on this type of

technology spill-in as we consider the potential for direct trade in technology.

       We have named the second type of trade in technology `virtual technology trade' as it is

fully in the spirit of the growing literature on virtual water trade (Allan 1998; Yang and Zehnder

2007). This literature points out that water-intensive crops can be imported in lieu of growing them

domestically ­ hence the idea that these countries are importing `virtual water'. In the case of

agricultural technology, we suggest that one piece of the solution to the Malthusian challenge in

the SSA region is to import food from regions where technological improvements are outpacing

population growth. (In section 3 below, we will develop a precise definition of what we mean by

virtual technology trade.) Historically, virtual trade in technology has been limited by restrictive

agricultural trade policies, motivated by self-sufficiency targets as well as concerns about food

safety, genetically modified crops, and a host of other factors. Therefore, in the results section of




                                                  4
this paper, we will show how the potential for virtual technology trade is critically dependent on

the extent to which the SSA region becomes more integrated into global agricultural markets.

       While a number of models have produced long-term projections of supply and demand

balances in world agriculture (see von Lampe et al. 2014 for a summary and comparison of 10 of

the more prominent ones), almost all have assumed exogenously determined rates of productivity

growth. Only a few studies have attempted to model future productivity as a function of R&D

spending (Lobell, Baldos, and Hertel 2013; Nelson et al. 2010). These models assume a single

parameter that indicates the efficiency with which R&D investment produces technical change,

i.e., the percentage change in agricultural productivity expected from a 1% change in R&D

spending, and restrict this relationship to a particular country or geographic region. State-of-the-

art models of R&D capital, however, take into account the substantial lag between R&D spending

and changes in farm productivity. This lag is typically one or two decades, beyond which these

productivity effects wear off due to R&D capital depreciation (Alston et al. 2010; Baldos et al.

2019). Only Nelson et al. (2010) allowed for eventual R&D capital depreciation, and none of these

studies have taken into account how the pattern of past R&D spending may affect future

productivity. Clearly, with long R&D lags, countries like China that have increased R&D spending

rapidly in recent years will likely have a different productivity trajectory than countries with more

stable R&D spending, such as the United States.

       The present paper extends prior work by (i) projecting future growth in R&D capital stocks,

taking into account past R&D spending patterns and allowing for R&D capital depreciation, (ii)

accounting for differences in the quality and capacity of national agricultural R&D systems by

allowing R&D elasticities to vary across global regions, based on a review of more than 40

econometric studies of past performance (Fuglie 2018); and (iii) incorporating the potential for



                                                 5
international R&D spillovers ­ that productivity growth in one region depends not only on that

region's R&D spending but also on technology transfer from other parts of the world.

        In the next section of the paper, we provide a brief review of the evidence on technological

progress in agriculture, its role in driving growth in farm output, the determinants underlying these

productivity improvements, and the evidence regarding international technology spillovers. We

then introduce our theoretical framework and identify the roles of direct and virtual technology

trade in overcoming the Malthusian challenges faced by many countries in Africa. This leads

naturally into our quantitative trade model, which is a higher-dimensional version of the theoretical

model, with geographic heterogeneity and explicit temporal linkages from R&D spending and

spillovers to regional productivity growth in agriculture. We use this framework first to decompose

historical drivers of regional crop prices and then to investigate the potential for trade in technology

to lower food prices and bolster food security in those countries currently experiencing the fastest

rates of population growth in the world.

2. Determinants of Agricultural Productivity

Globally, raising agricultural output has come to rely on improving efficiency rather than on

increasing the use of land, labor or industrial inputs. As the growth decomposition in Figure 2

shows, since the 1990s improvement in total factor productivity (TFP) has accounted for about

three-quarters of the growth in world agricultural output (Fuglie 2015). 1 The acceleration in

agricultural TFP growth since the 1990s primarily occurred in developing countries and to a lesser


1
  Given data limitations, the growth decomposition in Figure 2 is only approximate. Output is the value of
crop and livestock commodity production at 2005 global average farmgate prices, land includes area in
crops and pasture, measured as hectares of `rainfed-equivalent cropland', where irrigated areas and pasture
are quality-adjusted, labor is number of persons working on farms, capital consists of stocks of farm
machinery and animals, and intermediate inputs include inorganic fertilizers and animal feeds. The
contribution of each input to output growth is the growth rate of that input multiplied by its cost share. TFP
is the difference in growth between output and aggregate inputs. See Fuglie (2012) for a discussion of
methods and limitations.
                                                      6
extent in transition economies of the former Soviet bloc (where, prior to 1990, agricultural TFP

growth had been negative). In highly industrialized countries, TFP was already the primary source

of agricultural growth as early as the 1950s or 1960s. Worldwide, use of industrial inputs like

inorganic fertilizers grew very rapidly in the 1960s and 1970s, and this growth continues today but

at a much slower pace. Most of the growth in agricultural land has come through quality

improvement (converting pastures into cropland or extending irrigation) rather than expanding

farming to new lands. The growth rate of agricultural labor has slowed sharply since the 1980s,

turning negative in the early years of the 21st Century.




Figure 2. Sources of global agricultural growth, 1961­2016, showing the increasing importance of
TFP. Source: USDA-ERS (2019).
       The increasing importance of TFP to agricultural growth raises an important question. Is

the improved efficiency in agriculture due primarily to reallocating resources (transferring excess

labor out of agriculture, consolidating farms to achieve economies of scale, etc.), or to adoption of

new technologies and practices that do a better job of converting resources - energy, water, and

nutrients - into commodities? If it is the former, then encouraging reallocation of resources may

                                                 7
stimulate further improvement in productivity, at least until such opportunities are exhausted. 2 (In

the theoretical model developed below we abstract from this driver of productivity.) If it is the

latter (technological change), then prospects for sustaining growth require an adequate pipeline of

new technologies under development. However, the extent to which investments in R&D are

needed in all countries or regions would seem to depend greatly on the prospects for trade in

technology, either in its direct or virtual forms.

         Empirical research on the drivers of past TFP growth in agriculture have found both

resource reallocation and adoption of new technology to be important. Changes in relative factor

prices, market liberalization, and institutional or policy reforms that incentivized improved use of

resources have often provided a powerful, though short-term, boost to productivity. Boserup

(1965) and Hayami and Ruttan (1985) documented the effect of changing factor scarcity in

inducing improvements in agricultural productivity. Perhaps the most dramatic example of how

institutional reform can stimulate productivity was the decollectivization of Chinese agriculture

beginning in 1978. Productivity advanced quickly when farms were once again managed by

individual households, who retained the benefits of their own efforts (Lin 1992). Fuglie and Rada

(2013) also found positive though more modest productivity gains from structural adjustment

reforms in SSA. But such gains from resource adjustment face diminishing returns, and growth

may not be sustained after the initial response to new opportunities. Countries that have been able

to keep agricultural TFP rising over the long-term have largely been those that have invested

resources in agricultural R&D and encouraged the private sector to manufacture productivity

enhancing industrial inputs for farms (Hayami and Ruttan 1985; Fuglie 2012).



2
  Institutional and cultural barriers constraining resource reallocation have often been cited as a cause of low
productivity in developing countries (Caselli 2005; Adamopoulos et al. 2017) but some recent work has found that
the extent of agricultural land and labor market distortions may be less than previously thought (Fuglie et al. 2019).

                                                          8
        Because environmental conditions (rainfall, temperature, humidity, soils, topography, etc.)

have such an important influence on agriculture, direct spillover of agricultural technologies is

likely to be limited across global geographies. Socio-economic and market factors also constrain

spillovers. Farmers in isolated areas with limited access to urban or international markets, for

example, are not likely to be able to achieve similar efficiency gains from scale and specialization

as farmers with ready access to such markets.

        Empirical studies on sources of agricultural TFP growth have found few cases of

international R&D spillovers between developed and developing countries, or between developing

countries themselves, although spillovers have occurred between temperate-zone developed

countries (Fuglie 2018). For example, using patent data, Johnson and Evenson (1999) show that

most international technology transfer in agriculture occurs between high-income, temperate

countries. Eberhardt and Teal (2013) find that agricultural TFP growth is strongly correlated across

similar agro-climatic environments.

        One factor that may be have constrained trade in agricultural technology within tropical

zones is the limited capacity of national R&D systems in these regions. Hayami and Ruttan (1985)

characterized three stages of national capacities in agricultural research ­ the ability to first screen,

then adapt and finally invent. Nascent R&D systems are limited to testing or screening

technologies developed elsewhere, while somewhat more advanced systems can adapt them to

local conditions, such as crossing an imported crop variety with a local cultivar to get an improved

variety adapted to local conditions. Most agricultural R&D systems in developing countries are at

this second stage, while a few, namely those in the large emerging economies of Brazil, China and

India, are rapidly moving toward the inventive stage. At this third stage, they are capable of

developing general purpose technologies that may have broad application elsewhere, especially in



                                                   9
agro-climatic zones not too dissimilar from their own. The development of the tropical soybean

by the Brazilian national agricultural research institute, EMBRAPA, and hybrid rice by the

Chinese national research system, provide examples of the consequences of this inventive

capacity. The emergence of greater R&D capacity across the tropics raises the prospect of boosting

productivity in the SSA region through new opportunities for direct trade in technology, a prospect

we consider in our analysis below.

       Another factor complicating growth trajectories in agriculture is the role of environmental

policies. Engels Law suggests that, at the margin, non-agricultural demands for environmental

resources like land, water and greenhouse gas emissions mitigation will grow in importance,

relative to food, as societies become wealthier. This is already manifesting itself in many high

income countries, where environmental restrictions and conservation measures are a significant

part of agricultural policies. Reforms since the 1990s to the EU's Common Agricultural Policy

(CAP), for example, have reduced price supports for agricultural commodities while at the same

time increasing payments to farmers for retiring land from production and adopting other

conservation measures. Several countries have also tightened regulations on nutrient loadings and

chemical use by farms, and placed restrictions on the use of certain technologies, such as

genetically modified (GM) crops and animal antibiotics and growth hormones (OECD 2011).

       One result of EU agricultural policies has been to pull more resources out of agricultural

production. According to statistics compiled by USDA/ERS (2019), between 1990 and 2016, the

aggregate amount of land, labor, capital and intermediate inputs employed in northwest European

agriculture declined by about one fourth. However, continued improvement in TFP kept farm

output from following suit ­ it remained roughly constant in real terms over this period (Figure

3). In contrast, in the US and Canada, aggregate inputs remained almost constant over the 1990-



                                                10
2014 period and steady TFP growth led to rising agricultural output. Viewed through this lens,

Europe used TFP growth to improve environmental outcomes rather than increase the supply of

food, while North America chose to boost food output at the expense of potential ongoing

environmental damages.




Figure 3. Indices of real agricultural output and aggregate input use in Northwest Europe and North
America, 1961-2016. Source: USDA/ERS (2019).
       In the context of a global trading equilibrium, differential rates of TFP growth among

countries or regions can be expected to affect competitiveness and comparative advantage, leading

some countries to expand their agricultural sector and others to contract. In our quantitative

analysis below, we consider the possibility that some countries may impose environmental

restrictions that constrain virtual trade in agricultural technology, and we explore how this might

affect the Malthusian outcome in SSA.

3. Theoretical Framework

Our theoretical framework is designed to be as simple as possible while still addressing all of the

key mechanisms determining the role of technology trade in resolving the food security dilemma

in SSA. To introduce notation and key concepts, we begin by exploring the Malthusian footrace

in the context of a single region, closed economy, thereupon moving to a two-region model to

introduce our concepts of trade in technology.


                                                 11
   3.1 Single Region Model
   Consider an aggregate, agricultural sector comprised of many farms subject to entry/exit based on

   profitability. Regardless of the farm level technology, free entry and exit in the context of cost

   minimization will lead to the aggregate industry operating in the neighborhood of constant returns

   to scale (Diewert 1981). In the spirit of simplicity, we group the determinants of food output into

   three distinct components: technology, the key factors constraining long run expansion (climate,

   land and water ­ dubbed `land'), and non-land inputs (including labor, capital and purchased

   inputs). With just two inputs, the Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) production function is

   sufficiently flexible to locally approximate any technology, leading to the following relationship:

=QO A(L QL
         -
           + N QN
                -  -1/ 
                  )                                                                       (1)

          If we further assume that the land input is supplied inelastically, with the non-land inputs

   in perfectly elastic supply from the non-farm economy over the long run, then the Malthusian

   challenge can be formulated in terms of the percentage change in food prices, which evolve

   according to the following relationship (for all derivations, see supplementary material):

   pO =[ D - a ( S + 1)] / [ S +  D ]                                                     (2)

   Where lower case variables denote percentage changes, i.e., pO = 100* dPO / PO is the growth in

   food prices and a = 100* dA / A is the rate of TFP growth in agriculture. TFP growth stands in

   opposition to the percentage growth in food demand due to rising population (and income),  D .

   The sign and magnitude of the long run equilibrium price change depends on the elasticity of

   supply,  S = L
                -1
                   L +  ( L
                          -1
                             - 1) , along with the (assumed constant) price elasticity of demand for

   food,  D . The price elasticity of supply for agricultural products, depends, in turn, on the potential

   to expand area:  L
                    -1
                       L , where  L is the cost share of land and water in production,  L is the



                                                     12
 responsiveness of harvested area to land returns, and  ( L
                                                          -1
                                                             - 1) is the potential for further

 intensification of production, which, in turn, depends on the cost share of land and elasticity of

                                                1/ (1 +  ) .
 substitution between land and non-land inputs,=

         Equation (2) highlights the Malthusian footrace between growing demand and growth in

 agricultural productivity, where the latter is modulated by the responsiveness of supply to scarcity.

 If agricultural supplies are price-inelastic,  S = 0 , then the outcome of this footrace simply boils

 down to a question of whether TFP can grow at a faster rate than food demand. As noted in the

 introduction, the problem at present in the SSA region is that population growth remains

 stubbornly high, while agricultural TFP growth has historically been amongst the lowest in the

 world. This mismatch has resulted in food scarcity, rising prices, and rising undernutrition in many

 parts of SSA.

         Fortunately for SSA, the empirical evidence suggests that there exists significant supply

 response to price in the agricultural sector, once transactions costs are taken into account (Magrini,

 Balié, and Morales-Opazo 2018). This means that, in addition to the impact of an outward supply

 shift due to TFP growth, the ensuing increase in profitability in the sector will further boost

 production by drawing additional land and non-land inputs into the sector. This point is highlighted

 in the solution for equilibrium agricultural output growth as a function of increasing demand as

 well as TFP growth:

qO [a D ( S + 1) +  S  D ] / [ S +  D ]
=                                                                                      (3)

 This supply response notwithstanding, it is critical to improve TFP growth rates in the region if

 one hopes to attract sufficient resources and boost output fast enough to keep prices from rising.

 Indeed, the food security goal in this region is to significantly reduce food prices ­ particularly

 during the `lean season' ­ in order to reduce undernutrition in SSA.

                                                  13
        Within this framework, there are four obvious points of entry to overcome the Malthusian

threat in the SSA region, encapsulated in equation (2). The first is to slow population growth

( ). This has been successful in some parts of the continent. For example, Ethiopia has reduced

its population growth rate by a full percentage point since 1990 (Ethiopia Population 2019), but in

the poorest countries in West Africa, there is significant resistance to discussion of family

planning, let alone implementing a program targeting fertility rates (INS/Niger and International

2013). The next point of entry in equation (2) is to boost TFP growth ( ). As discussed in the

introduction, this has been the primary driver of agricultural output growth in the industrialized

countries since the end of WWII (Hayami and Ruttan 1985; Fuglie 2015). However, it can take

decades for public spending on agricultural R&D to actually boost TFP growth. Indeed, Baldos et

al. (2019) estimate that the productivity impacts of public R&D spending in the United States

peaked 22 years after the initial investment. And its impact persists for nearly 50 years! With half

of its population under 15 years of age and entering the child-bearing stage of their lifetime,

countries like Niger (INS/Niger and International 2013) cannot wait that long for improvements

in agricultural TFP.

        This brings us to the idea of trade in technology ­ the vehicle for delivering the last two

options for resolving the Malthusian dilemma in SSA. As noted above, the first, and most obvious,

type of technology trade involves importing existing technologies from other regions. This is

typically termed `technology spillover' and this idea inspired many foreign aid projects in the

1950's ­ introducing new breeds of livestock and new seed varieties into Africa, among other

efforts. Unfortunately, most of these projects failed miserably with the livestock falling prey to

local disease and lack of management infrastructure and the new seed varieties failing due to

insufficient nutrients, irregular precipitation and vulnerability to local pests. This poor track record



                                                  14
   is evident in the empirical work that finds only very limited evidence of direct agricultural

   technology transfers from OECD countries into the tropical regions of Africa (Johnson and

   Evenson 1999; Eberhardt and Teale 2013; Fuglie 2018). However, with growing capacity for

   research discovery in emerging economies like Brazil, China, and India, that share more agro-

   ecological and socio-economic characteristics with Africa, the potential for R&D spillovers

   increases.   We explore below the potential for such `direct technology trade' to solve the

   Malthusian challenge in Africa.

          As noted above, we dub the second type of technology trade, as `virtual trade in

   technology' ­ drawing inspiration from the literature on `virtual water trade' (Allan 1998; Yang

   and Zehnder 2007). In this case, rather than importing the technology itself, we explore the role of

   international commodity trade in allowing agricultural products produced elsewhere with new

   technologies to resolve the upward price pressures resulting from rapid population growth in the

   face of sluggish TFP growth in SSA agriculture. In order to render this idea more concrete, we

   expand the model introduced above to two regions and consider the impact of TFP growth in the

   rest of the world (RoW) on food prices, production and imports in SSA. Specifically, we evaluate

   the percentage change in SSA net imports, relative to worldwide production, as a function of

   technological innovation in the rest of the world. To address this issue, we turn now to the two

   region model.

   3.2 Two Region Model
          We begin with the following expression for the change in net imports into SSA:

=            =
 t 100* dM SSA / QW  qoD
                       SSA
                           -  qoS
                                SSA
                                                                                       (4)

       =
   where    SSA
         M QD   - QO
                   SSA
                       reflects net imports into the SSA region, T = M / QW expresses these net

   imports as a portion of global supply,  = QO
                                              SSA
                                                  / QW is SSA's share of global supply (which equals



                                                   15
global demand by virtual of global market clearing), and  = QD
                                                             SSA
                                                                 / QW is SSA's share of global

demand (which equals supply in this equilibrium model). Solving for percentage change in the

global price, we have:

   -( S
pO =  RoW
          + 1)a RoW / ({( D
                          W
                            +  S
                               SSA
                                   ) / (1 -  )} +  S
                                                   RoW
                                                        - O a RoW
                                                       )=                                        (5)

where the superscript RoW denotes rest of world and so a RoW is TFP growth in the non-SSA region.

This expression is quite similar to (2), only now the productivity growth in question only arises in

the non-SSA, RoW region.

        Utilizing this equilibrium outcome allows us to solve for the elasticity of net imports into

SSA as a function of TFP growth in the rest of the world, yielding the following:

                 / QW [ S
   a RoW 100* dM =
t /=                    SSA
                            +  D
                               SSA
                                   ] O
                                     RoW
                                                                                                 (6)

where  O
       RoW
           = ( S
               RoW
                   + 1) / [{( D
                              W
                                +  S
                                   SSA
                                       ) / (1 -  )} +  S
                                                       RoW
                                                           ] . Not surprisingly, the elasticity of virtual

technology trade with respect to RoW productivity growth, t / a RoW , depends on all of the supply

and demand elasticities in the two region model, as well as the relative size of SSA and in the

global food economy, through the (negative of the) price multiplier on RoW TFP growth:  O
                                                                                        RoW
                                                                                            .

Once the world price effect is determined, then the trade elasticity is increasing in the price

elasticities of demand and supply in the SSA region. If consumers and producers in this region are

highly responsive to price, then the elasticity of virtual technology trade will be larger.

        In the quantitative trade model developed in the next section, we will elicit the magnitude

of this elasticity. In an empirical context, we will see that the virtual trade in technology elasticity

also depends critically on the degree to which the SSA food economy is integrated into global

markets. The foregoing, two region model assumes full market integration, but in reality, the extent

of SSA integration into world agricultural markets remains limited. Furthermore, in the context of



                                                   16
a more disaggregated representation of the global economy we expect that virtual technology trade

will emanate from just a few highly innovative regions, not the entire rest of world.

3.3 Implications for Land Use
For a number of purposes, it will also be useful to consider the impact of new agricultural

technologies on land use in agriculture. The change in global cropland as a function of innovations

in the RoW region can be expressed at the weighted summation of the change in RoW cropland

and the change in cropland in the SSA region:

        q=W
          L  qL
              SSA
                  + (1 -  )qL
                            RoW
                                                                                             (7)

where  is the share of SSA in global cropland. Substituting in the equilibrium solution for world

prices and the ensuing land supplies, as a function of the TFP change we have:

         L =
        qW  - ( L
                SSA
                    / L
                      SSA
                          ) O
                            RoW RoW
                               a    + (1 -  )( L
                                               RoW
                                                   / L
                                                     RoW
                                                         )(1 -  O
                                                                RoW
                                                                    )a RoW                   (8)

Clearly land use in the SSA region will fall when TFP in the RoW region rises, since world prices

are falling, but land use in the RoW region is ambiguous. If  O < 1 , then the second term in (8)
                                                              RoW



will be positive and land use will rise in RoW. But this is the same condition for the excess demand

elasticity facing producers in RoW to be inelastic. This is also the condition under which land rents

rise, and land use expands in the face of TFP improvements.

       What about the global change in cropland? Insight into the combined land use changes can

be gained by making some simplifying assumptions (see Appendix). If, for example, supply

response to commodity prices is the same in both SSA and RoW, then the condition for global

cropland to expand in the face of TFP growth in RoW is simply:

        (1 -  ) / (1 -  ) > ( S + 1) / ( D
                                         W
                                           + S )                                             (9)

Where the left-hand side of this expression is equal to the ratio of global crop yields (output per

unit area) to RoW crop yields. This tells us that, for global cropland to expand in the wake of RoW


                                                   17
productivity gains, we require a relative elastic global demand for food ( D >> 0) combined with
                                                                           W



relatively low yields in RoW [(1 -  ) / (1 -  )] >> 1 so that the combination of expanding food

demand and displacement of high yielding crops elsewhere by low yielding production in the

innovating region causes RoW land use to expand more than the contraction in SSA. This does not

square with the facts, since global food demand is relatively inelastic and yields in SSA are low,

relative to RoW. Therefore, we expect, that, with integrated commodity markets, technological

innovation in RoW will reduce global land use in crops, thereby benefiting the environment.

3.4 Adding Natural Resource Conservation
The final consideration that we bring to bear in this theoretical model is the emerging trend in

some of the world's richest economies to use TFP growth to reduce input use in agriculture. This

reduces the growth in output in food production in the RoW region, as can be seen in the following

expression in which agricultural land and water resources are withdrawn from agriculture through

a set of environmental programs, thereby resulting in a backward shift in land supply,  L :

=RoW
qO    SRoW pO + ( SRoW + 1)a RoW -  RoW
                                    L                                              (10)

 From this expression it can be seen that such an environmental program can potentially be large

enough to neutralize the growth in output and eliminate the virtual technology trade altogether.

Indeed, this has been the case in much of Europe as well as in high income East Asia (Heisey and

Fuglie 2018). In the special case where: =
                                          RoW
                                          L   a RoW ( S
                                                      RoW
                                                          + 1) , these conservation programs fully

offset the effect of TFP on output growth. Another way of thinking about this is that regions like

the EU can withdraw resources from agriculture up to this point without having an adverse impact

on output. However, if TFP growth slows beyond that point, or if the conservation practices are

more aggressive, regional output -- at constant world prices -- will fall.




                                                 18
       In the context of the two-region trade equilibrium, the world price change as a function of

the combined TFP growth and conservation measures in the non-SSA (RoW) region becomes:

pO = [(1 -  ) L
              RoW
                  - (1 -  )( S
                             RoW
                                 + 1)a RoW ] / [ D
                                                 W
                                                   + S
                                                     W
                                                       ]                          (11)

The first term in the numerator (backward supply shift due to conservation measures) offsets some

of the price reducing effect of the innovation in RoW and therefore dilutes the amount of virtual

technology trade which will follow from the innovations in RoW agriculture.

4. Quantitative Trade Model

In order to explore the potential for trade in technology to resolve the Malthusian challenge in

SSA, we turn to a numerical implementation of the theoretical framework discussed above. This

higher dimensional implementation of the theoretical model allows us to relax a number of critical

assumptions. These include: (i) increasing the number of regions to allow for isolation of key

sources of technology spillovers (ii) development of explicit R&D spending scenarios and the

ensuing profile of TFP growth across these regions over time, (iii) heterogeneous rates of

population and income growth, and (iv) relaxing of the assumption of perfectly elastic supplies of

non-land factors of production.

4.1 Model Dimensions
The quantitative trade model used here is dubbed SIMPLE: a Simplified International Model of

Prices Land use and the Environment, in recognition of the barebones nature of the model (Baldos

and Hertel, 2013; Hertel and Baldos, 2016). It has been used to analyze the long run drivers of

future food production, prices and land use change (Baldos and Hertel 2013; Hertel, Baldos, and

van der Mensbrugghe 2016), adaptation to climate change (Baldos and Hertel 2015; Lobell,

Baldos, and Hertel 2013), the role of R&D and productivity growth in ensuring food security and

environmental sustainability (Baldos and Hertel 2014; Hertel, Ramankutty, and Baldos 2014) and

the market impacts of reducing food waste and post-harvest losses (Hertel and Baldos 2016). As

                                                 19
        its name suggests, this has been designed around the principle that a model should be no more

        complex than is absolutely necessary to understand the basic forces governing the global supply

        and demand for crops, cropland and food prices.

               The SIMPLE model disaggregates the world economy into sixteen regions, each producing

        an aggregate crop commodity using a variable combination of land and nonland inputs (Fig. A1 in

        supplementary material). Substitution of non-land inputs (e.g., fertilizers, farm labor and

        machinery) for land in crop production offers scope for endogenous intensification of production,

        allowing for crop yield growth even in the absence of technological change under increasing

        scarcity of land. Expansion of cropland requires that the land be bid away from competing uses,

        with the size of this area response varying across geographic regions. Crop production in SIMPLE

        has four potential uses: direct consumption, livestock feed, food processing, and biofuel feed-

        stocks. Food demands are price- and income-sensitive, but become more inelastic as per capita

        incomes rise (Muhammad et al. 2011). Rising incomes also cause consumers to diversify their

        diets, which, at early stages of economic development, means adding relatively more livestock and

        processed foods. Production of both these commodities requires crop inputs ­ the demand for

        which can be altered by exogenous technological progress in those sectors (e.g., more feed efficient

        livestock technology).

        4.2 Endogenizing Crop Productivity
        In the crops sector, we allow for endogenous growth in productivity, driven by exogenously

        specified time paths for investments in agricultural research. To implement this idea, we modify

        the production function in (1) as follows:
         O  S
=QO AO K O KS     -
              (L QL      -  -1/ 
                    + N QN )                                                                (12)




                                                        20
where initial productivity, AO , is enhanced by growth in the stock of own-knowledge capital,  ,

and spill-in knowledge capital,  . These provide factor-neutral productivity shocks, directly

contributing to TFP growth in the region. The parameters  and  are elasticities that specify the

percentage change in TFP from a 1% increase in knowledge capital from a given source.

       Knowledge capital  accumulates from past research expenditures  () in region 

according to:
         -
 = -  -(-)  ()                                                                      (13)

where  is the knowledge capital depreciation rate and  represents the lag time for research

expenditures to mature into useable technologies that are adopted on farms.            The general

expression in (10) can take on a variety of forms. It weights each past year's research expenditure

by a value ranging from 0 to 1 (0 when the technology is not yet in use or has been replaced or

fully depreciated, and 1 when it is fully operational and adopted). In our application we assume a

35-year research lag structure where the weights have a gamma distribution that reaches a

maximum value after 14 years. See Alston et al. (2010) for a discussion of measuring knowledge

capital in the context of agriculture.

       Sources of data on historical expenditures for public and private agricultural research

spending are described in Fuglie (2018), who also reports elasticities estimated by more than 40

studies on how agricultural R&D affected TFP growth in different regions of the world. These

elasticities describe how public and private research within countries, research in other countries,

and research by international agricultural research centers, affected agricultural TFP growth in

particular countries. From this list, Fuglie (2018) developed a "synthesis" set of R&D elasticities

for major global regions and compared the predicted TFP growth from R&D spending to actual

TFP growth for those regions. Fuglie's (2018) results are reproduced in Figure 4, which give an


                                                21
indication of the share of historical TFP growth that can be attributed to R&D, as opposed to other

factors. In developed regions, changes in R&D knowledge capital explain nearly all of agricultural

TFP growth, and R&D spill-ins are significant. In developing regions and transition economies,

R&D knowledge capital accounts for only part of the observed growth in TFP, and R&D spill-ins

are important only for the LAC region. The CGIAR system of international agricultural research

centers, which focuses on improving food crops in low income countries, has had a measurable

impact on agricultural productivity across all developing regions. The gap between observed and

predicted TFP growth in China, Africa and elsewhere can be explained in part by reforms in these

regions that encouraged more efficient utilization of existing resources.




Figure 4. Observed changes in agricultural TFP for major global regions over 1991-2011 and
predicted TFP growth from changes in R&D capital over same period. Source: Fuglie (2018).




                                                22
4.3 Estimating Undernutrition
Our principal Malthusian metric is the extent of macronutrient malnutrition, specifically, daily

caloric intake. Based on estimates from FAO (2012), we postulate a distribution of caloric intake

across the population in SSA. The solid line in Figure 5 shows this distribution for the year 2006.

By integrating under this density function up to the minimum caloric requirement, we obtain the

undernutrition index for that year. Multiplying by total population in the region, we obtain the

poverty headcount. Following the approach originally developed for poverty measures by Foster,

Greer and Thorbecke (1984), we can also compute the average depth of undernutrition or the

`undernutrition gap'. As income rises, food consumption increases, along with caloric intake, and

this density function shifts to the right. The hypothetical 2050 density shown in Figure 5 shows a

lower undernutrition headcount ratio in the wake of changes in per capita income, and food prices.

However, the absolute number of undernourished people in the region depends on the population

growth.




Figure 5 Distribution of caloric consumption for Sub Saharan Africa in 2006 (solid black line) and
in 2050 (dashed blue line). The dotted line represents the minimum required daily caloric intake.
Source: Authors' calculations using 2006 data from FAO (2012) and 2050 projections from
authors' calculations.




                                                23
4.4. International Trade
The standard implementation of SIMPLE incorporates market segmentation following the idea

originally proposed by Armington (1969) who postulated that domestic and imported products

were differentiated goods, albeit potentially close substitutes with the degree of substitution

determined by a CES function. This trade specification, and subsequent elaborations on this basic

CES framework that introduce love of variety, have dominated the empirical trade literature

(Hillberry and Hummels 2013) and the CES specification has been shown to dominate the

homogeneous product approach in the context of agricultural trade (e.g., Villoria and Hertel,

2011). The CES specification is also consistent with market demand when individual households

make a discrete choice between purchasing international vs. domestic commodities                and

consumers' ideal characteristics are distributed according to the multinomial logit (Anderson,

Palma, and Thisse 1989). In this case, the elasticity of substitution is inversely related to the

measure of heterogeneity in the underlying population's preferences. So, for example, a country

in SSA with a portion of the population in an urban seaport, exposed to international products, and

also many people still living in remote rural areas with limited exposure to world markets, would

have a lower elasticity of substitution than one in which nearly everyone lived in cities along the

coast with ready access to international markets.

       We apply the same segmented markets specification to domestic producers where suitable

aggregation across agricultural producers with differential international market access gives rise

to a Constant Elasticity of Transformation (CET) between goods produced for the domestic and

international markets. When many of a country's farmers face high transport costs and have poor

access to world markets, the absolute value of this transformation elasticity is small, and domestic

producers are relatively unresponsive to world price changes. On the other hand, when farmers are

well- integrated into the world market, we expect a strong supply response to international prices.

                                                24
        The extent of market segmentation is captured by the elasticities of substitution and

transformation between domestic and international goods as well as the initial shares of

international goods in the consumption and production bundles. The absolute value of the trade

elasticities are set to 3, in keeping with the broad thrust of the empirical evidence for international

substitution of crops (Hertel et al. 2007). In the Armington specification, the initial extent of market

penetration (the share of demand expenditures on international goods, linked to domestic goods

through the CES utility function, and the share of domestic production sold to the global market,

linked to local sales through the CET transformation function ­ see Figure A2) also plays a central

role in determining the degree to which the global and regional crop markets are linked. If no

international goods are available (zero share), then domestic and international consumer prices

will not be linked at all.

4.5 Model Validation
SIMPLE has been tested over historical periods via backcasting, focusing on global changes in

food production, prices and cropland (Baldos and Hertel 2013), regional output changes (Hertel,

Ramankutty, and Baldos 2014; Hertel and Baldos 2016), as well as changes in undernutrition

(Baldos and Hertel 2014). Figure 6 summarizes observed changes as well as model outputs over

the period 1961­2006. Model outputs are generated using historical changes in population, income

as well as agricultural TFP growth (see Table A1). In general, the model does well in capturing

the historical changes in crop production and crop price at the global level (actual changes at 196%

and -23% vs model output at 183% and -23%, respectively). SIMPLE also captures the partitioning

of global crop supply growth between global cropland expansion and global average crop yield

growth (see Figure A3). However, relative to the global changes the model does less well at

capturing historical changes at the regional level (see Figure A4) due to the importance of local

and regional policies, civil conflict and many other factors omitted from SIMPLE. This regional

                                                  25
`fit' could be improved by incorporating additional shifters in the supply and demand functions to

reflect these other factors.

        Figure 6 also shows the contribution of population, income and agricultural productivity

growth to the historical changes output. Here, we see that the simulated increase in global crop

production is mainly due to the historic population growth over this period (red bar ­ left panel,

Figure 6). Increased food demand due to population growth results in upward pressure on global

crop price (red bar, right panel, Figure 6) but strong growth in agricultural productivity (green bar,

right panel, Figure 6) caused food prices over this long run historical period to decline.




Figure 6. Historical validation and decomposition of key drivers of global crop production and
prices. Historical data on crop production and prices are from FAO (2019) and World Bank
(2019), respectively. (See also Appendix Table A1.)

5. Results

5.1 Historical Role of Trade in Technology: 1991-2011
We begin by examining the role of the three different channels through which technology can

influence food security in an historical context. Given the long lag linking R&D spending to

knowledge capital, and limitations on our R&D time series data, our historical analysis of the

different channels of technology trade begins in 1991 (recall Figure 4). By combining the findings

underpinning figures 4 and 6, we can provide a decomposition of the contributions of technology

                                                 26
to food price changes in the SSA region over the 1991-2011 period (Figure 7). This shows that the

most important channel was direct investment in R&D within the SSA region, followed by virtual

technology trade and CGIAR investments in R&D. The world market effects of spill-ins among

countries outside of SSA, and thereby on SSA prices ­ labeled here as `interactions', was relative

minor over this historical period.


                  Historical Drivers of Consumers' Crop Price in SSA: 1991-2006
 30


                         6.5

  0
                                                                                           -1.8
                                                                 -4.5          -4.8
                                                     -7.5
          -12.2
                                           -18.6
-30
        TOTAL         Non-Tech        All Tech     Own Tech    CGIAR      Virtual Tech Interactions
       CHANGE                                                                Trade
                               Subtotals                      Subtotals: All Tech only


Figure 7. Historical decomposition of consumers' crop price drivers in Sub-Saharan Africa: 1991-
2011. Non-Tech drivers include population and income, as well as TFP growth in non-crop sectors
and the crop TFP residual unexplained by R&D investments in agriculture. All Tech drivers
comprise public R&D in SSA, CGIAR R&D, Virtual technology trade and Interactions. Virtual
technology trade is the combined impact of public and private R&D spending in non-SSA regions
(RoW) and the interactions represent the impact on SSA prices of between regional R&D spill-ins
amongst RoW regions as channeled through virtual technology trade.
5.2 Future Scenarios
To understand the potential for trade in technology to alleviate the Malthusian pressures in the

SSA region by mid-century, we run a series of six forward-looking experiments as shown in Table

1, where rows correspond to the state of market integration and columns correspond to the extent

of technology spillovers. For example, the first cell in this experimental design matrix captures the

intersection of historically segmented markets (first row) and historical (low) spillover coefficients

(first column). We dub this experiment Seg-LowSpill which we treat as our future baseline

                                                     27
scenario, since it corresponds to the assumptions made in our historical analysis. In contrast, the

diagonally opposing cell is dubbed Int-HighSpill, denoting fully integrated markets (second row)

and enhanced spillovers (but without environmental restrictions) (second column), as described in

Sections 2 and 3 above. By comparing entries across rows in this matrix we obtain insights into

the role of market integration in the determination of technology's impacts on future food prices

and undernutrition in Sub Saharan Africa. By contrasting entries across the first two columns in

this matrix, we see the effects of enhanced spillovers on direct and virtual technology trade and

their consequences for undernutrition in SSA. The final (third) column in this experimental design

table corresponds to the case in which environmental restrictions in key non-SSA regions are

added to the shocks applied in the second column's experiments. By restricting food supplies in

the rest of the world, these policies will indirectly affect SSA prices and undernutrition.

Table 1. Experimental Design

                                             Technology Spillovers
 Experimental
 Design                                                Enhanced Spillovers
                               Historical
                                                 No Environ      With Environ
                               Spillovers
                                                 Restrictions     Restrictions

                 Historical
 Integration




                              Seg-LowSpill      Seg-HighSpill    Seg-HighSpill-Env
               Segmentation
   Market




                    Full
                              Int-LowSpill       Int-HighSpill   Int-HighSpill-Env
                Integration



5.3 Global Baseline Results
Before taking a closer look at the regional results in SSA, we first examine the changes in key

global variables in our future baseline scenario: Seg-LowSpill. Figure 8 shows projected changes

in global crop production and prices (upper panel). These projections are generated using baseline

assumptions about how population and per capita income as well as agricultural TFP will grow

                                                  28
between 2006 and 2050 (see Table A2). Under the future baseline, growth rates in TFP for the

crops sector are based on expected increases in public R&D spending in agriculture as well as

`Historical North' technology spillovers as defined in Section 4.1.

       An important qualification is that we abstract from climate change impacts in these

projections. These impacts remain highly uncertain, but within the context of the present

framework, adverse climate impacts might best be thought of as `sand in the gears' of the

R&D/productivity production process. In effect the elasticity of productivity with respect to R&D

capital might be reduced in the most severely affected regions. On a global scale, between the

present and mid-century, there are both positive impacts (colder regions benefit, as do certain

plants that benefit from elevated CO2 concentrations) as well as negative ones, thereby resulting

in offsetting global price impacts. As one moves out further in the century, the negative impacts

dominate (IPCC 2014).




                                                29
Figure 8. Projected baseline, 2006-2050, assuming segmented markets, historical spillovers and
the absence of environmental restrictions on agriculture. The colored bars provide a decomposition
of key drivers of global crop production, prices, caloric consumption and non-farm undernutrition
headcount. See Appendix Table A1 for more details.
        Relative to the historical changes, we see that the future increase in global crop production

over 2006-2050 (109%) is much less rapid (in percentage terms) than the increase over a

comparable historical period: 1961-2005 (190% - see Figure 6). Global food prices are expected

to continue their long-term decline (falling by another 39% from 2006 levels). Key to these

outcomes is the anticipated slowdown in demand growth as global population stabilizes (average

annual growth of 2.6% in 1961-2006 vs 0.8% in 2006-2050). With this slower population growth,

we now see that a rise in the relative contribution of per capita income growth to total food output

growth (orange bar ­ upper left panel, Figure 8). Globally, average caloric consumption is

expected to increase by 39% (mostly through increased consumption of meat and processed food

products) while undernutrition count is predicted to fall by almost 87%. Greater food availability

due to future improvements in farm productivity leading to increased food affordability, as well as

rising per capita incomes, are key to attaining these strong gains in future food security.

5.4 The Role of Technology in Enhancing Food Security in SSA
Figure 9 reports four sets of results from our experiments with the two variants of the SIMPLE

model: segmented and integrated markets for crop commodities, each considered under two

different technology scenarios: historical (low) spillovers and enhanced (high) spillovers.

Focusing first on the model with segmented markets and historical spillovers (our `baseline'

version of the current world, Seg-LowSpill), the model projects flat consumer crop prices in SSA

over the 2006-2050 period (the far left orange column in Figure 9). The next set of bars report the

contribution of population, income and non-crop TFP growth in the global economy, leaving the

remaining bars in the left-hand panel of Figure 9 to decompose the impact of R&D investments in


                                                 30
agricultural technology (All Tech) into the components identified in the theory section above. The

first is the contribution of SSA's own technological innovations on crop prices in the SSA region.

This contribution is relatively modest over the future period, as public R&D spending in the region

has been relatively low and is not projected to grow strongly in the coming decades. For example,

Fuglie et al. (2019) show that agricultural R&D spending by SSA countries is far lower than the

developing-world average by a number of intensity measures (spending as a percentage of

agricultural GDP, spending per hectare of cropland, spending per farm worker, the growth rate in

spending over the past several decades). The second set of Tech bars in Figure 9 refer to the impact

of CGIAR investments in R&D. These assume relatively greater importance going forward. The

historical record does not show evidence of significant R&D spillovers into the SSA region

(beyond CGIAR) and so there is no direct trade in technology between RoW and SSA in the left-

hand panel of Figure 9. The fourth component of this decomposition refers to the impact of virtual

technology trade, led by growth in the availability of food in the SSA region due to technological

improvements elsewhere in the world. In sharp contrast to the historical period, this is the dominant

factor in the baseline experiment wherein market segmentation and historical spillovers are

maintained. The fourth and final component of this decomposition is the result of interactions

between spillovers amongst regions in RoW and virtual technology trade with SSA. When

technology spills over from (e.g.) US to Argentina, and Argentinian producers expand exports,

SSA benefits indirectly from the spillovers within RoW through lower world food prices. This

interaction effect would not have arisen if the initial spillovers had not taken place. It is facilitated

by international commodity trade, but it is quite small in our baseline experiment under segmented

markets.




                                                   31
       What would happen if markets become fully integrated while retaining the historical

technology spillovers? This is admittedly an extreme case, whereby one price prevails, worldwide,

for the composite crop commodity. This scenario is designed to foreshadow future differences in

the impact of technology trade, if agricultural markets were to become more globalized. There are

clearly many obstacles to achieving greater international integration in agricultural markes,

including transportation costs and infrastructure limitations, government policies aimed at

maintaining some degree of self-sufficiency in food, and differing sanitary and phyto-sanitary

standards. However, the emergence of global supply chains for food is gradually reducing these

barriers. It is therefore of some interest to consider this case. Under the Int-LowSpill scenario SSA

crop prices fall by about 50% when markets are integrated (the far-left orange stippled bar). This

highlights the critical importance of international trade in determining the future affordability of

food in the SSA region in the face of strong growth in population and per capita incomes (Non-

Tech contribution to prices). The mechanism by which this occurs is as follows: When markets

are integrated, the upward pressure on SSA food prices owing to this economic growth is spread

across the globe. Since the downward price pressure in SSA from technology (All Tech) is quite

similar to the segmented case, the net effect is a significant price reduction for SSA consumers.

       It is also interesting to contrast results from the Seg-LowSpill baseline experiment with the

case wherein commodity markets remain segmented, but technology spillovers are enhanced (Seg-

HighSpill), thereby allowing for low income countries, including those in SSA, to benefit from

technological advancements in the emerging economies. These results are displayed in the red bars

in the right hand panel of Figure 9. Enhanced spillovers now contribute directly to price reductions

via technology trade (SSA spillovers) as well as indirectly through the interaction effect. With

greater spillovers amongst developing countries elsewhere, there are significant indirect (virtual)



                                                 32
benefits to food consumers in the SSA region. When combined, this results in a reduction in food

SSA prices of 35% over the 45 year projections period.

       The stippled red bars in the right-hand panel of Figure 9 report the combined impact of

integrated markets and enhanced spillovers (Int-HighSpill). The presence of integrated markets

spreads effect of the SSA demand-side growth across the world, thereby diminishing the upward

price pressure. Meanwhile, given the large and growing role of agriculture R&D investments in

Latin America, China and South Asia, enhanced spillovers from those regions have a significant

impact on world prices, contributing to the reduction of consumer prices in SSA under the Int-

ESpill scenario. This combination of market integration and enhanced spillovers generates the

most favorable outcome for SSA consumers, with prices dropping by more than two-thirds over

the 2006-2050 period.

   Future Drivers of Consumers' Crop Price in SSA: 2006-2050

                      Historical North                                                                                                      Enhanced Spillovers
100                                                                                                                  100




   0                                                                                                                   0




-100                                                                                                                 -100
                                                                SSA Spillovers




                                                                                                                                                                                          SSA Spillovers
                       Non-Tech




                                                                                                                                                 Non-Tech
                                             Own Tech




                                                                                                                                                                       Own Tech
                                                                                 Virtual Tech Trade

                                                                                                      Interactions




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Virtual Tech Trade

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Interactions
                                  All Tech



                                                        CGIAR




                                                                                                                                                            All Tech




                                                                                                                                                                                  CGIAR
       TOTAL CHANGE




                                                                                                                                 TOTAL CHANGE




                      Subtotals               Subtotals: All Tech only                                                                          Subtotals               Subtotals: All Tech only

           Segmented                                    Integrated                                                                    Segmented                                   Integrated



                                                                                                                            33
Figure 9. Contribution of technological change to the reduction in consumers' crop prices in Sub
Saharan Africa: 2006-2050. Non-Tech drivers include population and income, as well as TFP
growth in non-crop sectors and the crop TFP residual unexplained by R&D investments in
agriculture. All Tech drivers comprise public R&D in SSA, CGIAR R&D, SSA spill-ins
(Enhanced spillovers only), Virtual technology trade and Interactions. Virtual technology trade is
the combined impact of public and private R&D spending in non-SSA regions (RoW) and the
interactions represent the impact on SSA prices of between regional R&D spill-ins amongst RoW
regions as channeled through virtual technology trade. Source: Authors' calculations.


       One of the key assumptions in our future projections is that the historical relationship

between knowledge capital and TFP growth will hold in the future (i.e., the elasticities in equation

(12) are unchanging). While this may be reasonable in many cases, we have undertaken sensitivity

analysis in two important cases. The first pertains to the productivity of knowledge capital in the


SSA region. Historically,  O for SSA was just half as large as for the developed regions. This

makes it difficult for R&D investments to have a big impact on future productivity. In the

sensitivity analysis presented in the Appendix, we report the impacts of the different types of

technology trade on crop prices in SSA for the case where this elasticity for SSA is doubled so that

it reaches the values estimated for the more developed regions. This more than doubles the

contribution of `Own Tech' to crop price reduction in SSA, and it leads to a further 5% reduction

in overall prices in the baseline (-12.4% vs. -7.6%) under segmented markets. However, doubling

the knowledge capital elasticity for SSA has little impact on crop prices in the region under fully

integrated markets.

       The other region where we believe a robustness check is in order is Asia ­ particularly

China -- where extremely high rates of current agricultural R&D investments are leading to rapid

growth in knowledge capital and there is some concern about whether these investments will be

as productive as in the past. In the Appendix, we consider the impact on consumer prices in SSA

under the assumption that   O   is just half as large for Asia going forward, as was the case in the

                                                 34
historical simulation. In this case, the impact of virtual technology trade is a smaller driver of crop

prices in SSA, although some of this is picked up by other factors so that the total difference in

prices under the baseline case is modest (-2.4% vs. -7.6%).

5.5 The Role of Increased Environmental Emphasis in Other Regions
Thus far, we have assumed that rising productivity in other regions of the world translates into

increasing output and therefore virtual technology trade. However, as we saw in Section 2, in

Northern Europe this improved technology has translated into reduced inputs instead of higher

output. In particular, by limiting the use of land, water and chemicals in agriculture, the European

Union has sought to make farmers stewards of the environment, with farm payments to provide

the necessary incentives. The theory developed in Section 3 demonstrates the potential for such

environmental restrictions to offset the impact of productivity growth on prices and virtual

technology trade. Of course, the extent to which this will actually occur is an empirical question.

It depends on the stringency of the environmental restrictions, relative to the rate of productivity

growth, the elasticities of supply and demand, as well as the contribution of the restricted region

to global output. For this reason, it is important to conduct a quantitative experiment to assess the

potential impacts on SSA of stronger environmental standards in RoW.

       In this final pair of experiments (recall the last column in Table 1), we assume that the EU

approach to restricting inputs used in agriculture spreads to other high income economies,

including the US, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Korea and Japan, as well as to China and Latin

America, where environmental pressures are also building. The stringency of these restrictions is

such that crop output ceases to grow in all these countries, instead diverting the improved

productivity to reduced input usage. Figure 10 decomposes the impact of technology, on the one

hand, and region-specific environmental policies, on the other, on consumer crop prices in SSA.




                                                  35
                   Future Drivers of Consumers' Crop Price in
                                SSA: 2006-2050
  150
           Enhanced Spillovers with Environmental Restrictions



    0




 -150
                           Non-Tech




                                                       All Env Restrictions




                                                                                                         Latin America
                                                                                     Developed Regions
                                            All Tech




                                                                                                                         China
            TOTAL CHANGE




                                         Subtotals                                 Subtotals: Env Restrictions only
                                      Segmented                                             Integrated

Figure 10. Contribution of technological change and environmental restrictions to consumers' crop
prices in Sub Saharan Africa: 2006-2050. Non-Tech drivers include population and income, as
well as TFP growth in non-crop sectors and the crop TFP residual unexplained by R&D
investments in agriculture. All Tech drivers comprise public R&D in SSA, CGIAR R&D, SSA
spill-ins, virtual technology trade and interactions. Environmental restrictions are imposed in the
developed regions as well as Latin America and China. Source: Authors' calculations.

        The solid orange bars in Figure 10 show the impact of environmental restrictions under

segmented markets and high spillovers (Seg-HighSpill-Env). Despite the supply-side benefits of

enhanced spillovers, the extensive environmental restrictions result in an 18% rise consumer prices

for crop products in SSA. This stands in sharp contrast to the 25% reduction under the Seg-

HighSpill experiment, illustrating the indirect impact on SSA food security of widespread

environmental constraints on agriculture elsewhere. The environmental constraints on China are

the most impactful when it comes to SSA food prices, as China is the world's largest food producer

as well as consumer. This is followed ­ in roughly equal amounts ­ by the environmental

constraints in Latin America, and those in the wealthy economies.



                                                                              36
       The final experiment, Int-HighSpill-Env, adds market integration to the mix. So there are

now three counterfactual elements to this scenario: enhanced spillovers of technology from

emerging economies to other developing regions, environmental constraints in key regions of the

world, and agricultural market integration. In this case, the role of market integration in spreading

the growing demand-side pressures across the globe is dominant (this shows up in Figure 10 as a

reduction in the Non-Tech effect on SSA prices). As a consequence, prices over the 2006-2050

period fall by around one-third in the SSA region.

6. Consequences for Undernutrition in Sub Saharan Africa

Combining the baseline growth in income and population (both treated as exogenous in this partial

equilibrium framework), with the alternative scenarios for SSA consumer price changes, we can

use the framework underpinning Figure 5 to calculate the change in non-farm undernutrition in

SSA. By 2050, we expect the majority of the population in Africa will reside in urban areas, with

this figure reaching 70% in Nigeria (UN Population Division 2018). Many of those residing in

rural areas will no longer be dependent on agriculture as their primary earnings source. Bearing

this in mind, we focus on the potential contribution of lower food prices to the reduction in

undernutrition amongst the non-farm households for whom the first-order impact will be a

reduction in the cost of their diets. Table 2 reports the percentage change in non-farm

undernutrition in SSA under the six scenarios outlined in Table 1, with the food price changes

taken from the preceding figures and reported in parentheses in this table.

       Judging from the results in Table 2, it appears that the projected increases in per capita

income over the future baseline period will contribute to strong reductions in undernutrition, even

absent significant price reductions (baseline case, Seg-LowSpill). These food security gains are

further strengthened when market integration and/or enhanced technology spillovers are present.

Indeed, when those two scenarios are combined (Int-HighSpill), there is a dramatic price reduction
                                                 37
and non-farm undernutrition is virtually eliminated in the region. Amongst our scenarios, only the

case with sharp environmental restrictions in key producing regions outside of SSA results in

higher prices and significantly dampens the food security gains in SSA reported in Table 2.

                What about on-farm undernutrition? Here, the situation is considerably more complicated.

Crop prices also drive farm household income and rural wages. Furthermore, these income changes

will depend on whether or not the farm in question participates in the technology improvement, as

well as the extent of household income diversification. The latter, in turn can vary greatly by

country (Hertel 2016). However, we can say something meaningful about the most extreme cases.

For those households that are isolated from markets and fully self-sufficient, developments

elsewhere will not play a role. To the extent that these households can be reached with improved

technology, local innovations will translate directly into increased production, increases in

consumption and potentially entry into commercial sales of their products.

Table 2. Percentage change in non-farm undernutrition headcount in SSA under six scenarios
 % change in SSA non-                                     Technology Spillovers
 farm undernutrition                                                   Enhanced Spillovers
 (consumers' crop prices):              Historical
                                        Spillovers         No Environment        With Environmental
 2006-2050                                                    Restrictions            Restrictions
                   Historical
  Integration




                                       -72.9 (-7.6)           -86.9 (-34.6)              -57.8 (+16.0)
                  Segmentation
    Market




                 Full Integration     -96.0 (-58.9)           -98.6 (-72.3)              -88.1 (-36.2)

The figures give the percentage change between 2006 and 2050 in the share of the non-farm population consuming
fewer than adequate calories. (The figures in parenthesis indicate the percentage change in the consumer price of
food crops.) See Table 1 for a description of the six scenarios.

                At the other extreme, those farm households that are fully integrated into world markets

will face essentially exogenous prices. In this case all of the benefits of the local improved

technology will be passed back to the suppliers of farm inputs. To the extent that farm-owned

factors of production are in relatively inelastic supply, these will attract the rents associated with



                                                        38
domestic R&D-driven TFP gains. However, as these farm households will be in direct competition

with farmers around the world, the consequences of falling behind in the global R&D landscape

will be extremely costly, as technological innovations in RoW will reduce prices, and hence farm

incomes, for the fully integrated farm households.

       It is reasonable to expect that the economic position of most SSA farmers in 2050 will lie

somewhere between the two extremes of autarky and full integration. In this case, the impact of

local TFP growth on returns to farm-owned factors of production will hinge on the excess demand

elasticity which producers face. This, in turn, will depend on the price elasticities of demand in

local and global markets ­ as well as, more importantly, the extent of market integration and the

supply response in the rest of the world. If the excess demand elasticity facing SSA farmers is less

than one, then the derived demand for farm-owned factors of production will fall as TFP in SSA

improves, as will their factor returns (see Appendix).

       While modeling individual household types is beyond the scope of this paper, these types

of questions have received the attention of previous authors who looked at the impact of higher

world food prices on poverty in the wake of the food price crisis of the early 2000's. Headey (2014)

examines the impact of these higher food prices on national poverty rates. He considers 300

different poverty `episodes' and concludes that, across this sample of countries and surveys, higher

food prices tended to reduce poverty. The mechanism was as follows: higher prices boost the

incomes of the rural poor, both through higher farm incomes and higher wages, and the rural poor

have historically dominated the poverty statistics. This, in turn, leads to national level poverty

reductions. Ivanic and Martin (2008) reach a similar conclusion in their simulation analysis of the

impacts of higher world prices for food on poverty. They find that, in the short run, poverty rises

due to higher food costs, while in the longer run, the rural income effect dominates and overall



                                                39
poverty tends to fall. The findings in both studies are largely driven by the composition of absolute

poverty in the early 2000's when rural households have dominated the global absolute poverty

statistics. This is changing with rapid urbanization in virtually every part of the world and a

definitive assessment of the national poverty and nutrition impacts in the context of this paper

would require accurate projections of the rural vs. urban poverty profiles of key countries in 2050.

Lacking this information, we cannot generalize about the nutritional impacts of productivity

growth on farm households in SSA.

7. Consequences for Land Use and the Environment

An important part of the Malthusian dilemma stems from the limited availability of land for

agriculture. Indeed agriculture (including both cropland and pasture) accounts for more than 10%

of the earth's surface (Ramankutty, Foley, and Olejniczak 2002) and it is the main driver of

deforestation on the planet (Busch and Ferretti-Gallon 2017). As such, it is responsible for a

large portion of biodiversity losses and a significant portion of global greenhouse gas emissions

(IPCC 2014). Therefore, it is of considerable interest to examine how investments and trade in

agricultural technology affect the quantity of cropland ­ both regionally and globally.

       Table 3 reports the percentage changes in SSA cropland under the six scenarios explored

above. (Global results are reported in parentheses.) Under the baseline scenario, with market

segmentation (first row of results), cropland expands by about one-quarter in the SSA region as a

result of the strong growth in regional demand, fueled both by growing population and dietary

upgrading in light of the growing per capita incomes. This growth in cropland is significantly

mitigated in the presence of enhanced technology spillovers (second column), although these

environmental gains are more than offset when the developed and emerging economies

implement stronger environmental policies (final column), thereby shunting some of the

environmental burden of feeding the world to SSA. The cropland change in SSA is quite
                                                 40
different under integrated markets (second row). With rapid productivity growth in RoW, as a

consequence of strong R&D investments, SSA producers become less competitive over time and

output and cropland fall sharply, except for the case where environmental restrictions are put in

place in the RoW region.


Table 3. Percentage change in SSA cropland cover under the six scenarios
 % change in SSA                                         Technology Spillovers
 cropland cover:                                                      Enhanced Spillovers
 2006-2050 (global                    Historical
                                      Spillovers          No Environment        With Environmental
 change in parentheses)                                      Restrictions            Restrictions
                  Historical
 Integration




                                      27.2 (0.3)              15.9 (-5.5)                30.4 (2.3)
                 Segmentation
   Market




                Full Integration     -37.0 (-10.5)           -45.2 (-18.0)              -4.2 (-30.4)

The figures give the percentage change between 2006 and 2050 in cropland cover in the SSA region (and global
change in parentheses) under six combinations of market integration, spillovers and environment regulations.


               Global cropland change is negligible under segmented markets, as expansion in SSA is

offset by contraction in RoW where population growth slows, and even declines in some cases,

and consumers of food are largely satiated. Under integrated markets, since yields are higher in

RoW, the relatively stronger TFP growth in that region allows global cropland to fall quite

sharply as production shifts from the low yielding SSA region to higher yielding regions

elsewhere (recall equation (9)). This reduction in global cropland is accentuated under integrated

markets when land retirement policies are implemented in high income and emerging economies.

8. Summary and Conclusions

The recent rise in caloric undernutrition in Sub-Saharan Africa is an indication that the Malthusian

footrace between food availability and population remains relevant in the world's poorest

countries. This has brought greater attention to the role of agricultural technology in ensuring food

security in this region. In this paper, we develop a model of technology, food security and

                                                      41
international trade in which there are three distinct channels for technology to benefit non-farm

food security in SSA. The first is via greater direct R&D investment in the SSA region. This is the

primary channel through which the industrialized and newly emerging economies, including Brazil

and China, have boosted farm productivity in their own countries, and it has been the main channel

influencing historical development in SSA food prices, since 1961. However, the lag between

current investments and future productivity can be a long one, and historical neglect of the

agricultural research infrastructure as well as civil strife have made the accumulation of knowledge

capital in SSA relatively difficult. An alternative is to import technologies from other countries

where significant knowledge capital has already been established. Empirical evidence suggests

that technology `spill-ins' from the wealthy economies, largely located in the temperate climatic

zones, has hitherto been very limited. However, there is potential for greater success by

transferring technologies from emerging tropical economies, such as Brazil, which share similar

agro-ecologies in many instances. The third role for technology to resolve the Malthusian dilemma

in SSA is through `virtual technology trade', i.e., importing the benefits of technological

investments made elsewhere through lower cost food imports.

       In order to assess the relative contribution of each technology channel to non-farm food

security in Africa, we employ a partial equilibrium, quantitative trade model, augmented by a

dynamic relationship between R&D investments, knowledge capital and agricultural productivity.

Not surprisingly, we find that the importance of the three technology-food security linkages varies

depending on the extent of global market integration. With fully integrated agricultural markets,

virtual technology trade is far and away the most important vehicle for reducing non-farm

undernutrition in the SSA region. Given the dominance of R&D capacities outside the SSA region,

if there were no trade frictions, this partial equilibrium perspective suggests that it might make



                                                42
sense for SSA to import much of its food requirements. Of course, in order to afford these imports,

the region must increase exports of other goods and services. A deeper investigation of the future

comparative advantage of the SSA region requires a general equilibrium approach, which is

beyond the scope of the current paper.

       In practice, the world is a long way from integrated markets for agricultural products.

Nonetheless, even with the current state of food trade friction, we find that virtual technology will

likely eclipse domestic R&D as the most important vehicle for reducing non-farm undernutrition

in Africa between the present and 2050. However, investments in agricultural R&D by SSA

countries can play a significant role as well. And, if SSA researchers can successfully adapt

technologies from the emerging markets, this spill-in effect could rival in importance their own

R&D investments as well as those by the CGIAR system. Furthermore, we find there is significant

interaction between technology spill-ins in the rest of the world and virtual technology trade when

it comes to alleviating hunger in Africa.

       Given the importance of agricultural output growth in the rest of the world for SSA's food

security ­ via virtual trade in technology -- we also explore the consequences of more widespread

adoption of the Northern European approach to the agriculture-environment interface. Rather than

allowing farm productivity growth to be translated into increased food production, Northern

Europe has used this opportunity to withdraw resources from agriculture, resulting in a relatively

flat farm output profile since 1990. We examine the impact on 2050 non-farm undernutrition in

SSA of strengthened environmental restrictions in the richest economies, as well as China and

Latin America, such that their production profile, between the present and mid-century, remains

flat. This results in higher food prices in SSA (compared to the baseline) and a lesser reduction in




                                                 43
non-farm undernutrition, as well as far greater rates of cropland conversion SSA. Under this

scenario, much of the environmental burden of feeding the world is shunted to Africa.


8. References

Abbott, Philip, Chris Hurt, and W.E. Tyner. 2011. "What's Driving Food Prices in 2011?" Issue
        Report. Farm Foundation.
Adamopoulos, T., L. Brandt, J. Leight, and D. Restuccia. 2017. "Misallocation, Selection, and
        Productivity: A Quantitative Analysis with Panel Data from China." NBER Working
        Paper 23039, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. doi:
        10.3386/w23039.
Alexandratos, Nikos. 2009.World Food and Agriculture to 2030/2050. Highlights and Views
        from Mid-2009. Paper for the Expert Meeting on "How to Feed the World in 2050,"
        FAO, Rome, 24-26 June 2009 (revised 25 July 2009).
Alexandratos, Nikos, and Jelle Bruinsma. 2012. World Agricultural Towards 2030/2050: The
        2012 Revision. ESA Working Paper No. 12-03, FAO, Rome.
Ahmed, S.A., Thomas W. Hertel, and Ruben Lubowski. 2008. "Calibration of a Land Cover
        Supply Function Using Transition Probabilities." GTAP Research Memorandum 14.
        West Lafayette, Indiana, USA: Center for Global Trade Analysis, Department of
        Agricultural Economics, Purdue University.
        http://www.gtap.agecon.purdue.edu/resources/res_display.asp?RecordID=2947.
Allan, J. A. 1998. "Virtual Water: A Strategic Resource Global Solutions to Regional Deficits."
        Groundwater 36 (4): 545­46. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6584.1998.tb02825.x.
Alston, Julian M., Jennifer S. James, Matthew A. Andersen, and Philip G. Pardey. 2010.
        Persistence Pays: U.S. Agricultural Productivity Growth and the Benefits from Public
        R&D Spending. Natural Resource Management and Policy 34. Springer New York.
        http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4419-0658-8_8.
Anderson, Simon P., André De Palma, and Jacques-François Thisse. 1989. "Demand for
        Differentiated Products, Discrete Choice Models, and the Characteristics Approach." The
        Review of Economic Studies 56 (1): 21­35. https://doi.org/10.2307/2297747.
Armington, Paul S. 1969. "A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of
        Production (Une Théorie de La Demande de Produits Différenciés d'après Leur Origine)
        (Una Teoría de La Demanda de Productos Distinguiéndolos Según El Lugar de
        Producción)." Staff Papers (International Monetary Fund) 16 (1): 159­78.
        https://doi.org/10.2307/3866403.
Baldos, U.L.C., and Thomas W. Hertel. 2013. "Looking Back to Move Forward on Model
        Validation: Insights from a Global Model of Agricultural Land Use." Environmental
        Research Letters 8 (3): 034024. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/8/3/034024.
------. 2014. "Global Food Security in 2050: The Role of Agricultural Productivity and
        Climate Change." Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics.
        https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8489.12048.
------. 2015. "The Role of International Trade in Managing Food Security Risks from Climate
        Change." Food Security 7 (2): 275­90. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12571-015-0435-z.



                                               44
------. 2016. "Debunking the `New Normal': Why World Food Prices Are Expected to Resume
        Their Long Run Downward Trend." Global Food Security 8 (March): 27­38.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2016.03.002.
Baldos, U.L.C., Frederi G. Viens, Thomas W. Hertel, and Keith Fuglie. 2019. "R&D Spending,
        Knowledge Capital, and Agricultural Productivity Growth: A Bayesian Approach."
        American Journal of Agricultural Economics 101 (1): 291-310.
Boserup, Ester. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian
        Change Under Population Pressure. London: Allen & Unwin.
Caselli, F. 2005. "Accounting for Cross-country Income Differences." Chapter 9 in Handbook of
        Economic Growth, Vol. 1A (eds., P. Aghion and S. N. Durlauf), pp. 679­741.
        Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Diewert, W.E. 1981. "The Comparative Statics of Industry Long-Run Equilibrium." The
        Canadian Journal of Economics / Revue Canadienne d'Economique 14 (1): 78­92.
Eberhardt, Markus, and Francis Teal. 2013. "No Mangoes in the Tundra: Spatial Heterogeneity
        in Agricultural Productivity Analysis*." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 75
        (6): 914­39. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0084.2012.00720.x.
"Ethiopia Population 2019 (Demographics, Maps, Graphs)." n.d. Accessed May 28, 2019.
        http://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/ethiopia-population/.
FAO. 2012. FAO Food Security Statistics. Accessed 2012. http://www.fao.org/economic/ess/en/.
FAO. 2019. FAOSTAT Statistical Database. Accessed 2019 http://faostat.fao.org/.
FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP, and WHO. 2019. "The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the
        World 2019: B Safeguarding Against Economic Slowdowns and Downturns." Rome,
        Italy: FAO. http://www.fao.org/state-of-food-security-nutrition/en/.
Foster, James, Joel Greer, and Erik Thorbecke. 1984. "A Class of Decomposable Poverty
        Measures." Econometrica 52 (3): 761­66. https://doi.org/10.2307/1913475.
Fuglie, Keith. 2012. "Productivity Growth and Technology Capital in the Global Agricultural
        Economy." In Productivity Growth In Agriculture: An International Perspective, edited
        by Keith Fuglie, Sun Ling Wang, and V Eldon Ball, 335­68. Cambridge, MA, USA:
        CAB International.
Fuglie, Keith. 2018. "R&D Capital, R&D Spillovers, and Productivity Growth in World
        Agriculture." Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy 40 (3): 421­44.
        https://doi.org/10.1093/aepp/ppx045.
Fuglie, Keith, Madhur Gautam, Aparajita Goyal, and William Maloney. 2019. Harvesting
        Prosperity: Technology and Productivity Growth in Agriculture. Washington, DC: World
        Bank.
Fuglie, Keith, and Nicholas Rada. 2013. Resources, Policy and Agricultural Productivity in Sub-
        Saharan Africa. Economic Research Report 145, Economic Research Service, U.S.
        Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC, February.
Gurgel, Angelo, John M. Reilly, and Sergey Paltsev. 2007. "Potential Land Use Implications of a
        Global Biofuels Industry." Journal of Agricultural & Food Industrial Organization,
        Journal of Agricultural & Food Industrial Organization 5 (2): 1-36.
        http://ideas.repec.org/a/bpj/bjafio/v5y2007i2n9.html.
Hayami, Yujiro, and Vernon W. Ruttan. 1985. Agricultural Development: An International
        Perspective. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Headey, Derek. 2014. "Food Prices and Poverty Reduction in the Long Run." IFRPI Discussion
        Paper 1331. http://ebrary.ifpri.org/cdm/ref/collection/p15738coll2/id/128056.

                                              45
Heisey, Paul, and Keith Fuglie. 2018. Agricultural Research Investment and Policy Reform in
        High Income Countries. Economic Research Report 249. Economic Research Service,
        U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC, May.
Hertel, Thomas W., and U.L.C. Baldos. 2016. "Attaining Food and Environmental Security in an
        Era of Globalization." Global Environmental Change 41 (November): 195­205.
        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.10.006.
Hertel, Thomas W., David Hummels, Maros Ivanic, and Roman Keeney. 2007. "How Confident
        Can We Be in CGE-Based Assessments of Free Trade Agreements?" NBER Working
        Paper 10477, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Hertel, Thomas W, Navin Ramankutty, and U.L.C. Baldos. 2014. "Global Market Integration
        Increases Likelihood That a Future African Green Revolution Could Increase Crop Land
        Use and CO2 Emissions." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 (38):
        13799­804.
Hertel, Thomas W. 2016. "Food Security under Climate Change." Nature Climate Change 6 (1):
        10­13. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2834.
Hertel, Thomas W., Uris L.C. Baldos, and Dominique van der Mensbrugghe. 2016. "Predicting
        Long Term Food Demand, Cropland Use and Prices." Annual Review of Resource
        Economics 8: 417­41.
Hillberry, Russell, and David Hummels. 2013. "Chapter 18 - Trade Elasticity Parameters for a
        Computable General Equilibrium Model." In, Handbook of Computable General
        Equilibrium Modeling, Volume 1 (eds., P.B. Dixon and D.W. Jorgenson). Amersterdam:
        Elsevier. Pp. 1213-1269.
INS/Niger, Institut National de la Statistique-, and I. C. F. International. 2013. "Niger Enquête
        Démographique et de Santé et à Indicateurs Multiples (EDSN-MICS IV) 2012,"
        September. https://dhsprogram.com/publications/publication-FR277-DHS-Final-
        Reports.cfm.
IPCC. 2014. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. In, Contribution of
        Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
        Climate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge
        University Press.
Ivanic, Maros, and Will Martin. 2008. "Implications of Higher Global Food Prices for Poverty in
        Low-Income Countries." Agricultural Economics 39 (November): 405­16.
        http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/journal.asp?ref=0169-5150&site=1.
Johnson, Daniel K. N., and Robert E. Evenson. 1999. "R&D Spillovers to Agriculture:
        Measurement and Application." Contemporary Economic Policy 17 (4): 432­56.
        https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-7287.1999.tb00695.x.
Lin, Justin Yifu. 1992. "Rural Reforms and Agricultural Growth in China." American Economic
        Review 82 (1): 34­51.
Lobell, David B, Uris L.C. Baldos, and Thomas W. Hertel. 2013. "Climate Adaptation as
        Mitigation: The Case of Agricultural Investments." Environmental Research Letters 8.
        https://doi.org/doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/1/015012.
Magrini, Emiliano, Jean Balié, and Cristian Morales-Opazo. 2018. "Price Signals and Supply
        Responses for Staple Food Crops in Sub-Saharan Africa." Applied Economic
        Perspectives and Policy 40 (2): 276­96. https://doi.org/10.1093/aepp/ppx037.
Muhammad, Andrew, James L. Seale Jr., Birgit Meade, and Anita Regmi. 2011. "International
        Evidence on Food Consumption Patterns: An Update Using 2005 International

                                               46
        Comparison Program Data." Technical Bulletin TB-1929. Washington, D.C., USA:
        Economic Research Service, US Department of Agriculture.
        http://www.ers.usda.gov/Publications/TB1929/.
Nelson, Gerald C., Mark W. Rosegrant, Jawoo Koo, Richard Robertson, Timothy Sulser, Tingju
        Zhu, C. Ringler, et al. 2010. "The Costs of Agricultural Adaptation to Climate Change."
        Discussion Paper 4. Washington D.C., USA: World Bank.
OECD. 2001. "Market Effects of Crop Support Measures." Paris, France: OECD.
------. 2011. Evaluation of Agricultural Policy Reforms in the European Union.
        https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264112124-en.
Pingali, Prabhu L. 2012. "Green Revolution: Impacts, Limits, and the Path Ahead." Proceedings
        of the National Academy of Sciences, July. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0912953109.
UN Population Division. 2015. "World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision." New York ,
        USA: Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the
        United Nations Secretariat. http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/index.htm.
------. 2018. "World Urbanization Prospects: 2018." 2018.
        https://population.un.org/wup/Country-Profiles/.
USDA-ERS. 2019. "International Agricultural Productivity." On-line database. 2019.
        https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/international-agricultural-productivity/.
Villoria, Nelson B., and Thomas W. Hertel. 2011. "Geography Matters: International Trade
        Patterns and the Indirect Land Use Effects of Biofuels." American Journal of
        Agricultural Economics 93 (4): 919­35. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajae/aar025.
von Lampe, Martin, Dirk Willenbockel, Helal Ahammad, Elodie Blanc, Yongxia Cai, Katherine
        Calvin, Shinichiro Fujimori, et al. 2014. "Why Do Global Long-Term Scenarios for
        Agriculture Differ? An Overview of the AgMIP Global Economic Model
        Intercomparison." Agricultural Economics 45 (1): 3­20.
        https://doi.org/10.1111/agec.12086.
World Bank. 2019. "Global Economic Monitor Database." 2019. http://data.worldbank.org/.
World Development Indicators. 2019. (online datbase). World Bank.
        https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators
Yang, Hong, and Alexander Zehnder. 2007. "``Virtual Water'': An Unfolding Concept in
        Integrated Water Resources Management." Water Resources Research 43 (December):
        W12301. https://doi.org/10.1029/2007WR006048.




                                              47
Appendices for: Trade in Technology: A Potential Solution to the Food
Security Challenges of the 21st Century

                       By Thomas W. Hertel, Uris L.C. Baldos and Keith O. Fuglie

Outline:

A. Theoretical Model

       1. Core model

       2. Single region results

       3. Two region results

       4. Adding conservation measures

B. Quantitative Trade Model

C. Additional Results:

       1. Benchmark data

       2. Backcasting and historical validation

D. Appendix References




                                                  48
  A. Theoretical Model

  Core Model: Box A1 outlines the core, long run partial equilibrium model of agriculture in

  linearized form (lower case variables denote percentage change in the corresponding upper case

  (levels) variables.

   Box A1: A simple, partial equilibrium long run model of agriculture
       (1) qO = - D pO +  D                                               : demand for agricultural output
       (2) pO =
              +a         ( p
                        j
                                j   j   - aj )                            : agricultural entry/exit; zero profits

       (3) qN + aN = qO - a -  ( pN - aN - pO - a )                       : demand for non-land inputs
       (4) qL + aL = qO - a -  ( pL - aL - pO - a )                       : demand for land input
       (5) p j = 0, j  L                                                  : supply of non-land inputs
           qL  L pL - 
       (6) =                S
                            L
                                                                          : supply of land to agriculture

   Notation: all price and quantity variables represent percentage changes in the underlying indexes

   qO , q j : % change in long run agricultural output and input j

   a , a j : cumulative output-augmenting and input-j augmenting technical change in agriculture

    pO , p j : % change in the price of agricultural output and input j

     0 : elasticity of substitution between land and non-land inputs
    j  0 ,  j  0 : elasticity of supply to agriculture and cost share of input j

    D  0 : price elasticity of demand for agricultural output

    L ,  D : shifters in land supply, due to conservation measures, and output demand

    SX   L
         -1
            L : the extensive margin of supply response (area elasticity wrt commodity price)
   S
   I
       ( L
         -1
            - 1) : the intensive margin of supply response (yield elasticity wrt commodity price)

   CES production function (upper case variables are levels of corresponding lower case variables):

=QO A(L QL
         -
           + N QN            1/ (1 +  ) and  > -1
                  ) , where:=
                -  -1/ 




                                                        49
        Equation (1) determines the global demand for food as a function of price (via and constant

price elasticity of demand,  D > 0 , and exogenous shifts in this demand function,  O
                                                                                    D
                                                                                      , due to

growth in population and income, both of which are determined outside this partial equilibrium

model. Equations (2) ­ (4) are a consequence of cost minimizing behavior in the agricultural sector,

subject to the CES production function shown at the bottom of Box A1, coupled with free

entry/exit into or out of the agricultural sector, thereby ensuring zero profits (2). For the results

derived in this paper, the key elements of equations (2) ­ (4) are the rate of TFP growth ( a ) and

the elasticity of substitution between the land and nonland inputs,   0 . We do not exploit the

input biased technological change terms in this paper. For the derivation of these three equations,

see Gohin and Hertel (2003).

        Equations (5) and (6) close the factor markets in this model. Given its long run nature,

nonland inputs (labor, capital and industrial inputs) are assumed to be in perfectly elastic supply

in this partial equilibrium model. By contrast, land (and water) are inelastically supplied to

farming, thus giving an upward slope to the partial equilibrium supply curve. The output supply

elasticity,  S = L
                 -1
                    L +  ( L
                           -1
                              - 1) , is therefore a function of the land supply response to land

returns,  L , translated through the inverse of the cost share of land,  L , which serves to magnify

the impact of commodity price changes on land rents, since the nonland inputs are in perfectly

elastic supply and cannot benefit from a commodity price increase. This is the extensive margin

of commodity supply.

        The other component of the commodity supply response is the intensive margin of supply,

 ( L
   -1
      - 1) . It depends critically on the elasticity of substitution between the nonland inputs (e.g.,

fertilizer) and land. This, too, is a function of the cost share of the inelastically supplied land input.

In the case of subsistence agriculture, commercial inputs are likely to be small, capital limited and

                                                   50
labor abundant, making this cost share large. This translates into a very limited intensive margin

of commodity supply response.

        Single Region Results: Setting a j = 0 and substituting (4) into (2), and solving for land

rents, we obtain:

(7) =pL  L
         -1
            ( pO + a )

This is the well-known "magnification effect" in economics whereby any change in output price

is magnified as it is transmitted back to the returns to the sector-specific factor, land. Using (1) to

eliminate qO from (3), using (2) to eliminate po and equating (5) and (3) to reflect equilibrium in

the land market (assuming no environmental conservation measures:  L =0 ) leaves us with one

equation in one unknown, namely land rents, which depend on all the economic parameters in the

model as well as the productivity shock and population growth:

(8)     pL [( D - 1)a +  D ] / [ L +  (1 -  L ) +  L  D ]
        =

Plugging (8) into (6), since land supply varies directly with land returns, we have:

    qL  L [( D - 1)a +  D ] / [ L +  (1 -  L ) +  L  D ]
(9) =

Equations (8) and (9) are informative. Firstly, we can see that the impact of technological progress

in agriculture on land use is ambiguous. In particular, since all of the parameters in the denominator

are non-negative, a < 0  pL > 0 if, and only if,  D < 1 . That is, land returns, and land use will

fall following a favorable technological innovation if and only if farm level demand is inelastic.

Adding the population growth term, we see that land use will grow in response to the Malthusian

factor, but it will grow at less than the rate of population growth due to endogenous intensification

of production (nonland substitution for scarce land), as well the price responsiveness of demand.




                                                   51
Overall, the change in land use remains indeterminate, provided the farm level demand elasticity

is less than one.

        Equation (8) offers insights into the likely magnitude of such land rental price changes. In

particular, the change in land rents, for a given farm level demand elasticity and a given factor-

neutral productivity shock, will be greater, the smaller the elasticity of land supply ( L ) and the

smaller the elasticity of substitution between land and non-land inputs (  ). Equation (8) can be

re-written   in     terms   of   the   implied   commodity supply     elasticity in   this   model:

 S = L
     -1
        L +  ( L
               -1
                  - 1) , where the first term represents area response to the commodity price

change and the second reflects yield response to higher commodity prices. This results in (8'):

(8')   pL {[( D - 1)a +  D ] /  L [ S +  D ]}
       =

Increasing the land supply elasticity or the elasticity of substitution boosts the aggregate supply

responsiveness of output, thereby dampening the resulting price changes.

        Plugging (8') into (7) and solving for the equilibrium output price change gives:

(10)    pO =[ D - a ( S + 1)] / [ S +  D ]

This is equation (2) in the main text. From this equation, we see that the outcome of the long run

Malthusian footrace between supply and demand depends critically on the relative rates of

population growth and technological progress, whereby the latter is modulated by the price

elasticity of supply. If this elasticity is zero, then the long run evolution of prices is simply

dependent on the footrace between demand growth and the rate of technological progress.

However, the stronger the supply response in agriculture, the more modest is the rate of TFP

growth required to keep prices falling, as TFP growth boosts profitability in agriculture, thereby

drawing in additional resources in the form of land and nonland inputs. The resulting equilibrium

change in agricultural output can simply be read off the demand schedule:

                                                  52
(11)    qO = - D [ D - a( S + 1)] / [ S +  D ] +  D = [a D ( S + 1) +  S  D ] / [ S +  D ]

This is equation (3) in the main text. It shows that both TFP growth and population growth will

stimulate growth in output, with the magnitude of this increase depending on the size of the

demand and supply elasticities.

       Two Region Results: In order to understand the impacts of a continental scale technology

shock on global commodity prices and undernutrition, we need to factor in not only the changes

that arise in the innovating region, but also the response of producers and consumers rest of the

world. In the absence of technological spillovers, i.e., keeping the level of technology in the SSA

region constant, all of the impacts will be carried through the commodity markets. We call this

virtual trade in technology to relate it to the popular literature on virtual trade in water. We

investigate the determinants of this virtual technology trade first, then progress to the case where

some of the technological gains spillover to the rest of the world ­ a phenomenon which we dub

direct trade in technology.

       With minor modifications, we can adapt the model in Box A1 to analyze the impacts of

virtual technology trade. Since we will assume in this section that world markets are fully

integrated (an assumption that will be relaxed in the quantitative trade model), equation (1) simply

becomes global demand. And we distinguish the two regions using the superscripts: SSA and RoW.

These are attached to the supply-side variables in equations (2) ­ (6). In order to assess the impact

of virtual trade in technology, we evaluate the percentage change in SSA net imports, relative to

global consumption, due to the improvement in technology in the RoW region:

   =
(12)             =
     t 100* dM SSA    W
                   / QO  qoD
                           SSA
                               -  qoS
                                    SSA




where=  SSA
     M QD   - QO
               SSA
                   , reflects net imports into the SSA region, T = M / QW expresses these net

imports as a portion of global supply,  = QO
                                           SSA
                                               / QW is SSA's share of global supply (which equals

                                                    53
global demand by virtual of global market clearing) and  = QO
                                                            SSA
                                                                / QW is SSA's share of global

supply (which equals demand in this equilibrium model). This is equation (4) in the main text.

         With integrated world markets, an outward shift in the RoW region's supply curve, in the

absence of demand growth, can be represented using the following, reduced form equations:

(13)     =RoW
         qO    SRoW pO +  S
                          RoW    SSA
                              ; qO   = S
                                       SSA         W
                                           pO and qO = - D
                                                         W
                                                           pO

where  S
       RoW
          = ( S
              RoW
                  + 1)a RoW and the supply response in each region is a function of the region-

specific factor supply and demand parameters:  S = L
                                                   -1
                                                      L +  ( L
                                                             -1
                                                                - 1) . Global market clearing

requires that demand equals global supply:

(14)     q=
          W
          O  qO
              SSA
                  + (1 -  )qO
                            RoW




where  = QO
          SSA    W
              / QO denotes the SSA region's share of global production.

         Solving for the equilibrium change in global price in response to the shift in RoW's supply

curve:

- D
  W
    pO -  ( S
            SSA
                pO ) - (1 -  ) S
                               RoW
                                   pO = (1 -  ) S
                                                RoW




pO =-(1 -  ) S
             RoW
                 / [ D
                     W
                       +  S
                          SSA
                              + (1 -  ) S
                                        RoW
                                            ]=-(1 -  ) S
                                                       RoW
                                                           / [ D
                                                               W
                                                                 + S
                                                                   W
                                                                     ] , which is (14)

(15)     pO =-(1 -  ) S
                      RoW
                          / ( S
                              W
                                + D
                                  W
                                    )

We can also view this price change in terms of the underlying TFP-induced supply shift and the

excess demand elasticity facing the RoW region. Substituting in the expression for the TFP-

induced supply shift, we have:

pO =-(1 -  )( S
              RoW
                  + 1)a RoW / [ D
                                W
                                  +  S
                                     SSA
                                         + (1 -  ) S
                                                   RoW
                                                       ]

Dividing the numerator and denominator on the right hand side by: (1 -  )

   -( S
pO =  RoW
          + 1)a RoW / [( D
                         W
                           +  S
                              SSA
                                  ) / (1 -  ) +  S
                                                 RoW
                                                      - O
                                                     ]= RoW RoW
                                                           a



                                                 54
where  O
       RoW
           = ( S
               RoW
                   + 1) / [{( D
                              W
                                +  S
                                   SSA
                                       ) / (1 -  )} +  S
                                                       RoW
                                                           ]

Note that the first term in the denominator, [ D
                                               W
                                                 +  S
                                                    SSA
                                                        ] / (1 -  ) , is the elasticity of excess demand

facing producers in region RoW. This reflects the residual demand for region RoW's product, once

the supply response in the rest of the world is also included. As such, it is larger than the ordinary

global price elasticity of demand. Since this combined price response is weighted by the inverse

of the share of region RoW's production in the world market grows, as   0 the excess demand

elasticity facing these producers collapses to the global price elasticity of demand. Clearly the

relative size of the region where technology is improving will play a key role in determining the

importance of virtual technology trade.

       Having established the impact of a shock to supplies in region RoW on world prices, we

can work our way back to the regional outputs and demands:

      RoW
(16) qO   - S
          =     O a + ( SRoW + 1)a RoW =
            RoW RoW RoW
                                       [(1 -  O
                                              RoW
                                                  ) S
                                                    RoW
                                                        + 1]a RoW , qO
                                                                     SSA
                                                                         = - S  O a ,
                                                                             SSA RoW RoW



 RoW
qD   = D   O a , and qD
       RoW RoW RoW    SSA
                          = D  O a
                            SSA RoW RoW




And hence the technology-driven change in trade:

   =
(17) t 100* dM / Q=
                  W
                     ( D   O a ) -  (- S
                       SSA RoW RoW
                                          O a =
                                       SSA RoW RoW
                                                   ) [  D
                                                        SSA
                                                            +  S
                                                               SSA
                                                                   ] O
                                                                     RoW RoW
                                                                        a

which is equation (6) in the text.

       Substituting in the expression for  O
                                           RoW
                                               yields:

 =
(18)           / QW a RoW ( S
     t 100* dM =            RoW
                                + 1)[  D
                                       SSA
                                           +  S
                                              SSA
                                                  ] / ({[ D
                                                          W
                                                            +  S
                                                               RoW
                                                                   ] / (1 -  )} +  S
                                                                                   RoW
                                                                                       )>0

So the virtual trade in technology is a rather complex function of the regional supply and demand

elasticities as well as the shares of the two regions in current demand and supply. As the RoW

region looms larger in global supply,   0 , and the excess demand elasticity facing that region:

{[ D
   W
     +  S
        R
          ] / (1 -  )} , shrinks and the ensuing price change increases. This has the effect of


                                                  55
    amplifying the demand increase and supply reduction in SSA, therefore increasing the percentage

    change in technology-driven trade. Conversely, as the RoW (innovating) region shrinks in relative

    size:   1 ,  O  0 and the world price change flowing from the technological innovation

    becomes very small. In this case, the impact on technology-driven trade is small.

           Implications for Land Use: We can also deduce the implications for regional and global

    land use of a productivity shock in the RoW region. This is of interest given the prominent role of

    agricultural area expansion in terrestrial carbon emissions and biodiversity loss. First, note that the

    percentage change in global land use can be expressed as a weighted combination of land use

    change in SSA and in RoW:

    (19) q=W
           L  qL
               SSA
                   + (1 -  )qL
                             RoW




    Where  is the share of SSA in global cropland cover. Equations (6) and (8) allow us to deduce

    the change in regional land use, once we know the change in world prices resulting from the

    technological progress in the RoW region:

=
(20) qW
      L  ( L
           SSA
               / L
                 SSA
                     ) pO + (1 -  )( L
                                     RoW
                                         / L
                                           RoW
                                               )( pO + a RoW )

    Substituting in the equilibrium solution for world prices, as a function of the TFP change we have:

          L =
    (21) qW  - ( L
                 SSA
                     / L
                       SSA
                           ) O
                             RoW RoW
                                a    + (1 -  )( L
                                                RoW
                                                    / L
                                                      RoW
                                                          )(1 -  O
                                                                 RoW
                                                                     )a RoW

    where:  O
            RoW
                = ( S
                    RoW
                        + 1) / [{( D
                                   W
                                     +  S
                                        SSA
                                            ) / (1 -  )} +  S
                                                            RoW
                                                                ]

    Clearly land use in the SSA region will fall, since world prices are falling, but land use in the RoW

    region is ambiguous. If  O < 1 , then the second term in (21) will be positive and land use will
                             RoW




    rise in RoW. But this is the same condition for the excess demand elasticity facing producers in

    RoW to be inelastic: {( D +  S ) / (1 -  )} < 1 , from the single region analysis above, this is also
                            W    SSA



    the condition under which land rents rise, and land use expands in the face of TFP improvements.


                                                      56
        Since global land use is just the weighted summation of land use in SSA and RoW, in the

case where the excess demand elasticity facing producers in RoW is elastic, land use

unambiguously falls. However, when it is inelastic, the answer is not as clear cut. However, under

the simplifying assumption that land supply response to commodity price changes is the same in

both regions, i.e., ( L /  L ) = ( L /  L ) equation (21) simplifies to the following:
                      SSA  SSA     RoW  RoW




        - ( L /  L ) O
      L =
(22) qW              RoW RoW
                        a    + ( L /  L )(1 -  O
                                               RoW
                                                   )a RoW -  ( L /  L )a RoW +  ( L /  L ) O
                                                                                           RoW RoW
                                                                                              a

Canceling the first and last terms on the RHS of (22) gives:

(23) =
     qW
      L ( L /  L )(1 -  O
                        RoW
                                                  = ( L /  L )(1 -  O
                            )a RoW -  ( L /  L )a RoW               RoW
                                                                        -  )a RoW

This term is most likely to be positive when the region experiencing TFP growth is large (so

  0 ) and when excess demand is very elastic.

        If, in addition, the intensive margins of supply response are the same in both regions, then

the elasticity of world prices with respect to TFP simplifies as follows:

O
RoW
    =( S + 1) / [{( D
                    W
                      +  S ) / (1 -  )} +  S ] =(1 -  )( S + 1) / ( D
                                                                    W
                                                                      +  S )]

Therefore, global land use will rise, if and only if the following condition is satisfied:

1> O
   RoW
       +  = (1 -  )( S + 1) / ( D
                                W
                                  + S ) + 

This can be rewritten as follows:

(24) (1 -  ) / (1 -  ) > ( S + 1) / ( D +  S )
                                      W



The LHS of this expression is the ratio of the RoW's share in global land use to its share in global

production. But is just the ratio of inverse yields in RoW to inverse yields in the world, which is

also equal to the ration of yields in the world to yields in RoW. So what equation (24) tells us is

that, if yields in RoW are relatively high (relative to SSA), then it is unlikely that global land use

will rise. Conversely, if yields in the innovating region (RoW) were relatively low, it would be


                                                   57
possible that TFP growth in that region could cause global land use to rise, as production in the

low-yielding region displaces that in the high yielding region. Of course, in the case of SSA, we

know that crop yields are low, therefore virtually assuring at innovation in RoW will reduce global

land use when markets are fully integrated.

        Adding Conservation Measures: We treat the conservation programs as a backward shift

in the land supply function in equation (6) in Box A1:  L > 0 , we can follow the same steps above

and derive the new quantity supplied and price equilibrium conditions for the single region model

as follows:

    qO  S pO + ( S + 1)a -  L
(25)=

(26) pO = [ D +  L - ( S + 1)a ] / ( S +  D )

The conservation measure operates as a backward shift in the supply curve and, in terms of

equilibrium price, it operates in the same way as a shift in commodity demand. In the case of a

wealthy economy (e.g., the Northern Europe), with stable population growth and food-satiated

consumers, demand growth may be minimal. In this case, prices can remain stable as long as the

conservation measures do not overwhelm TFP growth, i.e.,  L  ( S + 1)ao . In the context of the

two region model, we have the following equilibrium condition for world price (equation (11) in

the main text):

(27) pO = [(1 -  ) L
                   RoW
                       - (1 -  )( S
                                  RoW
                                      + 1)a RoW ] / [ D
                                                      W
                                                        + S
                                                          W
                                                            ]

B. Quantitative Trade Model

The Simplified International Model of Prices Land use and the Environment (SIMPLE) model is

a multidimensional extension of the theoretical model in Box A1. Rather than two regions, there

are an arbitrarily large number of geographic regions in SIMPLE (15 in the current implementation

­ see Table A1). In addition, nonland factor supplies are not perfectly elastic, reflecting the fact

                                                  58
that other factors of production (most notably labor) are inelastically supplied to agriculture in

many parts of the world. Another key extension is the incorporation of the equation determining

current TFP growth as a function of past investments in agricultural R&D (main text, equation

(9)). Finally, in the segmented markets version of SIMPLE, there is imperfect price transmission

from global markets into the domestic economy. While this quantitative trade model is expressed

in linearized form, it is solved using nonlinear methods that capitalize on update formulae based

on the underlying cost functions. Thus it can be thought of as a one-shot, comparative static model

that takes the global economy from one equilibrium (e.g., 2006) to a future equilibrium (e.g.,

2050). It is validated based on its ability to predict historical outcomes (e.g., 1961) for key

variables, based on a backcasting exercise (see below).

       In our quantitative trade model (Figure A1), per capita consumer demands are also

disaggregated into three food types: crops, livestock and processed foods. These demands are log-

linear functions of price and income, with respective food demand elasticities varying as a function

of per capita income in each region. Based on international cross-section estimates by Muhammad

et al. (2011), the absolute values of the income and price elasticities for all food types fall as

incomes grow. Regional food demand is obtained by multiplying per capita demand by regional

population. Since livestock and processed foods are valued-added products, these are produced

within the consuming region using crop and non-crop inputs and therefore have region-specific

prices. A substantial share of crop demands in the model is derived demands, obtained from the

consumer demands for value-added food products. This is important, since technological change

and factor substitution in the livestock and processed food industries can lead to varying intensities

of crop use in these food products. The global demand for crops is the summation of final demands




                                                 59
and derived demands summed over all regions. World demand for crop feed stocks in biofuels is

exogenously specified and serves as an addition to global crop demand.




Figure A1. Diagram of the SIMPLE Model.
The bottom panel (green) refers to regional crop production for the aggregate crop commodity.
The upper panel (red) refers to regional crop demand. The disposition of crops includes direct
consumption, feedstuff use and food processing, as well as biofuels. Under market segmentation,
consumers and producers interact in the domestic and international crop markets. Under integrated
markets there is just a single global market and one price in all regions. The following are key
parameters for each region:  INC and  P are the price and income elasticities for each of the four
consumption commodities. These vary with per capita income and therefore evolve over time. The
elasticity of substitution between land and nonland inputs,  CROP , and determines the potential for
endogenous intensification of production. The supply elasticities of land and nonland inputs to the
crops sector,  LAND , ( L in the theoretical model),  NLAND and are also region-specific.




                                                60
       Global crop production in the model is specified for each of the 15 geographic regions as

a CES function of land and non-land inputs, each with different yields and potentially differing

rates of technological progress across regions. Cropland supply elasticities, which vary by region,

are based on the adjusted estimates of Gurgel, Reilly, and Paltsev (2007) and Ahmed, Hertel, and

Lubowski (2008). Non-land factor supplies to agriculture are also less than perfectly elastic supply,

but are more price responsive than land supply, based on the estimates offered by OECD (OECD

2001). In the standard version of the SIMPLE model, equilibrium is attained in the crop markets

when supply equals demand where the equilibrating variable is the global price of crops. In the

segmented markets version of SIMPLE model there is a finite elasticity of substitution between

crop commodities in the domestic and international markets and similarly a CET function

determining supply to the global market.

       We then compute the malnutrition headcount as our measure of food insecurity. The index

measures the prevalence of undernourishment by reporting the fraction of population whose daily

dietary energy intake is below the minimum requirement (FAO 2012). In the literature, it is

common to focus on changes in malnutrition incidence (Alexandratos and Bruinsma 2012;

Alexandratos 2009). Mathematically, the malnutrition index is equivalent to the poverty index

measure proposed by Foster, Greer and Thorbecke (1984). Given this, we can use the concept of

poverty-growth elasticity to link this measure to the average per capita dietary energy intake.

Widely used in the poverty literature, the growth elasticity measures the percent changes in the

indices of poverty given a one percent change in average per capita income (Bourguignon 2003;

Lopez and Serven 2006). To apply this concept in the case of dietary energy, we assume that the

distribution of per capita dietary energy consumption is lognormal. This is consistent with the

traditional assumption used by FAO regarding the distribution of dietary energy intake within a



                                                 61
country (Neiken 2003). The following equation is used to calculate the growth elasticity for the

malnutrition index ( ).This characterizes the percent change in this index in the wake of a one

percent rise in average dietary energy consumption (DEC):

                    1  (/)             
(22)    = -                         + 
                                       2

In this equation,  is the minimum daily energy requirement (MDER),  is the average per capita

DEC, and  is the standard deviation of the DEC distribution. The operators  and  denote the

standard normal probability density and cumulative distribution functions, respectively. To

compute the updated malnutrition headcount, we simply multiply the malnutrition index by the

population headcount. To implement the model, we rely on the food security data published by

FAO (2012; 2010).

C. Additional Results

Figure A2 reports the extent of global market penetration in regional crop consumption and

production. These shares play a key role in the segmented markets model. A low rate international

market participation will translate into limited international price transmission into the domestic

market. This is clearly the case for the SSA region for which both demand and supply shares

from/to international markets are quite low.

       Table A1 reports the exogenous drivers used in our historical validation of the SIMPLE

model for the 1961-2006 period. These include: population, income per capita, TFP for the crops,

livestock and processed foods sectors, factor supply shifts for three regions: rural labor supply in

Africa and irrigation supplies in South and Southeast Asia, all of which grew at extraordinary rates

over this period due to exogenous factors (e.g., the green revolution in Asia).




                                                62
 Table A1. Average Annual Growth Rates for Historical Validation: 1961-2006
                                      Per Capita Total Factor Productivity (TFP)                 Other
 Region                   Population                                      Processed
                                        Income      Crops Livestock                              Drivers
                                                                            Foods
 Eastern Europe                 0.46        -1.72      0.40        0.66
 North Africa                   2.61         1.33      3.13        0.18
 Sub Saharan Africa             2.77        -0.42      0.84        0.43                               3.5
 South America                  2.06         1.38      2.53        0.96
 Australia+New Zealand          1.46         1.94      1.99        1.14
 European Union                 0.43         2.46      2.28        1.14
 South Asia                     2.20         2.33      1.51        0.59      1.09                     3.3
 C. America + Caribbean         2.29         1.69      1.20        0.96     for all
 South Africa                   2.34         0.36      1.90        0.43    regions
 South East Asia                2.25         3.15      2.13        1.05                               3.3
 Canada+United States           1.03         2.19      2.52        1.14
 China                          1.62         6.78      3.23        1.05
 Middle East                    2.27         2.37      2.34        0.18
 Japan+Korea                    0.87         3.42      3.47        1.14
 Central Asia                   2.43        -2.49      0.40        0.66
 The growth rates are calculated from these sources: Population and per capita incomes from World
 Development Indicators (2019); crop TFP from Fuglie (2012), livestock TFP from Ludena et al (2007) and
 processed foods TFP from Griffith, Redding and Reenen (2004). Other drivers are non-land input supplies
 in Sub-Saharan Africa (based on labor force growth rate) and South & Southeast Asia (based on the growth
 in area equipped for irrigation). These other drivers are subsumed in the productivity component of the
 historical decomposition in Figure 6 of the main text.


        Figure 6 in the main text compares the actual and model-predicted changes in global crop

production and composite world price for crops over this historical period. Figure A3 below

provides this same comparison for two other key observables: crop yields and cropland area. These

figures demonstrate that SIMPLE does a good job capturing global changes in the agricultural

sector over a 45 year period. However, capturing regional changes in such a simple model is more

challenging. Figure A4 shows that crop growth in Latin America, in particular, was much more

rapid than predicted by the model over this historical period. There are many potential reasons for

this, including the opening up of vast areas of farmland in Brazil.




                                                      63
Figure A2. Metrics for Trade Integration in Agricultural Markets.
The red columns give the share of imports in the regional demand expenditures for crop
commodities. The green columns give the share of exports in crop production revenues. Data are
for 2006 (Source: FAO). Complete names of each regions are as follows (left to right): Eastern
Europe, North Africa, Sub Saharan Africa, South America, Australia+New Zealand, European
Union, South Asia, Central America + Caribbean, South Africa, South East Asia, Canada+United
States China, Middle East, Japan+Korea, Central Asia, respectively.




Figure A3. Historical Validation and Decomposition of Key Drivers of Global Crop Production
and Prices. Historical data on crop yield and crop land from FAOSTAT (2019). (See also Figure
6 in the main text.) Other drivers are non-land input supplies in Sub-Saharan Africa (based on
labor force growth rate) and South & Southeast Asia (based on the growth in area equipped for
irrigation) are subsumed in the productivity component of the historical decomposition in Figure
6 of the main text.




                                               64
Figure A4. Historical Validation and Decomposition of Growth in Regional Crop Production
Over 1961-2006. Historical data on crop yield and crop land from FAO (2019). (See also Figure
6 in the main text.) Note the shortfall in model predictions for crop expansion in Latin America.
The drivers of crop production in SIMPLE are just population, income, biofuels and Total Factor
Productivity (TFP). Other factors, such as the opening up of vast areas of Brazil to agriculture,
are not considered.


       Table A2 reports the exogenous drivers of SIMPLE going forward to mid-century, along

with their sources. Macro-economic trends are taken from the `business as usual' Shared

Socioeconomic Pathways scenario (SSP2). Productivity growth rates are based on expert

projections from the literature (see legend for Table A2).




                                                65
 Table A2. Key Average Annual Growth Rates for Future Projections : 2006-2050
                                                   Total Factor Productivity
     Region           Pop        Inc               Crops
                                           Low             High                 Proc
                                           Spill           Spill    Lstock     Foods
 Eastern Europe         -0.36     3.14       0.44            0.44     1.31
 North Africa           0.89      3.16       1.05            1.88     -0.28
 Sub Saharan            2.18      4.08
 Africa                                      0.45            1.00     0.47
 South America          0.68      2.49       3.32            5.36     4.89
 Australia+New          0.71      1.29
 Zealand                                     1.60            1.60     0.46
 European Union         -0.01     1.26       1.97            1.97     0.46
 South Asia             0.84      5.06       2.08            3.50     2.52
 Central                0.87      2.33
 America +                                                                     1.09
 Caribbean                                   2.88            4.56     4.89
 South Africa           0.36      3.16       0.67            1.32     0.47
 South East Asia        0.68      3.87       1.18            2.06     4.12
 Canada+United          0.56      1.12
 States                                      1.78            1.78     0.46
 China                  -0.16     4.78       3.04            4.88     4.12
 Middle East            1.23      1.68       1.04            1.86     -0.28
 Japan+Korea            -0.40     1.74       1.87            1.87     0.46
 Central Asia           1.04      4.00         0.63         0.63       1.31
 Sources: The following growth rates are calculated from these sources: Population
 and per capita incomes from Shared Socioeconomic Pathway (SSP) Projections
 Database v0.5 (Kriegler et al. 2012, O'Neill et al. 2014) for population and per
 capita income growth rates; Total Factor Productivity Growth for Crops from
 authors' calculations, for Livestock from Ludena et al (2007) and for Processed
 Foods from Griffith et al (2004)

         One of the key assumptions in our future projections is that the historical relationship

between knowledge capital and TFP growth will hold in the future (i.e., the elasticities in equation

(12) are unchanging). While this may be reasonable in many cases, there are two instances where

we believe some robustness checks are in order. Figure A5 reports the results of these sensitivity

analyses in these two cases. The first pertains to Asia ­ particularly China -- where extremely high

rates of current agricultural R&D investments are leading to rapid growth in knowledge capital

and there is some concern about whether these investments will be as productive as in the past.

The left hand panel of this figure shows the consumer prices changes in SSA under the assumption

                                                            66
that   O   is just half as large for Asia as in the historical simulation (0.105 instead of 0.210). In this

case, the impact of virtual technology trade is a smaller driver of crop prices in SSA, although

some of this is picked up by other factors so that the total difference in prices under the baseline

case is modest (-2.4% vs. -7.6%).

           The second robustness check pertains to the productivity of knowledge capital in the SSA

region. Historically,    O   for SSA was just half as large as for the developed regions. This makes it

difficult for R&D investments to make a big impact on future productivity. With a general

improvement in macroeconomic conditions coupled with recent increases infrastructure

investment (especially from China) the environment may be more conducive for technology

dissemination in this region, which could raise the estimated marginal productivity of investments

in R&D. In the sensitivity analysis presented in the right-hand panel of Figure A5, we report the

impacts of the different types of technology trade on crop prices in SSA for the case where this

elasticity for SSA is doubled so that it reaches the values estimated for the more developed regions

(0.26 instead of 0.13). This more than doubles the contribution of `Own Tech' to crop price

reduction in SSA, and it leads to a further 5% reduction in overall prices in the baseline (-12.4%

vs. -7.6%) under segmented markets. However, unlike the case of Asia ­ a large player in global

markets ­ doubling the knowledge capital elasticity for SSA has little impact on crop prices in the

region under fully integrated markets.




                                                     67
Figure A5. Robustness analysis with respect to the own-knowledge capital elasticities in
equation (9). The left-hand panel reports the case where the elasticities in Asia is cut in half for
the future projections. The right-hand panel reports results whereby the own-elasticity is doubled
for the SSA region.


D. Appendix References

Ahmed, S.A., Thomas W. Hertel, and Ruben Lubowski. 2008. "Calibration of a Land Cover
      Supply Function Using Transition Probabilities." GTAP Research Memorandum 14.
      West Lafayette, Indiana, USA: Center for Global Trade Analysis, Department of
      Agricultural Economics, Purdue University.
Alexandratos, Nikos. 2009.World Food and Agriculture to 2030/2050. Highlights and Views
      from Mid-2009. Paper for the Expert Meeting on "How to Feed the World in 2050,"
      FAO, Rome, 24-26 June 2009 (revised 25 July 2009).
Alexandratos, Nikos, and Jelle Bruinsma. 2012. World Agricultural Towards 2030/2050: The
      2012 Revision. ESA Working Paper No. 12-03, FAO, Rome.
Bourguignon, Francois. 2003. "The Growth Elasticity of Poverty Reduction; Explaining
      Heterogeneity Across Countries and Time Periods." In, Inequality and Growth: Theory
      and Policy Implications (eds., T.S. Eicher and S.J. Turnovsky). Cambridge, MA: MIT
      Press. Pp 3-26.
FAO. 2010. FAO Statistical Yearbook. Food and Agriculture Organization of the UnitedNations,
      Rome, Italy.

                                                 68
FAO. 2012. FAO Food Security Statistics. (online). Available from URL:
        http://www.fao.org/economic/ess/en/ [accessed 12 June 2012].
FAO. 2019. FAOSTAT Statistical Database. Accessed 2019. http://faostat.fao.org/.
Foster, James, Joel Greer, and Erik Thorbecke. 1984. "A Class of Decomposable Poverty
        Measures." Econometrica 52 (3): 761­66. https://doi.org/10.2307/1913475.
Fuglie, Keith. 2012. "Productivity Growth and Technology Capital in the Global Agricultural
        Economy." In Productivity Growth In Agriculture: An International Perspective, edited
        by Keith Fuglie, Sun Ling Wang, and V Eldon Ball, 335­68. Cambridge, MA, USA:
        CAB International.
Gohin, Alex, and Thomas W. Hertel. 2003. "A Note on the CES Functional Form and Its Use in
        the GTAP Model." GTAP Research Memorandum No. 2, Global Trade Analysis Project
        (GTAP), Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, USA.
Griffith, R., Redding, S., & Reenen, J. V. (2004). "Mapping the Two Faces of R&D:
        Productivity Growth in a Panel of OECD Industries". Review of Economics and Statistics
        86 (4): 883­ 895. http://doi.org/10.1162/0034653043125194
Gurgel, Angelo, John M. Reilly, and Sergey Paltsev. 2007. "Potential Land Use Implications of a
        Global Biofuels Industry." Journal of Agricultural & Food Industrial Organization 5 (2):
        1-36.
Kriegler, E., O'Neill, B. C., Hallegatte, S., Kram, T., Lempert, R. J., Moss, R. H., & Wilbanks,
        T. 2012. "The Need For and Use of Socio-economic Scenarios for Climate Change
        Analysis: A New Approach Based on Shared Socio-economic Pathways." Global
        Environmental Change 22 (4): 807­822. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.05.005
Lopez, Humberto, and Luis Serven. 2006. "A Normal Relationship? Poverty, Growth, and
        Inequality." Policy Research Working Papers, World Bank, Washington, DC, January.
Ludena, C.E., Hertel, T.W., Preckel, P.V., Foster, K. and Nin, A. (2007). "Productivity Growth
        and Convergence in Crop, Ruminant, and Nonruminant Production: Measurement and
        Forecasts." Agricultural Economics 37(1): 1­17
Muhammad, Andrew, James L. Seale Jr., Birgit Meade, and Anita Regmi. 2011. "International
        Evidence on Food Consumption Patterns: An Update Using 2005 International
        Comparison Program Data." Technical Bulletin TB-1929. Washington, D.C., USA:
        Economic Research Service, US Department of Agriculture.
        http://www.ers.usda.gov/Publications/TB1929/.
Neiken, L. (2003). FAO Methodology for Estimating the Prevalence of Undernourishment. FAO,
        Rome, Italy.
OECD. 2001. "Market Effects of Crop Support Measures." Paris, France: OECD.
O'Neill, Brian, et al. 2017. "The Roads Ahead: Narratives for Shared Socioeconomic Pathways
        Describing World Futures in the 21st Century." Global Environmental Change 42
        (January): 169-180.
World Development Indicators. 2019. (online datbase). World Bank.
        https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators




                                              69
