                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN THE ENERGY SECTOR

                                          David Popp
                                        Jacquelyn Pless
                                          Ivan Hascic
                                        Nick Johnstone

                                      Working Paper 27145
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27145


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We thank Julie Lassébie for helpful discussions on obtaining and working with Crunchbase data,
Miguel Cárdenas Rodríguez for precious help with patent searches, and Myriam Gregoire-
Zawilski for helpful research assistance. Hunt Allcott and participants at the NBER Conference
on The Role of Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Economic Growth provided helpful
comments on an earlier draft. A special thank you to Aaron Chatterji, Josh Lerner, Scott Stern,
and Mike Andrews for their efforts organizing this project and for helpful comments throughout.
Funding from the National Bureau of Economic Research project on The Role of Innovation and
Entrepreneurship in Economic Growth was used to purchase data for this research. The views
expressed in this paper are the authors' own and do not necessarily reflect those of the OECD, the
IEA, their member countries, nor the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by David Popp, Jacquelyn Pless, Ivan Hascic, and Nick Johnstone. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Innovation and Entrepreneurship in the Energy Sector
David Popp, Jacquelyn Pless, Ivan Hascic, and Nick Johnstone
NBER Working Paper No. 27145
May 2020
JEL No. O31,Q4,Q42,Q55

                                         ABSTRACT

Historically, innovation in the energy sector proceeded slowly and entrepreneurial start-up firms
played a relatively minor role. We argue that this may be changing. Energy markets are going
through a period of profound structural change. The rise of hydrofracturing lowered fossil fuel
prices so much that natural gas is now the primary fuel for electricity generation in the US.
Renewable energy technologies also experienced significant cost and performance improvements.
However, integrating intermittent resources creates additional grid management challenges,
requiring further innovation. This chapter documents the evolving roles of innovation and
entrepreneurship in the energy sector. First, we provide an overview of the energy industry,
highlighting that many new energy technologies are smaller, modular, and increasingly rely on
innovation in other fast-moving high-tech sectors. We then conduct two descriptive data analyses
that document a sharp decline in both clean energy patenting and start-up activity from about
2010 onwards. We discuss potential explanations and provide some evidence that while
innovation in existing technologies may simply have been successful, continued innovation will
be needed in enabling technologies that are more likely to depend on progress in other sectors.

David Popp                                      Ivan Hascic
Department of Public Administration             OECD Environment Directorate 2
and International Affairs                       rue André Pascale
Syracuse University                             75775 Paris Cedex 16
The Maxwell School                              France
426 Eggers Hall                                 Ivan.Hascic@oecd.org
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER                                        Nick Johnstone
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu                          Energy Data Centre
                                                International Energy Agency (IEA)
Jacquelyn Pless                                 Paris
MIT Sloan School of Management                  France
100 Main Street                                 Nick.JOHNSTONE@iea.org
Cambridge, MA 02142
jpless@mit.edu
I. Introduction

       Energy markets are going through a period of profound structural change. With significant
cost declines and performance improvements in renewable energy technologies over the last
decade, electricity grids must manage higher levels of generation from intermittent renewable
energy resources. These resources lower greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions associated with the
power sector but also create new challenges for grid operators, who must balance supply and
demand in real time. Furthermore, the rise of "unconventional" gas and oil in the past decade put
downward pressure on fossil fuel prices, resulting in natural gas replacing coal as the primary fuel
for electricity generation in the US.

       Despite these advances, improving the environmental performance of the energy sector
requires continued innovation. Limiting global warming to no more than 1.5° Celsius, which
would reduce (but not eliminate) projected climate change impacts, is only possible by achieving
zero net carbon emissions by mid-century (IPCC, 2018). Replacing vast amounts of fossil fuels
with alternative, carbon-free energy sources such as solar and wind energy will require long-term
energy storage solutions and smart grid technologies to integrate these intermittent energy sources
into the grid (International Renewable Energy Agency 2017, International Energy Agency 2019a).
These challenges must be overcome while also ensuring energy security in the face of rapidly
changing market conditions.

       Yet innovation in the energy sector has historically proceeded slowly. Energy firms invest
less in R&D than almost all other sectors of the economy. There are also several unique features
of the energy sector that make innovation in the energy context particularly challenging. Energy
production is capital intensive, and especially long-time horizons between initial idea and
commercialization create a "Valley of Death" for energy innovation (e.g. Mowrey et al. 2010,
Weyant, 2011). Such long time horizons also make energy firms less attractive to venture
capitalists, who typically expect to see returns within 5-7 years. In addition, because the social
benefits of clean energy associated with pollution reductions are not reflected in market prices
without government intervention, the potential demand for clean energy technologies is dependent
on effective environmental policy. As a result, while small, nimble start-ups are frequently the
vehicle through which innovation reaches the market in many sectors, they have historically played
a smaller role in the energy sector (Nanda et al. 2015, Gaddy et al. 2017).
       Could this be changing given the evolving nature of energy markets? Many of the latest
energy technologies are smaller and more modular (e.g. solar panels, smart meters for homes)
relative to conventional technologies. They also increasingly rely on advancements in other
sectors in which fast-moving start-ups are more prominent players. For instance, new smart grid
technologies depend on software and information technology (IT) ­ a sector where entrepreneurial
firms play important roles (e.g. Gaddy et al. 2017). How is the nature of innovation in energy
changing? Are entrepreneurial firms now playing a larger role? Do more energy innovations
contain a software or information technology component? Do energy start-ups with a high-tech
component perform better than other energy start-ups?

       We explore these questions in three parts. We begin by providing an overview of the energy
industry and energy innovation literature, exploring how both unconventional natural gas and oil
and increasingly affordable renewable energy technologies are changing the industry. We focus
on the electricity sector, considering the generation of electricity and the supply of fuel (e.g. coal
and natural gas) to power plants. While we do not directly address energy in the transportation
sector, there are technological needs that overlap both sectors, such as innovation in batteries for
energy storage on the power grid and for powering electric vehicles.

       We then provide two new descriptive data analyses on the changing nature of innovation
in energy, with a particular focus on the increasing role of digitalization. First, we examine
patenting activity and document that, despite rapid growth in the late 2000s, energy patenting
activity overall has fallen since about 2010 or 2011. We consider possible explanations for this
decline, such as the rise of hydraulic fracturing, changing regulations, diminishing returns to
research, and the existence of a cleantech bubble. The share of power sector patents that can also
be considered "high-tech", though, began to increase in the last couple of years of our sample
(2013-14). This suggests that digitalization may be an increasingly important aspect of energy
innovation moving forward.

       Second, we present data on start-up activity in the energy sector, with a similar focus on
entrepreneurial energy firms that operate in high-tech fields. The findings are consistent with what
we observe in the patenting data. We document a similar decline in energy start-ups since about
2010, but again, an increasing share of these energy start-ups are also "high-tech" firms. We also
show that high-tech energy start-ups are more likely to attract venture capital (VC) investments


                                                                                                    2
but they do not necessarily perform better than non-high-tech energy start-ups. Furthermore,
conditional on receiving funding, energy start-ups generally do not perform better than the average
funded firm, although there is some evidence of over-investment in clean energy corresponding
with growth and a subsequent fall in both patenting and VC funding during the 2006-2012 period.

       The rest of this chapter proceeds as follows. In Section II, we provide industry background
and a review of the energy innovation literature so far. Sections III and IV present our patenting
and start-up analyses, respectively. We conclude with a discussion of emerging trends in the
energy sector and suggestions for future research.



II. Industry Background

       Fossil fuel combustion generated nearly 5 billion metric tons of greenhouse gases in 2016,
accounting for 76 percent of all US emissions (US EPA, 2019). While electricity generation
historically was the largest source of US greenhouse gas emissions, increased generation from
natural gas and clean renewable energy resulted in emissions from the power sector falling below
those of the transportation sector for the first time in 2016 (US EPA 2019). Nonetheless, significant
innovation and progress is still needed in order to mitigate the potential impacts of climate change
and to meet future energy policy goals in a cost-effective manner, and innovation in the energy
sector has historically moved relatively slowly.

       Examining historical R&D investment trends can begin to shed light on this phenomenon.
Consider the data provided in Table 1, for instance, which shows domestic R&D paid for and
performed by U.S. companies in select industries, as a percentage of net sales. Over the past ten
years, the industrial sector as a whole spent between 2.5 to 3.5% of sales on R&D.               For
manufacturing industries, the share ranges from 3.1 to 3.9%, with shares approaching 10% in
R&D-intensive industries such as pharmaceuticals or computers.            In contrast, mining and
extraction industries, which include the oil and gas sector, were spending less than one percent of
sales on R&D until 2015. Utilities spend just 0.1% of sales on R&D. Only the engine and turbine
manufacturing component of the energy industry has R&D spending levels comparable to the rest
of the manufacturing sector.

       [table 1 here]


                                                                                                   3
       Fostering and accelerating innovation, though, is not simply a matter of increasing R&D
expenditures. Such spending must effectively translate into the commercialization and diffusion
of new technologies, processes, business models, and management practices that improve
performance, such as the financial and environmental performance of the power sector. Beyond
the lessons from innovation economics, strategy, and management that apply broadly to many
sectors, there are several unique features of the energy industry that make the process of
technological change different in this sector:

           1. Energy is a commodity. Consumers want the lights to go on when they flip a
               switch. While environmental considerations are becoming more important to
               consumers in many countries, most do not care about the source of that energy, and
               are unwilling to pay a premium for clean energy.             As a result, successful
               entrepreneurs cannot fully capture the rents associated with differentiating their
               product. Instead, reducing costs is the measure of successful innovation.

           2. Regulation plays an important role in the industry. Electrical and gas service is
               usually distributed by regulated natural monopolies, and regulation of energy
               production varies across jurisdictions. Because consumers focus on cost rather than
               quality, until recently cleaner energy sources such as solar or wind were viewed as
               too expensive in the absence of interventions to address externalities. Unlike
               sectors where the government is a primary consumer (such as the military or space
               exploration), energy is somewhat unique in that government regulation shapes
               demand, but final consumption decisions are made in the private sectors. As a
               result, uncertainty over future policy can dampen incentives for R&D.

           3. Energy generation is capital intensive. Economies of scale are pervasive in large
               power plants. For example, new natural gas-fired combined cycle plants are three
               times as large as similar plants built in the 1980s, leading to lower costs per kilowatt
               (EIA Today in Energy, 2019a). Demonstrating commercial viability of a new
               energy production technology requires hundreds of millions of dollars, making
               entry into the industry difficult for small start-up firms (Nanda et al. 2015).

           4. Long time horizons between initial idea and commercialization in the energy sector
               also make it more difficult for small start-up firms to raise capital (e.g. Popp 2016,

                                                                                                     4
                Howell, 2017). Venture capital investors expect returns within three to five years
                of their investments. But the development and testing of new energy technologies
                takes longer (Gaddy et al 2017).

         Measuring the returns to R&D in the energy sector is also challenging. Since energy is a
commodity, reducing costs and environmental impacts matter more than increasing productivity.
On these measures, the energy industry has seen remarkable changes in the 21st century. The rise
of unconventional gas and oil sources obtained using hydraulic fracturing increased supplies and
lowered prices of oil and gas. At the same time, costs of renewable energy sources fell to levels
making them competitive with fossil fuels. Below we describe the impact of each of these
technological advances on the energy industry.



A. The Rise of Shale Gas and Oil

         Access to natural gas and oil reserves in shale deposits on competitive terms has changed
global energy markets. Shale deposits were too expensive to access until technological advances
such as horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing (colloquially known as "fracking") reduced
drilling costs (Jacoby et al. 2012). These unconventional wells use a mixture of water, sand, and
other chemicals to cause cracks and fissures in the rock formation that allow crude oil to escape
(Fetter et al. 2018). Horizontal drilling is often used to widen access to shale plays. Improved
access to shale gas and oil caused US crude oil reserves to grow (Figure 1), allowing the US to
play a larger role in global oil markets. In September 2019, the US imported more petroleum than
it imported for the first time since monthly recordkeeping began in 1973 (EIA Today in Energy
2019b). Domestically, increased access to natural gas lowered natural gas prices (Figure 2),
leading to increased use of natural gas by electric utilities. Natural gas surpassed coal as the
primary fuel source for US electric utilities in 2016 (Figure 3). Since 2010, US power plant
emissions of sulfur dioxide (SO2) fell by 75% and carbon dioxide emissions fell by over 25%. As
a result, annual damages from emissions fell from $245 billion to $133 billion. Roughly $60
billion of this reduction is due to changing shares of fuels in power generation (Holland et al.
2018).




                                                                                                5
Figure 1: U.S. Crude Oil Proved Reserves




      Notes: U.S. crude oil proved reserves, in billions of barrels. Source: U.S. EIA (2018).



Figure 2: Annual Residential Natural Gas Price




      Notes: Average annual price of residential natural gas in the United States, in 2019 US dollars. Source:
      US.EIA Short-Term Energy Outlook, November 2019.




                                                                                                            6
Figure 3: U.S. Electricity Generation by Fuel Source




       Notes: "Renewable" includes conventional hydropower, wind, wood biomass, waste biomass, geothermal,
       and solar. Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration (2019).



       The rise in hydraulic fracturing began in the early 2000s, stimulated by the high price of
conventional crude oil at the time. These higher prices made shale oil viable, and the initial activity
in shale oil led to efficiency improvements that further reduced the costs (Killian 2016). Both
private and public sector investments in the United States aided the development of shale gas
technologies. The US invested in government R&D to develop unconventional natural gas, but
oil industry innovations such as horizontal drilling and three-dimensional seismic imaging were
also important. (Krupnick and Wang, 2017). In particular, Mitchell Energy, an independent
natural gas firm, made large investments in shale gas development before it was proven profitable
(Krupnick and Wang, 2017). Mitchell Energy had experimented with shale development for
several years without finding a way to make it profitable. Their technological advance came in
1997, when they used new "slickwater" fracking treatments (Cahoy et al. 2013). In 2001, Devon
Energy, with expertise in horizontal drilling, acquired Mitchell Energy. Combining horizontal
drilling and hydraulic fracturing led to the boom in shale gas production that would soon follow
(Cahoy et al. 2013).

       [table 2 here]


                                                                                                        7
        Hydraulic fracturing has affected both energy markets and the environment in several
ways:

           ·   Increased drilling has led to local economic booms. Employment in oil and gas
               extraction grew from nearly 74,000 workers in 2000 to over 113,400 workers in
               2016 (Table 2). Communities in the top quartile of potential hydraulic fracturing
               productivity experienced a 4.8% growth in employment and a 5.8% increase in
               household income (Bartik et al. 2019). Taking into account indirect impacts,
               Maniloff and Mastromonaco (2017) estimate the shale boom created about 550,000
               local jobs. Feyrer et al. (2017) find that every million dollars of new oil and gas
               extracted creates 0.85 jobs within the county, and 2.13 jobs within 100 miles of the
               drilling site. To put this in perspective, $393 billion of new oil and gas production
               occurred between 2005 and 2014.

           ·   At the same time, expansion of natural gas has hurt the coal industry. Employment
               in coal mining fell from a peak of 89,367 in 2012 to just 55,008 in 2016 (Table 2).

           ·   Shale gas and oil reduce market volatility. While shale wells take longer to drill
               and reach production, they produce more per well and have less variation in
               production. Thus, shale gas is more responsive to market prices (Newell and Prest
               2017).

           ·   While the development of shale gas helped reduce air pollution from US power
               plants, it also raised new environmental concerns. Hydraulic fracturing requires
               several times more water than conventional drilling. Moreover, there are concerns
               that leaks and spills from hydraulic fracturing activity may contaminate
               groundwater. As a results, several countries and some US states have banned
               hydraulic fracturing while further study is conducted (Krupnick and Wang, 2017).




                                                                                                  8
Figure 4: Costs of Electricity From Selected Sources




Notes: Figure shows the levelized cost of energy (LCOE) for various renewable energy sources. Data taken from
Figure 2.1 in International Renewable Energy Agency (2018), which uses costs of individual projects in the IRENA
Renewable Cost Database. Costs are the global weighted average of LCOE for newly commissioned projects in a
given year, where the weights are based on capacity deployed by country/year. The gray shaded region shows the
equivalent cost range for fossil fuels. Note that, by 2017, all renewable sources except concentrating solar power were
competitive with fossil fuels.



B. Increased Penetration of Renewable Energy Sources

         Increasing electricity generation from wind and solar energy provide a second opportunity
for the energy sector, but it also comes with its own set of challenges. The costs of electricity
generated from solar photovoltaic (PV) and onshore wind turbines fell dramatically since 2010,
making both competitive with electricity generated from fossil fuels (Figure 4). While renewable
energy sources are still a small share of electricity generation in the US (17%), their use is growing
rapidly (Figure 3). Solar and energy generation typically occurs at a smaller scale than fossil fuels.
Figure 5 shows trends in the percentage of employment in small and medium-sized establishments
for various industries. While the average for all manufacturing industries is just over 40 percent,
power generation, turbine manufacturing, and battery manufacturing all have percentages around
20 percent or less. In contrast, most solar and wind energy generation occurs in small and medium
sized establishments. Because solar and wind establishments are smaller and these enterprises still

                                                                                                                     9
make up a small share of the overall power generation industry, the growth in renewable energy
during the past decade did not lead to growth in employment in the power generation sector (Table
2).


Figure 5: Percentage of Employment in Small and Medium Enterprises, Select Industries




Notes: Figure shows the percentage of employees working in small and medium enterprises, which include
establishments of 500 workers or less. Separate breakdowns for solar and wind are unavailable until 2011. Source:
US Census Bureau: Statistics of US Businesses, various years.

        Wind and solar energy are examples of intermittent sources of power, as the electricity
generated depends on factors outside of the operator's control, such as wind speeds. Intermittent
sources create challenges for managing the electricity grid (Borestein 2012). Because electricity
is very expensive to store, what goes on the grid must match what comes off, requiring balancing
authorities to equate power supply and demand in real time (EIA Today in Energy, 2016, IEA
2019a). To illustrate, consider the structure of the U.S. electricity grid. The continental United
States electricity grid is divided into three mains sections: the Eastern Interconnection, the Western
Interconnection, and the Electricity Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT). Except for ERCOT,
these interconnections are divided into smaller balancing authorities managing smaller regions.
Some balancing authorities are independent utilities, such as the Tennessee Valley Authority

                                                                                                              10
(TVA). Others are Regional Transmission Organizations ­ independent non-profit organizations,
such as the Midwest Independent System Operator (MISO) or the New York Independent System
Operator (NYISO) (EIA Today in Energy, 2011).

       The increased penetration of intermittent renewable sources pose two additional
challenges. First, because the marginal cost of renewables is close to 0, it is offered to wholesale
markets at very low costs. At times when renewable energy generation is high, wholesale prices
fall. In some cases, oversupply of electricity from mid-day solar energy created negative electricity
prices ­ power producers were willing to pay grid managers to use the electricity they generate
(Bajwa and Cavicchi 2017). Low wholesale prices have particularly hurt nuclear plants (IEA
2019b). While these plants also have low marginal costs, they have high fixed costs that are
difficult to recover when wholesale prices are low. Nuclear plants are also costly to shut down
and restart. As a result, competition from natural gas and wind is forcing some nuclear plants to
retire early (Roth and Jaramillo, 2017) rather than accept low wholesale prices and operating at a
loss. Second, modular sources such as solar photovoltaic (PV) panels exacerbate the fluctuations
in electricity demand that occur during a typical day. As homeowners generate more of their own
power during the day using solar photovoltaic panels, demand for electricity purchased from the
grid falls but then picks up again in early evening as the sun sets and people return home for the
day.

       Addressing the challenges of grid integration requires both technological and management
innovations. Cross-border power markets increase flexibility and make balancing supply and
demand easier (Martinot 2016). Developing affordable energy storage options would reduce the
need to instantaneously balance supply and demand. Currently, most electricity stored on the grid
uses pumped hydro reserves: water is pushed to a higher elevation using excess electricity, where
it can be released to generate electricity using hydropower when needed. The use of pumped
hydropower storage is limited geographically. Technological advances such as better batteries
could greatly expand the potential of energy storage (Greenblatt et al. 2017). Similarly, smart grid
technologies allowing for automated demand-load management can better match supply and
demand (Greenblatt et al. 2017). Smart grid technologies allow for two-way communication
between customers and utilities, facilitating management strategies such as peak-load pricing,
where electricity prices to consumers rise and fall based on market conditions. Consumers can,
for example, then choose to run appliances at times when prices are lowest (US DOE, n.d.).
                                                                                                  11
C. Innovation in the Energy Sector

       The increased use of both hydraulic fracturing and renewable energy creates new
technological challenges, but also creates new opportunities for innovation.            New energy
technologies are often smaller and modular (e.g. solar panels, smart meters for homes), reducing
the need for large capital costs. While energy remains a commodity, the popularity of products
such as Nest thermostats suggests that product differentiation is possible for end-use technologies
that improve energy efficiency and potentially improve grid management. The rise of hydraulic
fracturing depended in part on improved seismic imaging to help locate new shale resources
(Krupnick and Wang, 2017). Today, energy companies are turning to data analytics and artificial
intelligence (AI) to further improve their search for new energy (Anonymous, 2019).

       Before turning to our analysis of the changing nature of energy innovation, we provide a
brief review of evidence so far in the literature examining the effects of policies and regulations
on energy innovation. See Popp (2019) for a more comprehensive review. There are several
distinct features of energy innovation that make it particularly important to study today. First and
foremost, addressing climate change and mitigating its harm in the time required will require
significant innovation at speed and scale. Furthermore, in addition to the four challenges outlined
at the beginning of this section, innovation in clean energy faces a "double-externality" challenge.
As there are for any innovation, knowledge spillovers associated with clean energy innovation
reduce private incentives for investing. However, the social benefits of clean energy associated
with pollution reductions are also not reflected in market prices without government intervention.
Thus, the potential demand for clean energy technologies is dependent on effective environmental
policy. Policies addressing these environmental externalities increase the potential market size for
clean energy innovation, and are often referred to as demand-pull policies in the literature. Policies
supporting technology development directly are often referred to as technology-push policies.

       These two market failures could, in principle, be addressed separately. Since knowledge
market failures apply generally across technologies, economy-wide policies affecting all types of
innovation could address knowledge market failures, leaving it to environmental policy to "get the
prices right" to encourage green innovation. A carbon tax exemplifies the economist's goal of
"getting prices right" by putting a price on emissions related to climate change. Evidence on the

                                                                                                   12
impact of market forces such as higher energy prices or price corrections from broad-based policies
such as carbon taxes show that prices matter for innovation. Over the long term, a 10 percent
increase in energy prices leads to a 3.5 percent rise in the number of U.S. patents in 11 different
alternative energy and energy efficiency technologies (Popp 2002). Most of the response occurs
quickly after a change in energy prices, with an average lag between an energy price change and
patenting activity of 3.71 years. Verdolini and Galeotti (2011) find similar results using a multi-
country sample from 1975 to 2000. Similarly, when facing higher fuel prices, firms in the
automotive industry produce more innovations on clean technologies, such as electric and hybrid
cars, and less in fossil-fuel technologies that improve internal combustion engines when facing
higher fuel prices (Aghion et al. 2016). A 10 percent higher fuel price is associated with about 10
percent more low-emission energy patents and 7 percent fewer fossil-fuel patents. In contrast,
energy prices are less effective for promoting innovation on home energy efficiency, particularly
for less-visible technologies such as insulation that are installed by builders and are not easily
modified. Instead, building code changes induce innovation for home energy efficiency (Noailly,
2012).

         However, in addition to broad-based policies such as carbon taxes or cap-and-trade that
target all greenhouse gas emissions, governments use a variety of targeted policies to promote
clean energy and reduce emissions. Examples include energy efficiency standards, renewable
energy mandates, tax incentives for purchasing rooftop solar photovoltaic equipment, and
investment credits and subsidies for specific clean energy technologies. The type of policy support
chosen also affects both the pace and direction of innovation. Policies to promote clean energy can
either be technology-neutral or technology-specific. Technology-neutral policies provide broad
mandates, such as reducing emissions to a certain level but leave it to consumers and firms to
decide how to comply. Examples include a carbon tax, which targets all emissions equally, as well
as more targeted policies such as renewable energy mandates. Such mandates can require that
utilities generate a set portion of electricity from renewable energy, but they do not dictate what
types of renewable sources be used. On the other hand, technology-specific policies stipulate the
use of individual technologies. For example, tax credits for electric vehicles or rooftop solar
energy are only available to consumers who purchase these products.

         Technology-neutral policies promote technologies closest to being competitive in the
market without policy support. Johnstone et al.'s (2010) study of renewable energy innovation is
                                                                                                13
an example. Because wind energy was the closest to being competitive with traditional energy
sources at the time of this study, innovation in countries with mandates to provide alternative
energy focused on wind. In contrast, direct investment incentives such as feed-in tariffs supported
innovation in solar and waste-to-energy technologies. These technologies were less competitive
with traditional energy technologies and required the guaranteed revenue from a feed-in tariff to
compete. Thus, although technology-specific policies may raise short-term costs, judicious use of
them helps promote the development of low-emission technologies further from the market, such
as offshore wind or carbon capture and sequestration.

       Recent theoretical work provides support for the use of such targeted policies ­ particularly
those technologies furthest from market. Other market failures such as learning-by-doing, path
dependency, and capital market failures limit incentives to invest in these emerging technologies
(Acemoglu et al. 2016, Fischer et al. 2017, Lehmann and Söderholm, 2018). Both learning-by-
doing and path dependency justify technology-specific deployment policies such as feed-in tariffs
or tax credits--most notably when the resulting cost-reductions benefit not only early adopters,
but also those who wait to adopt until costs fall (e.g. Lehmann and Söderholm, 2018). However,
the existing literature on learning-by-doing generally suggests that the benefits of learning-by-
doing are not sufficient to justify current levels of deployment subsidies (e.g. Nemet 2012, Fischer
et al. 2017, Tang, 2018). Empirical evidence on path dependency is slim. Path dependency creates
a market failure if switching costs make it difficult for firms previously investing in one type of
technology to switch to profitable opportunities in another. While some recent studies find
evidence of path dependency in energy innovation (e.g. Aghion et al. 2016, Stucki and Woerter
2017), none of these studies tests whether the observed path dependency results from high
switching costs or are simply a reaction to better research opportunities. More research on the
relationship between switching costs and path dependency is needed.

       In contrast, the evidence on capital market failures for energy is limited but suggestive of
such market failures. In a study using financial microdata, Cárdenas Rodríguez et al. (2015) find
that price-based policy instruments such as feed-in tariffs and tax credits have a positive effect on
private investment for renewable energy. It is hypothesized that such instruments provide a more
predictable revenue stream, potentially making them more suitable for alleviating the particular
risk-return profile of renewable energy investments. In contrast, quota-based policy instruments,
whose support levels are more difficult to ascertain ex ante, have no significant effect on private
                                                                                                  14
finance investment. Moreover, if credit markets are functioning well, price schemes will induce
private finance for less mature technologies (e.g. solar PV), while a quota schemes will induce
private finance for more mature technologies (e.g. onshore wind). However, if credit markets are
not functioning well only price schemes will have an effect on private finance flows, and only for
the case of onshore wind power.

       In an evaluation of the US Department of Energy Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) program, Howell (2017) provides evidence that early financing helps overcome capital
market failures in clean energy. SBIR grants improve the performance of new clean energy firms,
but are ineffective for older technologies such as coal, natural gas, and biofuels. Similarly, Popp
(2017) provides evidence that bringing new energy technologies to market takes longer in clean
energy than in other fields (e.g. Branstattter and Ogura 2005, Finardi, 2011), suggesting that the
length of time necessary for commercialization of energy R&D creates a barrier to raising private
sector financial support.

       Given the importance of financing constraints, a recently emerging literature considers the
role of venture capital for renewable energy. Nanda et al. (2015) provide descriptive data
comparing clean energy innovations supported by venture capital to other clean energy
innovations, showing patents from firms that received venture capital are cited more frequently.
However, they argue that the nature of energy markets may reduce the potential of venture capital
in clean energy. These concerns include the capital intensity of energy production, the long time
frame, and the difficulty for successful ventures to find an "exit" strategy where they are purchased
by a larger company. Similarly, comparing venture capital investments in clean energy, software,
and medicine, Gaddy et al. (2017) find that clean energy ventures do not perform as well as
software, but they do not perform worse than medicine. They also argue that their study suggests
venture capital is poorly suited for clean technology.          Cumming et al. (2017) consider
crowdfunding as an alternative to venture capital. They collect data on crowdfunded projects from
Indiegogo, with 7.4 % of projects pertaining to clean technology. While potential entrepreneurs
are able to use the crowdfunding platform to reduce information asymmetries with investors, clean
technology offerings are no more successful than other crowdfunded projects, and appear to be
perceived as more risky.




                                                                                                  15
       Finally, climate change is a global problem. Innovators partake in global markets and are
influenced by regulation not only at home, but in other countries where they do business. As such,
policies in both local and foreign markets matter. Dechezleprêtre and Glachant (2014) compare
wind energy patents across OECD countries, using data from 1991-2008. Their observations are
country pairs, as they look at both the source (e.g. where the invention is developed) and
destination (e.g. where patents are granted) of invention. Although the marginal effect of policies
implemented at home is 12 times higher, the larger size of foreign markets make the overall impact
of foreign policies twice as large on average as the overall impact of domestic policies on
innovation. In a study of 15 OECD countries using patent data from 1978 to 2005, Peters et al.
(2012) also find both domestic and foreign demand-pull policies (such as renewable portfolio
standards or feed-in tariffs) are important for the development of solar PV technology. However,
technology-push policies such as R&D subsidies only increase domestic innovation, as firms must
be in the local market to take advantage of them. Fabrizio et al. (2017) find similar results for
energy storage. In addition, as their sample includes patents from countries not directly regulating
energy storage, they also show that demand-pull policies encourage innovation and increase
technology transfer coming into the country, measured as domestic patent applications filed for
technologies that originally filed for patent protection elsewhere.



III. Patenting in the Energy Sector

       In this section, we present patenting trends for a range of energy technologies, focusing on
technologies related to the changing nature of energy: clean energy technologies and hydraulic
fracturing. A large literature on energy innovation has shown that clean energy patenting is
responsive to both higher energy prices (e.g. Newell et al. 1999, Popp 2002, Verdolini and
Gaelotti, 2011, and Aghion et al. 2016) and policy (e.g. Johnstone et al. 2010, Peters et al. 2012,
Dechezleprêtre and Glachant, 2014, Nesta et al. 2014, Fabrizio et al. 2017). However, with a few
exceptions, patent levels have fallen since a peak in the early 2010s. We explore possible
explanations for this decline below.

       Our patent data are taken from the European Patent Office (EPO) World Patent Statistical
Database (PATSTAT), which includes over 100 million patent applications from 90 patent
authorities. To control for patent quality, we only include patent applications having two or more

                                                                                                 16
family members in different jurisdictions. Inventors must file a patent at each patent office for
which they desire protection. Filing in multiple offices is a signal that the patented invention is of
higher quality (e.g. Lanjouw et al. 1998, Harhoff et al. 2003). We use the European Patent Office's
"Y scheme", which provides separate classifications for technologies pertaining to climate change
mitigation and adaptation, to identify relevant patents. These classifications complement standard
patent classification schemes such as the Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) scheme,
grouping together relevant technologies that may appear in a wide range of traditional patent
classes (Veefkind et al. 2012, Angelucci et al. 2018).

        We first present data for eleven clean energy technologies, categorized in two main groups.
Clean energy technologies include new or improved energy sources. Enabling technologies
include those technologies that will help integrate a rapidly diversifying set of energy sources,
such as energy storage, smart grids, and systems integration. Appendix Table A lists the patent
classes used to identify each technology below. In both figures the trend for all technologies is
included for comparison.

        Figures 6 through 8 present our patent data. Panels A and B of Figure 6 show global trends
for clean energy and enabling energy technologies, respectively. Our data include patents applied
for between 1997 and 2015, so that our focus is on innovation since the Kyoto Protocol. Because
the number of patents in each group varies, we normalize each patent series so that 2006 equals
100. 1 Two notable trends stand out. First, each energy technology experiences dramatic growth
in the early 2010s. For most technologies, global patent counts increased by a factor of 3 or more
from 2006 to 2011. Growth is larger for several of the enabling technologies, which are less
mature. The only exception to this pattern is hybrid and electric vehicles, whose patent counts
peak in 2007. For the remaining technologies, this sudden increase in clean energy patenting
followed already significant growth in the early 21st century, as patent counts for most technologies
doubled from 1997 to 2006. Second, this sudden increase in patenting was followed by a rapid
decline. By 2015, patent levels were around half of what they were at the 2010-11 peak. This
stands in contrast to the small, steady increases in patenting for all technologies.




1
  We normalize in the middle of the sample, rather than in 1997, because some technologies have very few patents
in the early years of the sample.

                                                                                                               17
Figure 6: Global Energy Patents

A. Clean Energy Technologies




    B. Enabling Energy Technologies




Notes: Figures show global counts of energy patents for patents filed in two or more countries. Patents are sorted by
priority year. All counts normalized so that 2006 = 100. Patent extractions from the EPO World Patent Statistical
Database (PATSTAT).


                                                                                                                 18
Figure 7: Clean Energy Patents by Country
A: United States                                            B: European Union




C: Japan                                                    D: China




Notes: Figures show global counts of clean energy patents for patents filed in two or more countries. Patents are
sorted by priority year. . Fractional counts used for patents with inventors from multiple countries. All counts
normalized so that 2006 = 100. Patent extractions from the EPO World Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT).



        Figures 7 and 8 show that these trends are truly global. Based on the home country of each
inventor, we present clean energy patents and enabling technology patents from inventors from
the United States, the European Union, Japan, and China. While the downturn is not as noticeable
for China (or perhaps begins a year or two later), overall patenting is also increasing more rapidly
in China, so that much of the growth in energy patenting in China simply corresponds to an overall
increase in patenting activity. With few exceptions, such as building energy efficiency patents in
the U.S. and EU, similar peaks and declines are observed for clean energy technologies in the US,
EU, and Japan.




                                                                                                              19
Figure 8: Enabling Energy Technology Patents by Country
A: United States                                               B: European Union




C: Japan                                                       D: China




Notes: Figures show global counts of enabling energy technologies for patents filed in two or more countries. Patents
are sorted by priority year. Fractional counts used for patents with inventors from multiple countries. All counts
normalized so that 2006 = 100. Patent extractions from the EPO World Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT).



A. Why Has Clean Energy Patenting Fallen?

         While it is beyond the scope of this chapter to provide definitive evidence on any one
possible explanation for the recent decline in clean energy patenting, we suggest several possible
explanations below. When relevant, we cite evidence from recent working papers that have begun
exploring this decline. In other cases, we provide our own descriptive data to look for correlations
between potential mechanisms that might explain the decline.




                                                                                                                  20
Figure 9: Energy prices, selected countries
A: United States                                              B. European Union




C: Japan




Notes: Figures show gasoline and residential electricity prices for select countries, in 2015 US Dollars. Source: IEA
(2019c) Energy Prices and Taxes Statistics.



1. Innovation follows energy prices

        As previously noted, energy prices are an important driver of energy innovation (e.g. Popp,
2002; Verdolini and Galeotti, 2011; Aghion et al. 2016). Both the recent increase and decrease in
patenting coincide with trends in energy prices, particularly in the fuel sector (Figure 9). Similar
spikes in patenting also occurred during the period of high energy prices in the late 1970s and early
1980s. Figure 10 provides a longer-term look at patenting for selected technologies. 2 To control


2
 Because our search terms use the EPO's Y-scheme, which uses internal EPO classifications, we cannot extend the
data prior to 1978. The EPO was founded in late 1977.

                                                                                                                 21
for overall growth in patenting, we present these data as the share of all global patents pertaining
to a given technology. The trends clearly suggest that clean energy patenting fell as energy prices
declined in the mid-1980s.


Figure 10: Historical Patent Counts, Selected Technologies




Notes: Figures shows the share of all patents in selected technologies, for patents filed in two or more countries.
Patents are sorted by priority year. Fractional counts used for patents with inventors from multiple countries. Patent
extractions from the EPO World Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT).



         While it is tempting to conclude that history is simply repeating itself again, the most
striking take-away from Figure 10 is the unprecedented growth in patenting through the late 2000s.
The share of patents devoted to technologies such as wind, energy efficiency and energy storage
is three to five times higher in the late 2000s and very early 2010s than during the first energy
crisis. Only solar thermal technology experienced a peak in the late 1970s comparable to its peak
just after 2010. Presumably this is a result of changing emphasis in solar energy, where modular
solar photovoltaic panels, rather than large scale solar thermal installations, have become the cost
effective technology. Recall from Figure 4 that concentrated solar power was cheaper than solar

                                                                                                                  22
PV in 2010, but by 2017 solar PV was three times less expensive than concentrated solar power.
As figure 10 shows, these cost reductions followed a remarkable growth in solar PV innovation.

       The observation that "peak" patenting is so much higher at the turn of the last decade
emphasizes how other energy policies complemented the incentives provided by energy prices.
During the energy crisis of the 1970s, government R&D investments for clean energy were the
main targeted clean energy policy. By the 2000s, direct subsidies such as feed-in tariffs
guaranteeing a minimum price for clean energy or government mandates for renewable energy
sources became more prevalent, as did broad-based carbon pricing following the introduction of
the EU Emissions Trading Scheme in 2005 (e.g. EIA, 2004, Ang et al. 2017). The importance of
both targeted and broad-based energy policy for promoting innovation is further supported by
recent evidence that consumers are more responsive to energy price changes driven by carbon
taxes rather than other market dynamics, as tax changes may be more salient and are perceived as
being more persistent (Rivers and Shaufele, 2015; Li et al. 2014; Davis and Kilian, 2011).
Furthermore, targeted subsidies are particularly important for fostering innovation in technologies
that had not yet become cost-effective, such as solar PV in the early 2000s (Johnstone et al. 2010).
While increases in the price of fossil fuels, either due to market forces or carbon-pricing policies,
may affect which energy technology is cheapest at the margin, price increases tend to not spur
producers or consumers to choose technologies that remain relatively costlier even with higher
fossil fuel prices. Given the important supporting role of policy, the drop in energy prices alone
is not sufficient to explain the recent decline in patenting.



2. The rise of hydrofracturing

       The decline in clean energy patenting comes soon after the expansion of US natural gas
production due to hydrofracturing. Recall that natural gas prices in the US began to decline after
2007. Similarly, increased oil supply and decreased demand after the global recession led to
decreased oil and gasoline prices (e.g. Figure 9). Acemoglu et al. (2019) posit that the shale boom
caused energy innovation to shift from clean energy to fossil fuels.




                                                                                                  23
Figure 11: Hydrofracturing patents, 1990-2015




Notes: The figure shows hydrofracturing patents with applications in two or more countries, sorted by priority year
and inventor country. Fractional counts used for patents with inventors from multiple countries. Patent extractions
from the EPO World Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT).



         Data on hydraulic fracturing patents provide some support for this argument. Figure 11
shows patent counts related to hydrofracturing for the world, the United States, and European
Union. 3 Together the US and EU account for 79% of these patents. Two trends emerge. First,
after a period of relatively flat innovation, hydrofractruring innovation took off during the first
decade of the 21st century. Between 1990 and 1999, fracking patents grew by just over 50%. From


3
  As in other figures, data includes patents with applications in two or more countries, sorted by priority year and
inventor country. As the patent classes used to identify these innovations are limited in scope, we also perform a
robustness check using a broader set of classes which may however include un-related technologies. For this reason
they are combined with a keyword search on patent titles and abstracts using the terms hydraulic fracturing,
horizontal drilling, and well completion (following Cahoy et al. 2013). These counts are not directly comparable to
our other patent trends, as the keyword searches are only possible for patents applications registered at granted by
the US and European Patent Offices. Although the resulting patent counts are much lower, the trends for those
patents are similar, with a three-fold increase during the 2000s and dominance by U.S. inventors. Search terms for
both search strategies are listed in Appendix A.

                                                                                                                  24
2000 to 2009, they grew by more than a factor of 3. While they do not grow as fast as most clean
energy patents, hydraulic fracturing patents do not peak until 2013.

       Second, recent innovations in hydrofracturing are dominated by the United States, as nearly
all the growth during the 2000s comes from US inventors. Fracking faces strong public opposition
in Europe due to concerns over surface water diversion, groundwater quality, and consistency with
climate policy goals (Krupnick and Wang 2017) While the US is responsible for about 20 to 30%
of most energy inventions (Table 3), it is responsible for over 50% of fracking patents.
Nonetheless, the fall in clean energy patenting has occurred globally.              Moreover, while
hydrofracturing contributed to the fall in oil and gas prices during this time period, electricity
prices are a more important driver of innovation for renewable technologies such as solar and wind
energy. Trends in electricity prices vary across countries (Figure 9). Electricity prices were
relatively stable in the US, thanks in part to lower natural gas prices, but steadily increasing in the
EU and began to rise in Japan after bottoming out in 2010. As such, the rise of hydrofracking
offers at best a partial explanation for the decline in clean energy patents.

       [table 3 here]



3. Weakened regulations

       Because market prices do not internalize environmental externalities for clean energy
versus other energy sources, regulatory support is an important driver of innovation in the energy
sector. Both weakened regulation and uncertain regulation dampen incentives to innovate. Some
regulatory changes that occurred as renewable energy reached its peak include:

           ·   The election of President Barack Obama in the United States increased expectations
               that the U.S. would enact nationwide climate legislation. While several proposals
               were considered ­ most prominently the American Clean Energy and Security Act,
               more commonly known as the Waxman-Markey bill, which would have instituted
               a cap-and-trade system for U.S. carbon emissions ­ health care was the first priority
               of the new administration, and prospects for nationwide climate policy fell once
               Republicans took control of the Senate in 2010.




                                                                                                    25
               ·   The initial run-up of clean energy innovation coincides with the beginning of the
                   European Union's Emissions Trading Scheme (EU-ETS), an EU-wide cap-and-
                   trade program for carbon emissions. Phase I of EU-ETS began in 2005. This pilot
                   phase lasted until 2007. Phase II, which began in 2008, lowered the supply of
                   allowances available. While allowance prices initially rose to 30 Euros as a result,
                   they fell to below 10 Euros after the financial crisis in late 2008 (Ellerman et al.
                   2016). Allowance prices would not reach pre-crisis levels again until phase IV
                   began in 2018. 4

               ·   As the cost of renewable energy technology fell, government support also began to
                   decline. Germany, Spain, and Italy ­ three major supporters of solar PV, all cut
                   subsidies to PV after the financial crisis. While Spain cut subsidies to PV in
                   September 2008, Germany announced cuts in late 2010 ­ right at the peak of
                   patenting activity. Italy announced cuts to subsidies beginning in 2012. Moreover,
                   Spain's subsidy cut was retroactive, increasing uncertainty among investors. A
                   working paper by Ko and Simons (2020) argues that these subsidy cuts affected
                   innovation not only domestically, but abroad as well. They link the subsidy cuts to
                   a decline in R&D by South Korean manufacturers, who exported seventy percent
                   of PV production.

           Weakened regulations are a plausible explanation for the worldwide decline in clean
energy innovation. Both energy supply technologies and the enabling technologies needed to
complement these technologies peak after 2010, corresponding with when the US election reduced
the likelihood of climate policy in the US and Germany reduced solar subsidies. In contrast,
technologies less directly linked to these policies, such as building energy efficiency and hybrid
vehicles, peak at different times. That global innovation fell as a result is consistent with studies
such as Dechezleprêtre and Glachant (2014) and Peters et al. (2012), who demonstrated the
importance of global markets for wind and solar innovation respectively.




4
    https://sandbag.org.uk/carbon-price-viewer/, accessed November 14, 2019.

                                                                                                    26
4. Was there a clean technology bubble?

           While most discussions of the recent decline in clean energy patents attempt to explain the
decline, perhaps instead it is the rapid growth in clean energy patenting around 2010-11 that
requires an explanation. Clean energy patenting has fallen from its peak, but it still witnessed
impressive growth compared to overall technological progress since 2006. Except for
hybrid/electric vehicles and solar thermal, growth in patenting 2006-2015 is still greater for energy
patents than for all patents in general. For instance, by 2015, overall patent counts are 16 percent
higher than they were in 2006. In contrast, solar PV patent counts are 53 percent higher, wind
energy patents 62 percent higher, energy storage patents 74 percent higher, and smart grid patents
138 percent higher. Perhaps investors were overly optimistic about the future potential of clean
energy, leading to a cleantech bubble. Our venture capital data allow us to explore this possibility
further, by looking for evidence of a clean technology bubble in venture capital around the same
time.



5. Diminishing returns to research

           Both demand-side and supply-side pressures affect energy innovation (Popp 2002). As
research in a field progresses, promising opportunities may be used up, making it harder for further
progress. Given how quickly clean energy patenting increased in the early 2010s, might promising
avenues of research simply dried up?

           Popp (2002) uses forward citations made to patents in a given year to assess the quality of
innovation from a given year. However, that requires several years of patent data to assess, which
is not possible for the recent decline in patents. Instead, we present data on two measures of patent
quality that make use of data on backward citations ­ citations made by a given patent to the prior
art:

       ·   Radicalness, first proposed by Shane (2001), measures the extent to which patents are
           building upon ideas outside the patented technological domain. For a given patent, p, it is
           the count of the number of IPC classes included in patents cited by patent p that are not
           included in the classifications of patent i itself. It is calculated as:

                                                          
                                   =                       , for IPCpj  IPCp,

                                                                                                   27
       where CTj is the count of IPC 4-digit classifications IPCpj cited by patent p that are not
       assigned to patent p, and np represents the total number of IPC classes in the prior art cited
       by patent p (Squicciarini et al. 2013).

   ·   Originality, first proposed by Trajtenberg et al. (1997), measures the breadth of technology
       fields on which a patent relies. It also relies on backwards citations, but is based on the
       percentage of citations made by patent p to each possible IPC 4-digit patent class. Patents
       building on a more diverse set of knowledge are more original. We calculate originality as:

                                              2               
                                      = 1 -     ,

       where spj is the percentage of citations made by patent p to patent class j out of the np IPC
       4-digit classifications in all patents cited by patent p (Squicciarini et al. 2013).

       Figures 12 and 13 present radicalness and originality for a select set of our energy patent
technologies, as well as all patents (in red) for comparison. Because the annual averages for small
technological fields are noisy, we present the data as three-year moving averages. In each figure,
the top panel includes "traditional" clean energy technologies such as renewables and electric and
hybrid vehicles. A few things stand out here. Among these technologies, there are some noticeable
peaks for radicalness, although except for vehicles and wind in the mid-1990s, these peaks appear
to coincide with a similar peak for all technologies. Pertaining to the recent drop in clean energy
patenting, radicalness for solar, wind and energy efficiency buildings patents all peak right before
the spike in patenting. That radicalness begins to fall along with patenting provides some
suggestive evidence of diminishing returns. However, the radicalness of these technologies
remains higher than the radicalness of technology as a whole (in red). The originality of both wind
and solar patents appear to peak slightly before the spike in patenting, although the drop-offs in
recent years are not very large. Electric and hybrid vehicles are both more radical and more
original than either other clean energy technologies or all technologies in general. Nonetheless,
while their originality is fairly constant since the early 1990s, the radicalness of EHV peaks in
2007, which is when EHV patenting peaks. In contrast, the radicalness of building energy
efficiency technology peaks in 2006, although patenting doesn't peak until 2012. Solar PV is
nearly always less radical and less original than the average technology. This result also suggests
that the era of "peak patenting" for solar PV may be ending.


                                                                                                  28
Figure 12: Radicalness

A. Clean Energy Technologies




B. Enabling Energy Technologies




Notes: Figures show the three-year moving average of radicalness for selected energy technologies. Source: authors'
calculations using data from the EPO World Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT).



                                                                                                                29
Figure 13: Originality

A. Clean Energy Technologies




B. Enabling Energy Technologies




Notes: Figures show the three-year moving average of originality for selected energy technologies. Source: authors'
calculations using data from the EPO World Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT).


                                                                                                                30
       The bottom panel of each figure presents radicalness and originality for three enabling
energy technologies: systems integration, energy storage, and smart grids. While originality has
fallen for energy storage, all three are more original than the average technology, suggesting that
advances in these types of technologies may be increasingly important for driving the energy
transition and integration of new resources. Interestingly while both systems integration and smart
grids technology are more radical than the average technology, the radicalness of energy storage
almost perfectly follows the trends for the average technology. Energy storage appears to build
off a diverse range of technologies (i.e., it is more original), but not necessarily technological
classes outside of its own domain (i.e., it is not more radical).

       The measures for enabling technologies are inconsistent with diminishing returns as an
explanation for decreasing patenting in these technologies. Particularly for systems integration and
smart grid technology, the patented applications being filed are still radical and original. It may
be that the fall in patenting for these technologies has occurred because they are complements to
intermittent renewable energy sources such as wind and solar. Decreased patenting in those
technologies may have been seen as a sign of reduced opportunities for smart grids and systems
integration. However, diminishing returns appears to be only a partial explanation at best for
decreased clean energy patenting.



6. Innovation has worked

       Concerns of diminishing returns pertain to the supply-side of innovation. Related to the
possibility that research has hit diminishing returns is the possibility that clean energy research in
existing technologies has been a success. In such a case, there will be less demand for continued
research, and relatively more resources devoted to incremental innovations that cannot be patented.
Recall from section II that the costs of wind and solar PV have fallen to levels that make them
competitive with traditional sources of electricity. In fact, by 2017 solar PV costs had fallen below
what experts had earlier predicted for the year 2030 (Nemet, 2019)! Clean energy innovation
peaking at the point where costs become competitive is consistent with innovation on other clean
technologies. For instance, Popp (2006) shows both how innovation on sulfur dioxide and nitrogen
oxide pollution control quickly increased soon after the passage of regulations in the US, Japan,
and Germany, and returned to pre-peak levels once the goals of the regulation were met.

                                                                                                   31
       But unlike these examples, more innovation is still needed--urgently--to enable the clean
energy transition in the time required. Wind and solar energy still make up just a small fraction of
electric generation. Complementary technologies to integrate rising shares of wind and solar into
the grid are needed. Electric vehicles must improve to be widely accepted by consumers.
Innovation in new technologies altogether--such as long-term storage solutions for seasonal
balancing--are needed in some regions. That innovation, at least as measured by patent counts,
is falling may suggest a challenge for business and policy makers moving forward. At the same
time, it may be that these trends do not fully capture some innovation that is crucial for the clean
energy transition. Cost-effective integration of clean energy resources increasingly relies on
innovation in other high-tech sectors, like IT, and it may be that traditional measures of energy
patenting and innovation do not reflect the benefits that these advances bring to the energy sector.
Further development of measures and methods for capturing these innovations is needed.



B. The Challenges of New Energy Technologies

       For many reasons, relative to past trends the remaining technological needs for a clean
energy transition are more challenging, and are likely to grow more so in the future. Overcoming
these challenges will require additional government support. First, the next wave of energy
innovation will emphasize public infrastructure such as smart-grid technologies, the integration of
intermittent renewable energy technologies into the grid, the adoption of connected vehicle
infrastructure, and charging infrastructure for electric vehicles. How will private sector innovation
respond when the demand for new equipment comes from the government itself in the form of
infrastructure investment, rather than from the private sector?

       Second, if successful, these emerging technologies will generate large spillovers. Much of
their social value comes from making it easier to use complementary technologies such as
intermittent renewables.    For example, as the share of electricity generated by intermittent
renewable power grows, advances in energy storage would greatly improve grid management.
Energy storage breakthroughs leading to better batteries would also make electric vehicles more
attractive to consumers, both by reducing costs and increasing vehicle range. Because of its novel
nature, Dechezleprêtre et al. (2017) find evidence of large spillovers in many areas of clean energy
research.

                                                                                                  32
       Third, the value of energy storage also depends on the cost of solar and wind generation.
Complementarities among technologies make future benefits from innovation uncertain. The
potential private sector rewards from energy storage innovation are connected to progress in
intermittent renewables. As the cost of solar and wind falls, so must the cost of storage to continue
to add value (Braff et al. 2016). This interdependency raises uncertainty about the future profits
from innovation.

       Finally, grid integration and energy storage innovations also provide examples of how the
building blocks of energy innovation are changing. The high radicalness and originality of both
smart grids and system integration technologies suggest technologies will require more innovation
across different businesses and different lines of technology. As an example of the changing nature
of energy technology, we look at the extent to which information and communication (ICT)
technology has permeated both energy and other sectors.

       Figure 14 illustrates the penetration of digital technology in different technological
domains, measured as the three-year moving average of the percentage of patents in different fields
that also have an ICT patent classification. Appendix Table A lists the patent classes used to
identify each technology below. Overall, the share of patents also having an ICT class rose through
the end of the 20th century, plateauing around 40% by 2006. Trends in ICT penetration among
climate mitigation technologies is similar (panel A), although a bit lower. For climate mitigating
energy and building technologies, ICT penetration is just a few percentage points below all
technologies, and follows similar trends. ICT penetration is a bit lower for climate mitigation
technologies in the manufacturing sector, and much lower in the transportation sector. For
comparison, we also include the health sector, which has lower ICT penetration, of just 10 percent.

       Panel B provides evidence from other energy and engineering technologies (panel B).
Compared to these technologies, ICT penetration appears more important for climate mitigation.
ICT penetration for power technologies plateaus at around 25%. In patents related to general
engineering, engines, or combustion patents have ICT penetration rates below 10 percent.




                                                                                                  33
Figure 14 ­ Penetration of digital technologies in various technologies

A. Climate change mitigation technologies




B. Broad energy technologies




Note: 3 year moving average of % of "claimed priorities" (i.e. patent family size > 1) in the different fields which
also have an ICT co-class. Patent extractions from EPO World Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT) by
OECD/ENV and IEA/EDC (2019).



                                                                                                                34
       As energy innovation moves forward, bringing in new knowledge from disparate sectors
such as ICT could change the nature of energy R&D. Traditionally, energy R&D has been
dominated by large firms that move slowly. While redesigning a turbine requires the physical
transformation of equipment, improvements in software and information technology can be made
more quickly (Branstetter et al. 2019a).       ICT improvements are also modular.          Software
components can be developed remotely and integrated into larger systems, allowing R&D to be
done in more locations, both domestically and abroad (Branstetter et al. 2019b). These changes
suggest that innovation in other sectors, especially those that are high-tech, is likely to become
more important during the next wave of energy innovation. To examine this possibility, we turn
next to data on venture capital in the energy industry



IV. Early-Stage Financing for Start-ups in the Energy Sector

       Start-ups historically played a minor role in the energy sector (Nanda et al., 2015; Gaddy
et al., 2017). Existing distribution systems and regulatory frameworks were designed for a
centralized system, and combined with high capital costs, there were significant barriers to entry.
However, the transition towards a more decentralized energy system characterized by increasing
levels of renewable energy and storage technologies may change the role of energy start-ups.
Furthermore, the successful integration of these resources relies on progress and innovation in
other sectors as well, where entrepreneurial firms do play a larger role. For example, information
technology (IT) and blockchain technology are further helping to facilitate this transition to a more
decentralized energy system and becoming increasingly abundant. Blockchain energy startups are
multiplying, raising more than 265 million euro for applications in the energy sector in 2017
(European Commission, 2018).

       At the same time, start-ups need to raise capital to survive or successfully exit, but venture
capital (VC) investments for clean energy firms have fallen in recent years after large investments
through the 2000s. There are multiple potential explanations for this perceived failure of the VC
model for clean energy. Some point to inadequate risk-return profiles (Gaddy et al., 2017). Long
time horizons between technology idea, development, and commercialization in the energy sector
offer an alternative explanation, whereby firms may have achieved the desired returns but on a
time-scale that is typically not attractive to VCs. This suggests a different form of more patient

                                                                                                  35
capital may be needed. If high-tech is becoming more important in the energy sector, it also could
be that it is just increasingly difficult to evaluate energy start-ups as they become increasingly
complex and perhaps difficult to evaluate ex ante. While Nanda et al. (2015) and Gaddy et al.
(2017) provide initial explorations of venture capital in the energy sector, the changing nature of
energy markets in recent years suggests further investigation is warranted to better understand the
historical and potential role of start-ups in enabling and driving the clean energy transition.

        In this section, we explore trends in the types of companies founded since the year 2000 as
well as the funding raised by different start-ups. We also examine the performance of different
types of energy firms, such as whether they raised funding, whether they had a successful exit (i.e.,
as measured by an acquisition or initial public offering (IPO)), and the time to exit conditional on
a successful exit. While the analysis remains purely descriptive and does not attempt to estimate
any causal relationships, our exploration of heterogeneous correlations reveals a few key insights
that warrant more rigorous evaluation in future research.



A. Data Overview

        We gather firm-level data on start-up companies and VC activity from Crunchbase, a
commercial database of innovative companies. 5 Crunchbase provides detailed information on
organizations--such as their founding date, headquarter country, funding raised (with detailed
funding round information), and exits--generating real-time updates from a community of
partners and machine learning algorithms. It has become a leading provider of data on startups and
investment activity, especially for the U.S., and it has been embraced by the investor community
as a leading platform for discovering and connecting with innovative companies.

        That said, the data come with limitations. There are certainly selection concerns, for
instance, as more innovative companies are more likely to appear in the data. There is also
increasing coverage over time but with less comprehensive coverage in the final year or two given
time lags. Furthermore, some firms may misleadingly indicate that they operate in a certain sector
for self-promotion purposes in an effort to attract more funding, as sector categories are not cross-


5
  The database can be accessed at www.crunchbase.com. Crunchbase was created in 2007, however the data cover
firms that were founded in preceding years as well. See Dalle et al (2017) for a discussion of the use of Crunchbase
data in economic and managerial research.

                                                                                                                 36
checked against traditional sectoral classifications. Lastly, the coverage for firms in some
countries, such as China, is very low, which may be particularly important for the energy context.

        We do not attempt to address these selection biases from a statistical perspective. However,
we do try to engage with some of the concerns descriptively when we graphically explore trends
and outcomes of firms across sectors by using shares of total firms founded and total funding
allocated each year per sector in addition to the totals. We also focus mainly on comparisons across
sectors and across energy types (rather than changes over time) in our correlation analysis and
discussion. Insofar as the selection biases impacting performance metrics are not systematically
different across sectors or firms of different energy types within the energy sector, our analyses
still provide some meaningful insight about energy start-ups that is new to the literature.

        We link several Crunchbase datasets in order to compile our dataset for analysis. First, we
start with the full cross-section of 733,133 organizations. 6 We keep only those that were founded
in 2000 or later and those that indicated their primary business as operating as a company (as
opposed to an investor, for instance). We match this organization-level data to funding round-level
data, and we convert all funding amounts (in USD) to real 2010 dollars using the consumer price
index from the World Bank. The funding deal dataset includes 268,774 observations with about
71k missing actual funding amount information, so the totals used throughout the analysis are
lower bounds for this sample of firms. 7 We find each firm's total funding raised and the number
of successful funding rounds (where each observation in the funding deal dataset is defined as a
funding round) and match these data to the organization-level cross-sectional data. We also match
this to Crunchbase's data on firm exits (i.e., acquisitions and initial public offerings (IPOs)). After
dropping duplicate observations, the datasets include information on about 87 thousand
acquisitions and 17 thousand IPOs.

        Perhaps most interestingly for our analysis, Crunchbase sector classifications allow us to
identify start-ups that operate in multiple (and possibly complementary) fields, such as IT. We
classify firms based upon whether they indicate that they are in the energy sector, and separately



6
 We accessed the data in Summer 2019.
7
 These also are lower bounds from the perspective of firms not appearing in Crunchbase at all. When examining the
impact of this funding on various outcomes, these correlations will embed selection bias, such as endogeneity
associated with these firms perhaps being more visible (and thus perhaps more successful) than those that do not
appear in the data or do not have fully populated funding data.

                                                                                                              37
firms also indicating that they operate in a high-tech sector. Table 4 provides a summary of how
we classify different types of firms and the number of observations we have for each category. Our
final sample consists of 604,884 firms founded from 2000 through 2018, including 13,515 energy
firms. Panel A provides the breakdown of firms based upon high-level sectors. We classify
different types of energy firms in Panel B, and in Panel C, we further breakdown the energy firms
based upon whether they also operate in a high-tech sector. Of the 13,515 energy firms, 10,129 are
energy-only (e.g. not also high-tech) versus 3,386 being energy as well as high-tech. Panel C also
shows the number of firms that are also high-tech by energy type.

        [Table 4 here]



    B. Trends in Companies Founded and Funding Raised

        We begin by graphically exploring trends in companies founded each year and funding
raised for energy firms relative to those in manufacturing, science, health and biotech,
transportation, and financial services. 8 Figure 15 illustrates these trends from 2000 through 2018
in four panels. First, in Panels A and B, we plot the total number of companies founded each year
and the share of companies founded each year by sector, respectively. The number of energy firms
founded appears to peak in the year 2012, which is a little later than when it peaks when measured
as a share of founded firms. This suggests that founding energy firms was still on the rise
throughout the great recession, but not as quickly relative to firms in other sectors. Furthermore,
the number and share of start-ups in financial services, science and engineering start-ups all
increase more quickly than energy following the recession, with the share of firms founded that
are energy-related falling from about 2007 onwards.

        Panels C and D illustrate similar patterns for the share of total funding each year allocated
to each sector (Panel C) and the share of total funding deals by sector (Panel D). 9 These figures
also clearly illustrate the "bubble" of investments flowing to energy at different times. There are
two spikes in the share of energy funding levels--in 2008 and 2012--and also a spike in the share



8
  Note that because some firms may participate in multiple sectors, some firms and their associated funding are
double-counted.
9
  A share of funding deals refers to the share of the total number of VC funding rounds completed each year that go
to each sector.

                                                                                                                 38
Figure 15: Comparison of Energy Firms to Other Sectors

A: Number of Companies Founded Each Year                         B: Share of Companies Founded Each Year




C: Share of Total Funding by VCs Each Year                       D: Share of Total Funding Deals by VCs




Notes: Panel A compares the number of firms founded each year. Panel B compares the share of firms founded each
year as a proportion of all firms. Panel C is the share of total VC funding going to each sector, and Panel C is the share
of total number of completed VC rounds going to each sector.



of funding deals for energy firms in the year 2008. This aligns with energy firm founding year
peaks, descriptively suggesting that such funding may be correlated with the successful start-up of
energy firms. The decrease in funding for energy firms corresponds with decreases in science and
health/biotech as well, whereas funding to financial services and transportation are on the rise
following the great recession. We will explore the relationship between funding and start-up
performance in Section IV.C.

         The rise and fall of the share of VC funding going to energy firms also closely mirrors the
trends in patenting presented in Section III. In both cases, rapid growth begins in the mid-2000s.
While the peak in venture capital funding comes slightly later than the peak in many clean energy

                                                                                                                      39
patents, both drop significantly after 2012, and both remain above the levels achieved prior to the
initial increase in 2006. While these data are only suggestive, it does appear that the rise and fall
in patenting seen during the 2006-2012 period may be indicative of broader trends in energy
investment.

Figure 16: Growing Share of Companies Founded are High-tech from 2005-2014

A: Number of Companies Founded Each Year              B: Share of Companies that are High-Tech




C: Total Funding for All Companies vs. High-Tech D: Proportion of Funding to High-Tech




       Next, given the increasing penetration of high-technology innovations broadly over the
past decade--combined with the need for high-tech innovations in the energy sector for the
integration of variable renewable energy resources--we explore trends in high-tech companies as
well as energy firms that are either energy-only or high-tech energy. We first compare high-tech
companies to all companies in Figure 16. Panel A plots the number of companies (total and high-
tech) over time and Panel B plots the share of companies founded each year that are high-tech.
These figures illustrate how the share of companies that are high-tech has risen starkly from about

                                                                                                  40
2006 onwards. Panels C and D explore VC funding allocated, revealing that the majority of funds
do go to firms that are high-tech. The share of funds going to high-tech firms fell in the years
leading up the recessing and through 2010, but then rose again quickly from 2010 onwards,
suggesting that VCs may be particularly drawn to firms reporting to operate in high-tech sectors.

Figure 17: Energy-only and High-Tech Energy Companies

A: Share energy-only vs. energy and high-tech         B: Increasing share of high-tech energy cos.




C: Total Funding: Energy & Energy High-Tech           D: Share of Funding: Energy & Energy HT




       We explore this further to see if a similar relationship holds in the energy sector specifically
(Figure 17). Panel A of Figure 17 plots the share of all companies founded that are energy firms
also categorized as high-tech versus those that are energy-only (i.e., not also operating in the high-
tech space), and Panel B plots the share of energy firms founded each year that are also high-tech.
While the overall number of energy-only start-ups has been falling since about 2006, the number
of energy firms that are also high-tech rose sharply after 2006 and plateaued throughout the great
recession, falling again from 2009 onwards (but then leveling off from about 2012 onwards). The

                                                                                                    41
proportion of energy start-ups that are also high-tech have therefore been rising quickly.
Comparing these findings with funding towards these types of firms in Panels C and D, we can
see that the spike in the number of high-tech energy start-ups around the year 2008 also aligns with
a spike in funding (both in totals and in shares) around the same time.

Figure 18: Energy Companies Founded Each Year by Energy Type

A: Number of Companies by Energy Type                        B: Share of All Companies by Energy Type




C: Number of Companies by Energy Type                        D: Share of All Companies by Energy Type




Notes: Shares (Panel B and Panel D) are proportions of all companies founded in a given year.


        We explore this distinction between energy-only and high-tech energy firms by energy
type as well (see Figure 18). Panel A plots the number of companies by energy type (clean, fossil
fuel, grid management, energy efficiency, and other) and Panel B plots the share of all firms that
fall into each category. These figures very clearly show the "bubble" of clean energy firms that
emerged through the great recession: while the number of firms in fossil fuel, grid management,
etc. remained relatively flat (or increased slightly), there was a major spike in clean energy from
                                                                                                    42
about 2004 to 2008, with the proportion of firms in clean energy then falling sharply from about
2009 onwards. When examining firms that specifically are also high-tech in these energy sub-
categories in Panels C and D, we can see that these trends may have been at least partially driven
by high-tech energy firms. The proportion of firms that are high-tech clean energy firms jumped
sharply from 2005 to 2007, and then began to fall from 2008 onwards before leveling off in 2011.

         As one final exploration of whether energy start-ups are increasingly also high-tech, we
examine the share of energy firms (rather than of total firms) that are also high-tech by energy
type. Panel A of Figure 19 plots energy firms that are also high-tech by energy sub-group as shares
of all energy companies founded each year, and Panel B of Figure 19 plots firms that are also high-
tech as shares of their own sub-group. In other words, in Panel A, high-tech clean firms are plotted
as a proportion of all energy firms, in Panel B, high-tech clean firms are plotted as a proportion of
all clean energy firms. The story is clear: across all energy sub-groups, start-ups are increasingly
either claiming to be high-tech or actually are high-tech. This growth is similar to the growth
observed in the share of energy patents also classified as high-tech, as well as supporting the
anecdotal evidence presented in Section II that IT is also of growing importance in the search for
new energy resources.



Figure 19: Increasing Trends in Energy Firms that are Also High-Tech

A: Share of All Energy Companies Founded                        B: Share of Each Energy Sub-Group Also HT




Notes: All shares are of totals corresponding to all energy firms.




                                                                                                      43
       Lastly, we examine whether these trends are correlated with VC funds flowing to energy
firms that are also high-tech, as this could provide some insight into one potential explanation of
why VC funding has not performed as well in the energy sector relative to others. That is, it could
be that being labeled or marketed as "high-tech" helps these firms attract VC, but they may not
actually end up performing any better than energy-only firms. This could be for several reasons.
High-tech energy firms may be particularly complex and difficult to assess, or such firms could
take longer to commercialize their products or exit if they are working on a more complex
technology. It also could be that some firms simply claim to be high-tech when they are not as a
means for attracting VC--a hypothesis that's been posed in light of Crunchbase being used as a
platform by VCs. This could mean that VCs over-value them, or alternatively, that they just don't
perform as well as energy-only firms. We explore firm performance in the next section, but first
we present graphical evidence of funding trends for these types of firms.

       Figure 20 plots the share of total funding (Panels A and C) and the share of successful
funding deals each year (Panels B and D) by energy sub-category (Panels A and B) and then by
energy sub-category for firms that are also high-tech. Panels A and B illustrate the clean energy
funding "bubble" that occurred around the year 2008, where there is a large spike in the share of
funding that goes to clean energy relative to other types of energy in terms of both levels of funding
and the number of funding deals. Interestingly, there is also a spike in funding allocated to fossil
fuel energy around 2012-13, which is likely driven by the fracking revolution. Panels C and D
specifically look at high-tech energy firms by sub-category. Despite there only being a spike in
funding for clean energy firms in general around the year 2008, it appears as though there is a
spike in funding for all energy types that are also at least labeled as "high-tech", and this is
particularly pronounced for clean energy and grid management firms.

       Taken together, these findings suggest that at least part of the explanation for changes in
clean energy VC funding is that energy firms are increasingly high-tech. The energy transition
requires complementary high-tech endeavors, such as innovation in smart technologies, platforms,
and the AI required for managing a more complex and distributed system. However, this may
present new challenges for VCs. It may be that "high-tech" firms are more attractive to VCs, but
they may not necessarily perform better (which we explore in the next section). It also could be
that the firms in our data are actually not necessarily in high-tech industries but rather just claiming


                                                                                                     44
to be in an effort to attract funding. Any of these stories could at least partially explain
unexpectedly low returns to investments in the clean energy sector so far.

Figure 20: Share of Funding Going to Energy Firms

A: Share of Total Funding by Energy Type                   B: Share of Funding Deals by Energy Type




C: Share of Total Funding by Energy Type                   D: Share of Funding Deals by Energy Type




Notes: Energy Funding as Shares of Total Funding (Panels A and C) and Shares of Funding Deals (Panels B and D).
Panels C and D show Shares by Energy Type for energy firms that are also high-tech.



        This also presents a new challenge for researchers studying energy innovation: studying
firms or patents that are only identified as being in the energy sector will vastly under-estimate
innovation and start-up activity that is relevant for advancing the clean energy transition.
Accounting for innovation in high-tech sectors that are also applicable for the exploration,
integration, and management of new energy systems and resources is more important than ever for
fully understanding the energy innovation landscape.




                                                                                                            45
C. The Performance of Energy Firms

       Insufficient returns to investments are often pointed to as the key explanation for why VC
funding has not been as successful in the clean energy sector relative to other sectors. This could
be due to low returns--or lower returns than expected--or it could be that the time horizons for
achieving returns are just longer than average and thus the returns have not yet been realized. A
third hypothesis is that it is difficult to identify promising energy VCs that are increasingly
complex and operating not just in the energy sector but also often in other high-tech sectors, or
that VCs over-value such firms. To explore these potential explanations, we examine the success
of energy firms relative to average firms and other high-tech firms, as well as performance metrics
across energy types as measured by whether they had a successful exit (i.e., acquisition or IPO),
whether they ever raised funds, the amount raised conditional on raising funds, and the time to exit
as measured by the difference between the founding and exit year. In each case we regress these
outcomes on indicator variables that capture firm type (energy-only, high-tech only, high-tech
energy, etc.), along with founded year fixed effects and a dummy variable indicating whether the
firm is located in the U.S. We cluster our standard errors by founding year. We focus on two broad
sets of questions:

           1. Are energy start-ups more or less likely to raise funds and/or successfully exit via
               acquisition or IPO? Does this vary by the type of energy firm? (Tables 5-8).

           2. Conditional on having received funds, are energy start-ups more or less likely to
               successfully exit? While differences in the likelihood of receiving funding may
               occur if the expected potential returns differ across sectors, conditional on receiving
               funding, any differences across sectors observed are suggestive evidence that
               investors are not valuing expected returns across sectors correctly (Table 9).

Since the firms listed in Crunchbase are not a random sample of start-ups, our results should not
be interpreted as causal. However, they reveal correlations in the data worthy of exploration in
future research.

       We begin by examining all firms and comparing the relative performance of energy firms
(of any type) as a baseline. Table 5 presents the correlations between being an energy firm and the
five measures of firm performance. Across all metrics, energy firms perform better than the
average firm in our sample. They are 4.2%, 6.3%, and 14.5% more likely to be acquired, go public,

                                                                                                   46
or raise funds over their lifetimes, respectively. They also raise more money conditional on raising
funds (column 4), and they take 0.85 fewer years on average to exit conditional on either being
acquired or going public.

         [table 5 here]

         Given that VC has been considered a "failed" financing model for the energy sector after
some investments did not provide the expected returns, it is interesting that the energy start-ups
listed in Crunchbase perform relatively better than the average start-up. One potential explanation
is that investors may place an unwarranted premium on energy firms that are also high-tech--or
claim to be high-tech--relative to energy firms that are not high-tech. This might occur if there is
a perception that high-tech firms are more likely to perform better, or perhaps generate returns in
a shorter timeframe relative to energy-only firms. To test this, we explore whether firms operating
in both the energy and high-tech spaces raise more VC funding than their energy-only counterparts,
and then also whether they perform better. We do this by regressing the performance outcomes on
indicator variables for firm type (energy-only, high-tech-only, or both) and provide the correlations
in Table 6. 10 While firms that operate only in the energy space appear to do better than the average
firm on every measure, high-tech energy firms are no more likely to be acquired or go public than
the average firm, and they are far less likely to do so relative to energy-only firms (Columns 1 and
2). They also do not take any less time to exit relative to the average firm but take longer to exit
relative to energy-only firms (Column 5). Yet high-tech energy firms are 11% more likely to raise
funds relative to energy-only firms (Column 3). 11 This suggests that VC firms possibly were
placing a premium on high-tech energy firms relative to energy-only firms but without reaping the
expected rewards.

         [table 6 here]




10
   Note that these categories are mutually exclusive, so that the coefficients are, for example, the share of firms of
each type that are acquired or have an IPO. The differences between the correlations for energy-only and high-tech
energy firms are statistically significant in all cases (at the 10% level in Column 1, at the 5% level in Columns 2 and
5, and at the 1% level in Columns 3 and 4).
11
   This is significant at the 1% level. Conditional on raising funds, energy plus high-tech firms raise fewer funds
relative to energy-only funds (Column 4), but this could be an artefact of the data. The graphical analysis
demonstrated that the amount of funding per round decreased in later years, and this is also when the number of
energy plus high-tech firms is increasing.


                                                                                                                    47
           We also consider whether the performance of energy start-ups varies by the type of energy,
as much of the discussion around the perceived failure of the VC model has centered around clean
energy. For instance, do clean energy firms perform worse or take longer to exit (than the average
firm or relative to other types of energy firms), thus making VC a poor vehicle for financing clean
energy? The evidence presented in Table 7 suggests that this is not the case. 12 Clean energy firms
are less likely to be acquired relative to the average firm as well as energy firms (column 1), but
they are more likely to go public (column 2) and raise funds (on both the extensive (column 3) and
intensive margins (column 4) relative to the average firm. They also take less time to exit (column
5). At the same time, relative to fossil fuel firms and other "general" energy firms, they are less
likely to go public and take slightly longer to exit. Taken together, these correlations may suggest
that slightly longer time horizons relative to other energy firms may partially explain insufficient
VC investment returns if expectations were incorrect. That is, if investors assumed that the exit
time for clean energy firms is the same as fossil fuel energy firms, they would have (just slightly)
under-estimated the amount of time it would take for clean firms to exit. But, nonetheless, clean
firms do exit much faster than the average firm and perform better on most measures.

           [table 7 here]

           Finally, in Table 8 we examine the same correlations for energy-only firms and high-tech
energy firms conditional on energy type, with the omitted category being the average "general"
energy firm. Once again we find that venture capital investors appear to place a premium on
energy firms that are also high-tech. With the exception of energy efficiency, high-tech energy
firms raise more funds than their energy-only counterparts. The chances of raising funds are
negative for fossil fuel energy-only and grid management-only relative to the average "general"
energy firm (and there is zero correlation between being clean energy-only and raising funds),
whereas they are positive for all three energy types when the firm is also high-tech. At the same
time, the high-tech energy firms do not perform better (and actually perform worse on occasion)
across the other performance metrics. Clean and fossil fuel high-tech energy firms are less likely
to go public, and high-tech fossil fuel energy firms are also less likely to be acquired. Being high-
tech also increases the time to exit for fossil fuel, grid management, and energy efficiency firms.




12
     Each of these categories is mutually exclusive.

                                                                                                  48
         [table 8 here]

         A core remaining question is whether differences in returns to energy investments relative
to investments in other firms can at least partially explain the fall in energy funding (and founding
of energy start-ups) over time. Our data do not allow us to directly examine returns to energy
investments. However, we can compare the performance of energy firms that are funded relative
to the average funded firm to better assess how well VC investments in energy fare. We test the
likelihood of exit (either through acquisition or IPO) conditional on receiving funding. Correlation
comparisons conditional on funding also at least partially account for selection bias associated
with being more likely to receive funding. While energy firms in the Crunchbase dataset may do
better than other firms on some measures of performance, selection into Crunchbase is not random.

         We estimate these correlations across the full sample, as well as for sub-samples based on
the firm's founding year (2000-2005, 2006-2012, and 2013-2018) in order to test whether there
may have been a "bubble" in clean energy finance. The years chosen correspond to the boom-
and-bust period observed in clean energy patenting. 13 Lerner (2011) notes that venture capital
funding is often cyclical, with investors overreacting to both good and bad news. Moreover, he
finds that clean energy investment grew rapidly, albeit from a very low base, in the early 2000s.
Overall returns on these investments were high, but primarily due to two very successful
companies. He notes that the patterns observed in his data suggest overfunding may have occurred
in the clean energy sector. If such a "bubble" exists, we expect firms funded during bubble years
(i.e., roughly 2006-2012 in the clean energy investment context) to perform worse than those
funded in other years, as clean energy investor expectations may have been unreasonably high.

         [table 9 here]

         Table 9 presents the results. Column 1 uses the full sample. We see that clean energy and
"other" energy firms are about 2.5 percentage points less likely to exit than the average firm. As
the sample mean is just 11.6 percent, this is a substantial difference. Unlike the estimates for the
full sample in Table 7 that do not condition on receiving funding, in no cases do we see that funded
energy firms are more likely to exit. Recall that energy firms in Crunchbase are more likely to


13
  We do not include separate categories for high-tech energy firms in this table, as the small number of firms in
each cell lead to imprecise estimates when splitting the sample. Overall, we find similar patterns for non-high tech
energy firms, but with nearly all coefficients insignificant when splitting the sample.

                                                                                                                   49
receive funding (Table 7), so that overall they exit more frequently than other firms. However,
conditional on funding, energy firms do no better than other firms, and clean energy firms do
worse. Understanding why energy firms are more likely to receive funding is left for future
research. It may be that there are differences in the types of firms selecting into Crunchbase, or it
may be that because entrepreneurs do not see venture capital as an appropriate model for energy,
only relatively more promising energy companies choose to seek out venture capital. Since both
of these factors may be different for the different sub-sets of energy start-ups, this may also help
to explain the differences we see within the sector.

        Why do some funded energy firms fare worse than non-energy funded firms? We provide
suggestive evidence of a "bubble" in clean energy and energy efficiency investments that coincides
with the peak patenting and VC period of 2006-2012. While energy firms funded in the early
period perform just as well as the average firm across all energy types, clean energy, energy
efficiency, and "other" energy firms perform worse during the boom-and-bust period of 2006-
2012. These firms are 25 to 30 percent less likely to exit than funded non-energy firms. Consistent
with the "bubble" hypothesis, the share of total funding going to both clean energy and energy
efficiency firms has a notable peak between 2006 and 2009 (Figure 19). Also consistent with a
boom and bust story, energy efficiency firms are 30 percent more likely to exit during the prior
2000-2005 period, although this estimate is not statistically significant, with a p-value of 0.12.
Fossil fuel energy funded firms are still just as likely to exit as non-energy firms during this period,
further suggesting that this boom-and-bust period was truly unique to investments in clean energy,
energy efficiency, and "other" energy firms. In the 2013-2018 period, only "other" energy firms
remain less likely to exit.

        These results are consistent with the possibility of a clean-tech bubble, although we cannot
rule out other potential explanations. If investors were overly exuberant about clean energy during
the boom period and invested too much into clean energy relative to other sectors, we would expect
to see poorer performance of funded energy firms founded during that time. Of course, this need
not imply a bubble. Actual returns are uncertain. Investors may hold a portfolio of investments
with negatively correlated risks to hedge against losses in any one sector. Investors may have
acted rationally, only to see clean energy firms experience unexpectedly bad outcomes, such as
because of changing regulations. Moreover, our analysis only looks at binary outcomes. We do


                                                                                                     50
not calculate a rate of return by comparing the valuation of these firms on exit to the amount raised.
Exploration of competing explanations is left for future research.



D. Summary of Findings on Start-Ups

       To summarize our findings on venture capital in the energy sector, we find a growing
interest in energy firms that also operate in the high-tech space. These firms are more likely to
raise funds than other types of energy firms, even though they are not more likely to exit than
energy firms not also in high-tech. In general, all types of energy firms in the Crunchbase dataset
perform better than the average firm on most performance metrics. However, once conditioning
on having received funding, energy firms generally do not perform better than the average funded
firm. There is some evidence of over-investment in clean energy during the 2006-2012 period,
but more research is needed.

       One caveat worth noting is that we are unable to decipher whether these firms are actually
working on high-tech technologies or whether they just claim to be doing so on the Crunchbase
platform, perhaps in an effort to attract more funding. To truly measure the importance of high-
tech activity we would need a better measure of actual business activities. At a minimum, we
provide evidence that energy firms claiming to be high-tech seem to attract more funding. This
suggests that VCs may place a premium on these types of firms, which could be explained either
by the fact that they are high-tech or by being high-quality if the savviness of claiming to be high-
tech is correlated with other measures of firm quality.



V. Conclusions

       As our chapter has documented, the nature of innovation in the energy sector is changing.
Within the past decade, the use of hydrofracturing technology in the U.S. increased the prominence
of natural gas. Increased usage of natural gas reduced carbon emissions as it replaced coal as the
dominant fuel for electricity, but brought with it new environmental questions. The costs of wind
and solar energy fell to levels making them competitive with fossil fuels. Innovative activity in the
energy sector is also increasingly high-tech across all energy types.



                                                                                                   51
       The patent data presented in section III highlights the role of innovation promoting these
trends. Patents for wind, solar, and hydrofracturnig all peaked in the early 2010s. The data also
illustrate the challenges faced by the industry moving forward. As electricity generation from
wind and solar energy grows, integrating these intermittent energy sources into the electricity grid
will become more challenging. Unfortunately, not only has patenting in clean energy technologies
such as wind and solar energy fallen from their early 2010s peak, but so has patenting in enabling
technologies such as grid integration, smart grids, and energy storage.

       Our chapter posits several possible explanations for the fall of clean patenting over the past
decade. While we leave it for future research to identify the relative contributions (if any) of the
various explanations proposed in section III, it is undoubtedly the case that innovation in the energy
industry is changing in ways never seen before. Traditionally, energy R&D has been dominated
by large firms that move relatively slowly compared to firms in other sectors. But increasingly,
new energy innovation depends, at least in part, on high tech innovations such as IT. IT innovation
moves much more quickly, is modular, and sees greater participation from smaller firms. Our
venture capital data back this up. Energy start-ups attract funding at higher rates relative to the
average firm, and energy firms with a high-tech component attract funding even more often.
However, once conditioned on receiving funding, energy firms generally do not perform better
than the average firm.

       While our work is descriptive, not causal, it does raise several questions, both for research
and for the industry moving forward. One set of research questions considers the relative
importance of different policy instruments for promoting clean energy innovation. First, what role
can market-wide increases in energy prices, such as through carbon taxation, play relative to
targeted energy policies such as renewable energy mandates for promoting clean energy
innovation? While recent studies on the drivers of clean energy innovation consistently find that
policies to increase clean energy demand promote innovation, those studies that also control for
energy prices find mixed results. Some find that higher prices on their own have little effect on
innovation once controlling for policy (e.g. Johnstone et al, 2010; Nesta et al. 2014), while others
find both policy and prices matter (e.g. Verdolini and Galeotti 2011; Peters et al. 2012). One
important distinction is the difference between higher prices following the imposition of new taxes
versus higher prices in response to market shocks. Studies of gasoline consumption suggest
consumers are more responsive to changes in taxes than market-generated fluctuations in price, as
                                                                                                   52
tax increases are perceived as more persistent (Rivers and Shaufele, 2015; Li et al. 2014; Davis
and Kilian, 2011). Similar studies comparing the effect of taxes versus market-generated price
changes on innovation would help uncover the potential of broad-based policies such as carbon
taxes for promoting clean energy innovation.

       A second set of questions consider how to promote innovative solutions to technical
challenges such as grid integration that incorporate high tech solutions. Do existing energy firms
have the capability to incorporate high-tech solutions into their products, or will collaborative
research become more important? While there is scant evidence on the role of collaborative
research in the energy sector, the work that does exist suggests government intervention can
facilitate collaboration. However, this research primarily focuses on flows of knowledge across
borders (e.g. Hascic et al. 2012, Conti et al. 2018) or across institutions. For alternative energy
technologies, both scientific articles and patents with authors from multiple types of institutions
(e.g., university and corporations) are cited more frequently, suggesting that collaborations may
have positive impacts on research quality (Popp 2017). Within the European Union, research
networks enhance the effect of demand-side policies, particularly when high scientific profile
network members, such as universities, are included in the network (Fabrizi et al. 2018). There is
less research on promoting collaborations across fields. As the decline in patenting for enabling
technologies suggests, such research is needed. For example, do patents combining energy and
high-tech come from incumbent firms or new entrants to the field? Are they more likely to be
collaborative?

       Better understanding the role that smaller firms, particularly those operating in the high-
tech space, can play moving forward is also important. Howell (2017) finds that Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) funding from the Department of Energy has been effective,
particularly for clean energy technologies. That support was most important for clean energy
raises two points. First, it highlights that economies of scale may be less prominent for clean
energy technology than for traditional energy technologies, so that smaller firms may play a more
important role in clean energy innovation. Second, it raises the question of the extent to which
financial constraints hinder clean energy investment, relative to a lack of demand for emerging
clean technologies that historically have not been cost-effective without government support. That
is, is the Valley of Death for energy research really due to the special characteristics of energy
innovation, or simply a result of historically underpriced environmental externalities reducing
                                                                                                53
demand for cleaner technology? Both falling costs and increased policy support from governments
may provide future researchers evidence needed to better identify the effects of financial
constraints from other market failures holding back clean technology. Similarly, linking patent
data with data on venture capital could provide new insights. For instance, how prominent were
start-up firms in the energy patenting boom of the early 2010s? Were their patents heavily cited?
That is, did start-ups provide new insights to a changing field?

       Finally, it is important to note that much of the energy industry is still characterized by
large firms with economies of scale. Even if fossil fuel plants are all replaced, large nuclear plants
are likely to remain. Offshore wind technology, if successful, will also be capital intensive. The
power grid itself is a natural monopoly. While start-up firms may play a larger role for growing
modular technologies such as solar PV or emerging needs with a high-tech component such as grid
integration, they remain just part of an industry where large capital costs play an important role.
Moving forward, both policy makers and industry leaders will need to identify when smaller,
modular technologies are likely to be successful and when large-scale, capital intensive
technologies are needed (e.g. Nemet, 2019, chapter 11), so as to devise policy solutions that
recognize the different needs of each type of technology. The climate problem is too large and
complex for a one-size-fits-all solution, and so is the energy system on which solving the climate
problem depends.




                                                                                                   54
Appendix Table A: CPC classifications for energy technologies

Clean Energy Technologies
Building Energy Efficiency
Y02B 20/00-70/00 Aspects of energy efficiency related to lighting, appliances, etc...
Y02B 80/00            Aspects of energy efficiency related to building envelope

Carbon capture and storage
Y02C                 Capture, storage, sequestration or disposal of greenhouse gases

Solar photovoltaic (PV)
Y02E 10/50            Photovoltaic (PV) energy

Solar thermal energy
Y02E 10/40           Solar thermal energy

Wind energy
Y02E 10/70            Wind energy

Hybrid and Electric Vehicles
Y02T 10/62           Hybrid vehicles
Y02T 10/64           Electric vehicles

Enabling Technologies
Energy storage
Y02E 60/10         Energy storage

Smart grids
Y04S                  Systems integrating technologies related to power network operation,
                      communication or information technologies for improving the electrical
                      power generation, transmission, distribution, management or usage, i.e.
                      smart grids

Systems integration: building
Y02B 70/30-346        Systems integrating technologies related to power network operation and
                      ICT for improving the carbon footprint of the management of residential
                      or tertiary loads, i.e. smart grids as CCMT in the buildings sector or as
                      enabling technology in buildings sector.
Y02B 90/20-2692       Systems integrating technologies related to power network operation and
                      communication or information technologies mediating in the improvement
                      of the carbon footprint of the management of residential or tertiary loads,
                      i.e. smart grids as enabling technology in buildings sector

Systems integration: energy
Y02E 40/70-76         Systems integrating technologies related to power network operation and
                      ICT for improving the carbon footprint of electrical power generation,

                                                                                                55
                          transmission or distribution, i.e. smart grids as CCMT in the energy
                          generation sector or as enabling technology in the energy generation sector
Y02E 60/70-7892           Systems integrating technologies related to power network operation and
                          communication or information technologies mediating in the improvement
                          of the carbon footprint of electrical power generation, transmission or
                          distribution, i.e. smart grids as enabling technology in the energy
                          generation sector

Systems integration: transportation
Y02T 90/167-169        Systems integrating technologies related to power network operation and
                       ICT for supporting the interoperability of electric or hybrid vehicles, i.e.
                       smart grids as interface for battery charging of electric vehicles [EV] or
                       hybrid vehicles [HEV]

Hydrofracturing
CPC codes included in Figure 10:
C10G 1               Production of liquid hydrocarbon mixtures from oil-shale, oil-sand, or
                     non-melting solid carbonaceous or similar materials, e.g. wood, coal
E21B 43              Methods or apparatus for obtaining oil, gas, water, soluble or meltable
                     materials or a slurry of minerals from wells

The robustness check in footnote 3 includes the above CPC codes and additional CPC codes in
combination with keyword searches: 14
E21B 36               Heating, cooling, insulating arrangements for boreholes or wells, e.g. for
                      use in permafrost zones
C10G 2300             Aspects relating to hydrocarbon processing covered by groups C10G 1/00
                      - C10G 99/00
Y10T 29               Metal working
C09K 8                Compositions for drilling of boreholes or wells; Compositions for treating
                      boreholes or wells, e.g. for completion or for remedial operations
E21B 47               Survey of boreholes or wells
B32B 15               Layered products comprising a layer of metal
E21B 7                Special methods or apparatus for drilling
B32B 1                Layered products having a general shape other than plane




14
  The patent search strategy follows Apenteng (2016). Keywords include "hydraulic fracturing", "horizontal
drilling" and "well completion" following Cahoy et al. (2013).

                                                                                                             56
CPC and IPC codes used in Figure 14:

Climate Change Mitigation Technologies

All Climate Change Mitigation
Y02                 Technologies for mitigation or adaptation against climate change

Clean energy
Y02E                  Reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, related to energy generation,
                      transmission or distribution

Clean transportation
Y02T                 Climate change mitigation technologies related to transportation

Clean buildings
Y02B                  Climate change mitigation technologies related to buildings, and related
                      end-user applications

Clean manufacturing
Y02P                Climate change mitigation technologies in the production or processing of
                    goods

Broad Energy Technologies

Engines and pumps
F02                   Combustion engines; Hot-gas or combustion-product engine plants

General engineering
F15                 Fluid-pressure actuators; hydraulics or pneumatics in general
F16                 Engineering elements and units; general measures for producing and
                    maintaining effective functioning of machines or installations; thermal
                    insulation in general
F17                 Storing or distributing gases or liquids

Health technology
A61                   Medical or veterinary science; hygiene

Combustion
F23                   Combustion apparatus; combustion processes

Power
H02                   Generation; Conversion or distribution of electric power


ICT technologies
The patent search strategy follows the J-tags from Inaba and Squicciarini (2017).

                                                                                                 57
References
Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, L. Barrage, and D. Hémous. 2019. "Climate Change, Directed
       Innovation, and Energy Transition: The Long-run Consequences of the Shale Gas
       Revolution," working paper, available at https://scholar.harvard.edu/aghion/publications/
       climate-change-directed-innovation-and-energy-transition-long-run-consequences,      last
       accessed November 7, 2019.
Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, D. Hanley, and W. Kerr. 2016. "Transition to Clean Technology."
       Journal of Political Economy. 124(1): 52­104.
Aghion, P., A. Dechezleprêtre, D. Hemous, R. Martin, and J. Van Reenen. 2016. "Carbon Taxes,
       Path Dependency and Directed Technical Change: Evidence from the Auto Industry."
       Journal of Political Economy. 124: 1-51.
Ang, G., D. Röttgers, and P. Pralhad. 2017. "The Empirics of Enabling Investment and Innovation
       in Renewable Energy." OECD Environment Working Papers No. 123. OECD Publishing,
       Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/67d221b8-en.
Angelucci, S., F.J. Hurtado-Albir and A. Volpe. 2018. "Supporting Global Initiatives on Climate
       Change: The EPO's "Y02-Y04S" Tagging Scheme." World Patent Information. 54: 585-
       592.
Anonymous 2019. "Oil rush." The Economist. March 16, 2019: 57.
Apenteng, Seth O., 2016. "Patent Analysis of Shale Gas Technology to Identify the U.S.
       Government's Role in its Development", A Thesis in Energy and Mineral Engineering,
       The Pennsylvania State University.
Bajwa, Maheen and Joseph Cavicchi 2017. "Growing Evidence of Increased Frequency of
       Negative Electricity Prices in U.S. Wholesale Electricity Markets." IAEE Energy Forum,
       37-41.
Bartik, Alexander W., Janet Currie, Michael Greenstone, and Christopher R. Knittel. 2019. "The
       Local Economic and Welfare Consequences of Hydraulic Fracturing." American Economic
       Journal: Applied Economics 11(4): 105-155.
Borenstein, Severin. 2012. "The Private and Public Economics of Renewable Electricity
       Generation." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1), 67-92.
Braff, William A., Joshua M. Mueller, and Jessika E. Trancik. 2016. "Value of storage
       technologies for wind and solar energy." Nature Climate Change 6: 964-969.

                                                                                             58
Branstetter, Lee G. Matej Drev, and Namho Kwon. 2019a. "Get with the Program: Software-
       Driven Innovation in Traditional Manufacturing." Management Science. 65(2): 541-558.
Branstetter, Lee G., Britta Glennon and J. Bradford Jensen. 2019b. "The IT Revolution and the
       Globalization of R&D." Innovation Policy and the Economy: Volume 19. Josh Lerner and
       Scott Stern, eds., University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Branstatter, L., Ogura Y., 2005. "Is Academic Science Driving a Surge in Industrial Innovation?
       Evidence from Patent Counts." NBER Working Paper #11561.
Cahoy, Daniel R., Joel Gehman, and Zhen Lei. 2013. "Fracking Patents: The Emergence of Patents
       as Information-Containment Tools in Shale Drilling." Michigan Telecommunications and
       Technology Law Review 19: 279-330.
Cárdenas Rodríguez M., I. Hascic, N. Johnstone, J. Silva and A. Ferey (2015), "Renewable Energy
       Policies and Private Sector Investment: Evidence from Financial Microdata,"
       Environmental & Resource Economics. 62(1): 163-188.
Conti, C., M.L. Mancusi., F. Sanna-Randaccio, R. Sestini, and E. Verdolini. 2018. "Transition
       Towards a Green Economy in Europe: Innovation and Knowledge Integration in the
       Renewable Energy Sector." Research Policy. 47: 1996-2009.
Cumming, D.J., G. Leboeuf and A. Schwienbacher. 2017. "Crowdfunding Cleantech." Energy
       Economics. 65: 292-303.
Dalle, J., M. den Besten and C. Menon (2017), "Using Crunchbase for economic and managerial
       research." OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers, No. 2017/08, OECD
       Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/6c418d60-en.
Davis, Lucas W. and Lutz Kilian. 2011. "Estimating the Effect of a Gasoline Tax on Carbon
       Emissions." Journal of Applied Econometrics 26(7): 1187­1214.
Dechezleprêtre, A. and M. Glachant. 2014. "Does Foreign Environmental Policy Influence
       Domestic Innovation? Evidence from the Wind Industry." Environmental and Resource
       Economics. 58 (3): 391-413.
Dechezleprêtre, A., R. Martin, and M. Mohnen, M. 2017. "Knowledge Spillovers from Clean and
       Dirty Technologies: A Patent Citation Analysis." Grantham Research Institute on Climate
       Change and the Environment Working Paper No. 135.




                                                                                            59
EIA Today in Energy 2019a. "More new natural gas combined-cycle power plants are using
       advanced designs," https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=39912, last accessed
       October 17, 2019.
EIA Today in Energy 2019b. "US petroleum exports exceeded imports in September,"
       https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=42176, last accessed December 6, 2019.
EIA Today in Energy 2016. "U.S. electric system is made up of interconnections and balancing
       authorities,"   https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=27152,      last   accessed
       November 22, 2019.
EIA Today in Energy 2011. "About 60% of the U.S. electric power supply is managed by RTOs,"
       https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=790, last accessed November 22, 2019.
Ellerman, Denny, Claudio Marcantonini and Aleksandar Zaklan (2016), "The EU ETS: Eight
       Years and Counting," Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 10(1), 89-107.
European Commission (2018). "10 Trends Reshaping Climate and Energy," European Political
       Strategy     Centre.   Available    at:    https://ec.europa.eu/epsc/sites/epsc/files/epsc_-
       _10_trends_transforming_climate_and_energy.pdf)
Fabrizi, A., G. Guarini, and V. Meliciani. 2018. "Green Patents, Regulatory Policies and Research
       Network Policies." Research Policy. 47: 1018-1031.
Fabrizio, K.R., S. Poczter, and B.A. Zelner. 2017. "Does innovation policy attract international
       competition? Evidence from energy storage." Research Policy. 46: 1106-1117.
Fetter, T.R., A.L. Steck, C. Timmins, and D. Wrenn. 2018. "Learning by Viewing? Social
       Learning, Regulatory Disclosure, and Firm Productivity in Shale Gas." NBER Working
       Paper #25401.
Feyrer, James, Erin T. Mansur and Bruce Sacerdote. 2017. "Geographic Dispersion of Economic
       Shocks: Evidence from the Fracking Revolution." American Economic Review 107(4):
       1313-1334.
Finardi, U. 2011. "Time Relations between Scientific Production and Patenting of Knowledge:
       The Case of Nanotechnologies." Scientometrics. 89(1), 37-50.
Fischer C., L. Preonas, and R. Newell R. 2017. "Environmental and Technology Policy Options
       in the Electricity Sector: Are We Deploying Too Many?" Journal of the Association of
       Environmental and Resource Economists. 4(4): 959-984.



                                                                                                60
Gaddy, B.E., V. Sivaram, T.B. Jones and L. Wayman. 2017. "Venture Capital and Cleantech: The
       Wrong Model for Energy Innovation." Energy Policy. 102: 385-395.
Greenblatt, Jeffrey B., Nicholas R. Brown, Rachel Slaybaugh, Theresa Wilks, Emma Stewart, and
       Sean T. McCoy. 2017. "The Future of Low-Carbon Energy.' Annual Review of
       Environment and Resources 42: 289-316.
Harhoff, D., F. M. Scherer, and K. Vopel (2003), "Citations, Family Size, Opposition and the
       Value of Patent Rights", Research Policy, 32(8): 1343-1363.
Hascic, I., N. Johnstone, and N. Kahrobaie. 2012. "International Technology Agreements for
       Climate Change: Analysis Based on Co-Invention Data." OECD Environment Working
       Papers No. 42.
Holland, Stephen P., Erin T. Mansur, Nicholas Muller, and Andrew J. Yates. 2018.
       "Decompositions and Policy Consequences of an Extraordinary Decline in Air Pollution
       from Electricity Generation." NBER Working Paper #25339.
Howell, S.T. 2017. "Financing Innovation: Evidence from R&D Grants." American Economic
       Review. 107(4): 1136-1164.
Inaba, T. and M. Squicciarini (2017), "ICT: A new taxonomy based on the international patent
       classification." OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers, No. 2017/01,
       OECD Publishing, Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/ab16c396-en.
International Renewable Energy Agency. 2018. Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2017,
       International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi.
International Renewable Energy Agency. 2017. Accelerating the Energy Transition Through
       Innovation, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi.
International Energy Agency (2004) Renewable energy--market and policy trends in IEA
       countries. IEA, Paris.
International Energy Agency 2019a. "Status of Power System Transformation 2019." IEA, Paris
       https://www.iea.org/reports/status-of-power-system-transformation-2019
International Energy Agency 2019b. "Nuclear Power in a Clean Energy System." IEA, Paris
       https://www.iea.org/reports/nuclear-power-in-a-clean-energy-system.
International   Energy   Agency     2019c.   "World   Energy    Prices   2019."   IEA,   Paris
       https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-prices-2019.



                                                                                           61
IPCC, 2018: Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming
       of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways,
       in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change,
       sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai,
       H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan,
       R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T.
       Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In Press.
Jacoby, Henry D., Francis M. O'Sullivan and Sergey Palstev. 2012. "The Influence of Shale Gas
       on U.S. Energy and Environmental Policy." Economics of Energy and Environmental
       Policy. 1(1): 37-51.
Johnstone, N. I. Hascic and D. Popp. 2010. "Renewable Energy Policies and Technological
       Innovation: Evidence Based on Patent Counts." Environmental and Resource Economics.
       45(1): 133-155.
Killian, Lutz. 2016. "The Impact of the Shale Oil Revolution on U.S. Oil and Gasoline Prices,"
       Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 10(2), 188-205.
Ko, Yu-li and Kenneth L. Simons. 2020. "The Cross-Border Impact of Demand-Pull Policies on
       R&D:       A      Firm-Level      Analysis."     working      paper      available     at
       http://homepages.rpi.edu/~simonk/pdf/photovoltaicResearchAndSubsidies.pdf,           last
       accessed April 3, 2020.
Krupnick, Alan and Zhongmin Wang. 2017. "Lessons from the U.S. Shale Gas Boom." In Ian
       Parry, Karen Pittel, and Herman Vollebergh (eds.) Energy Tax and Regulatory Policy in
       Europe: Reform Priorities. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 223-253.
Lanjouw J. O., A. Pakes, and J. Putnam (1998), "How to Count Patents and Value Intellectual
       Property: The Uses of Patent Renewal and Application Data", Journal of Industrial
       Economics, 46(4): 405-432.
Lehmann, P. and P. Söderholm 2018. "Can Technology-Specific Deployment Policies Be Cost-
       Effective? The Case of Renewable Support Schemes." Environmental and Resource
       Economics. 71: 475-505.
Lerner, J. 2011. "Venture Capital and Innovation in Energy." In Accelerating Energy Innovation:
       Insights from Multiple Sectors, edited by Rebecca M. Henderson and Richard G. Newell,
       225­260. University of Chicago Press.

                                                                                             62
Li, Shanjun, Joshua Linn, and Erich Muehlegger. 2014. "Gasoline Taxes and Consumer Behavior."
       American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(4): 302-42.
Maniloff, Peter and Ralph Mastromonaco. 2017. "The local employment impacts of fracking: A
       national study." Resource and Energy Economics 49: 62-85.
Martinot, Eric. 2016. "Grid Integration of Renewable Energy: Flexibility, Innovation, and
       Experience." annual Review of Environment and Resources 41: 223-251.
Mowrey, D.C., R.R. Nelson, and B.R. Martin. 2010. "Technology Policy and Global Warming:
       Why New Policy Models are Needed (or Why Putting New Wine in Old Bottles Won't
       Work)." Research Policy. 39: 1011-1023.
Nanda, R., K. Younge and L. Fleming. 2015. "Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Renewable
       Energy," chapter 7 in The Changing Frontier: Rethinking Science and Innovation Policy,
       A.B. Jaffe and B.F. Jones (eds.), University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, pp. 199-232.
Nemet, G.F. 2019. How Solar Energy Became Cheap: A Model for Low-Carbon Innovation.
       Routledge Press, New York.
Nemet, G.F., 2012. "Knowledge Spillovers from Learning by Doing in Wind Power." Journal of
       Policy Analysis and Management. 31(3): 600-621.
Newell, R. A.B. Jaffe and R. Stavins. 1999. "The Induced Innovation Hypothesis and Energy-
       Saving Technological Change." The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 114(3), 941-975.
Newell, Richard G. and Brian C. Priest. 2017. "How the Shale Boom has Transformed the US Oil
       and Gas Industry," Resources for the Future Issue Brief 17-11.
Nesta, L., F. Vona, and F. Nicolli. 2014. "Environmental Policies, Competition, and Innovation in
       Renewable Energy." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management. 67: 396-411.
Noailly, J. 2012. "Improving the Energy Efficiency of Buildings: The Impact of Environmental
       Policy on Technological Innovation." Energy Economics. 34: 795-806.
Peters, M., M. Schneider, T. Griesshaber and V.H. Hoffman. 2012. "The impact of technology-
       push and demand-pull policies on technical change­Does the locus of policies matter?"
       Research Policy. 41 (8):1296-1308.
Popp, D. 2019. "Environmental Policy and Innovation: A Decade of Research." International
       Review of Environmental and Resource Economics. 13(3-4): 265-337.
Popp, D. 2017. "From Science to Technology: The Value of Knowledge From Different Energy
       Research Institutions." Research Policy. 46(9): 1580-1594.

                                                                                              63
Popp, D. 2006. "International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Control Technologies:
       The Effects of NOX and SO2 Regulation in the U.S., Japan, and Germany." Journal of
       Environmental Economics and Management. 51(1): 46-71.
Popp, D. 2002. "Induced Innovation and Energy Prices." American Economic Review. 92(1): 160-
       180.
Rivers N. and B. Schaufele. 2015. "Salience of carbon taxes in the gasoline market." Journal of
       Environmental Economics and Management. 74: 23-36.
Roth, Michael Buchdahl and Jaramillo, Paulina 2017. "Going nuclear for climate mitigation: An
       analysis of the cost effectiveness of preserving existing U.S. nuclear power plants as a
       carbon avoidance strategy." Energy: 131: 67-77.
Shane, S. (2001), "Technological Opportunities and New Firm Creation", Management Science,
       47 (2): 205­220.
Squicciarini, Mariagrazia, Hélène Dernis and Chiara Criscuolo. 2013. "Measuring Patent Quality:
       Indicators of Technological and Economic Value." OECD Sciece, Technology and
       Industsry Working Papers 2013/03.
Stucki, T. and M. Woerter. 2017. "Green Inventions: Is Wait-and-see a Reasonable Option?" The
       Energy Journal. 38(4): 43-71.
Tang, T. 2018. "Explaining Technological Change in the US Wind Industry: Energy Policies,
       Technological Learning, and Collaboration." Energy Policy. 120: 197-212.
Trajtenberg, M, Jaffe, A., and R. Henderson (1997). "University versus Corporate Patents: A
       Window on the Basicness of Inventions", Economics of Innovation and New Technology,
       5(1): 19-50.
U.S. Department of Energy. nd. "What is the Smart Grid?" https://www.smartgrid.gov/
       the_smart_grid/smart_grid.html, last accessed November 22, 2019.
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2019. "Monthly Energy Review: Table 7.2a:
       Electricity Net Generation (Total, All Sectors)." U.S. Energy Information Administration,
       Washington, DC.
U.S. Energy Information Administration. 2018. U.S. Crude Oil and Natural Gas Proved Reserves,
       Year End 2017. U.S. Dept. of Energy, Washington, DC.
United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2019. Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas
       Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2017 EPA 430-R-19-001.

                                                                                             64
Veefkind, V., F.J. Hurtado-Albir, S. Angelucci, K. Karachalios, and N. Thurman. 2012. "A New
       EPO Classification Scheme for Climate Change Mitigation." World Patent Information.
       34: 106-111.
Verdolini, E. and M. Galeotti. 2011. "At Home and Abroad: An Empirical Analysis of Innovation
       and Diffusion in Energy Technologies."     Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management. 61: 119­134.
Weyant, J. 2011. "Accelerating the Development and Diffusion of New Energy Technologies:
       Beyond the `Valley of Death.'" Energy Economics. 33: 674-682.




                                                                                          65
Table 1: Domestic R&D as a Percentage of Net Sales, selected industries

                                                                2006     2007     2008     2009      2010     2011     2012    2013      2014    2015    2016
                                      Energy Industry
   NAICS 21: Mining, extraction and support activities          0.7%     0.9%     0.4%     0.7%      0.5%     0.4%     0.9%    0.8%      0.8%    1.2%     1.4%
                                    NAICS 22: Utilities         0.1%     0.1%     0.1%     0.1%       N/A     0.1%     0.1%    0.1%      0.1%    0.1%     0.1%
  NAICS 3336: Engines, turbines, & power trans. equip.           N/A      N/A     4.1%     3.3%      5.1%     3.0%     3.3%    2.7%       N/A    5.1%     6.0%

                              Comparison Industries
            NAICS 21-23, 31-33, 42-81: All industries 3.4% 3.5% 3.0% 3.0% 2.5% 2.6% 2.7%                                       2.7% 2.9%         3.3%     3.5%
           NAICS 31-33: All manufacturing industries 3.6% 3.7% 3.5% 3.7% 3.3% 3.2% 3.1%                                        3.1% 3.3%         3.7%     3.9%
 NAICS 3361-63: Automobiles, bodies, trailers, & parts 2.4% 2.4% 2.5% 2.4% 1.8% 2.1% 2.2%                                      2.0% 2.2%         2.1%     2.2%
         NAICS 3254: Pharmaceuticals and medicines 13.5% 12.7% 12.2% 12.3% 11.7% 10.6% 11.2%                                   9.0% 11.3%         11%     9.7%
        NAICS 334: Computer and electronic products 9.2% 8.4% 10.1% 9.2% 8.2% 8.5% 8.6%                                        9.0% 8.9%         8.7%     8.7%

Notes: Table shows domestic R&D paid for and performed by the company as a percentage of domestic net sales (percent of domestic sales of R&D performers or
funders). 2006 & 2007 data are not comparable to other years due to changes in data availability. Data in those years represent company and other nonfederal
funds for industrial R&D as a percent of net sales of companies performing industrial R&D in the United States. Source: National Science Foundation Business
Research and Development and Innovation, various years.




                                                                                                                                                         66
Table 2: Total employment (thousands): Select Industries

                                                                2000       2005       2010       2011        2012       2013       2014       2015            2016
 211111: Crude petroleum and natural gas extraction              73.7       72.4       99.5      109.0      114.5       120.1      126.7      124.8           113.4
 2121: Coal mining                                               70.7       74.3       81.4        86.2       89.4       84.0       76.6       69.9            55.0
 23712: Pipeline construction                                               86.3      126.9      127.9      143.4       163.1      167.7      178.3           163.7
 22111: Electric Power Generation                               143.9      120.8      132.8      135.7      134.5       135.4      137.5      134.9           135.2
 22114: Solar                                                                                                  0.8        0.9        1.2           1.4          1.6
 22115: Wind                                                                                                   2.4        2.9        2.8           3.1          3.2
 335911: Battery manufacturing                                   22.8       17.1       17.8        18.9       19.3       18.9       19.2       19.7            20.8
 3361-3: Automobiles                                           1198.1     1033.2      627.6      667.3      727.1       769.7      811.1      865.6           901.9
 31-33: All manufacturing                                    16474.0 13667.3 10862.8 10984.4 11192.0 11276.4 11424.3 11605.5 11590.4

Note: Table shows total employment, in thousands, for select industries. . Source: US Census Bureau: Statistics of US Businesses, various years.




                                                                                                                                                         67
Table 3: Percentage of patents with inventors from selected countries and regions

                                         2000        2005        2010        2015
 United States
 Fracking                                 52.0        53.4       53.3        54.8
 Solar PV                                 17.2        22.7       21.5        20.6
 Wind                                     10.5        21.9       19.9        15.6
 Hybrid and Electric Vehicles             15.7        20.7       19.0        18.7
 Carbon capture and storage               35.3        31.9       38.3        41.8
 Energy Storage                           17.8         9.9       14.4        19.4
 Smart Grids                              33.8        41.7       33.4        33.3
 All technologies                         27.0        24.6       21.9        23.4
 European Union
 Fracking                                 31.2        25.8       24.4        20.8
 Solar PV                                 18.8        26.2       17.8        17.8
 Wind                                     69.0        47.8       50.7        51.5
 Hybrid and Electric Vehicles             18.7        23.2       30.9        26.1
 Carbon capture and storage               27.4        30.9       30.1        25.6
 Energy Storage                           16.8        13.8       19.1        17.9
 Smart Grids                              34.2        22.6       20.3        26.2
 All technologies                         31.1        26.7       25.9        22.7
 China
 Fracking                                  0.7         1.6         2.7        3.8
 Solar PV                                  0.4         2.1         3.4        7.6
 Wind                                      0.0         3.8         5.0        6.5
 Hybrid and Electric Vehicles              0.5         0.5         2.9        3.9
 Carbon capture and storage                0.8         2.0         1.2        1.1
 Energy Storage                            1.0         3.4         4.4        4.8
 Smart Grids                               0.0         1.1         2.7        5.3
 All technologies                          1.0         2.8         6.1       10.7
 Japan
 Fracking                                  1.7         2.3        0.9         1.5
 Solar PV                                 57.2        33.0       31.4        25.8
 Wind                                      8.5         7.6        8.7        12.0
 Hybrid and Electric Vehicles             60.2        51.5       39.3        35.6
 Carbon capture and storage               27.7        15.7       13.1        10.3
 Energy Storage                           52.6        49.4       38.2        36.0
 Smart Grids                              18.2        13.1       21.9        16.6
 All technologies                         28.4        26.7       24.5        21.2

Notes: Table shows the percentage of inventors coming from each country for selected technologies. Fractional counts
used for patents with inventors from multiple countries. Source: Authors' calculations using data from the EPO World
Patent Statistical Database (PATSTAT).



                                                                                                                68
Table 4: Firm Classifications and Descriptions

                                                                                         Number
                Firm Type                         Crunchbase Categories                  of Firms
                    (1)                                    (2)                              (3)

 A. High-Level Sectoral Groupings
       All firms                      Total sample of firms across sectors               604,884
       Energy                         All energy types                                    13,515
       Financial Services             Financial services, lending, and payments           48,923
       Science                        Science and engineering                             40,464
       Health/Biotech                 Healthcare and biotechnology                        62,414
       Manufacturing                  Manufacturing                                       32,116
       Transport                      Transportation                                      22,300
       High-tech                      Apps, AI, data, hardware, IT, internet services,   300,251
                                      telecommunications, mobile, platforms, and
                                      software

 B. Energy Types
      Clean                           Clean energy, renewable energy, storage,              6,276
                                      solar, wind
      Fossil Fuel                     Fossil fuels, fuel cells, and oil and gas             2,265
      Grid Management                 Electricity distribution, energy management,            887
                                      and power grid
      Energy Efficiency               Energy efficiency                                       466
      Other Energy                    All other energy types, including biomass and         3,621
                                      biofuel

 C. Energy and High-Tech Firms
      Energy only                     Energy firms not in high-tech                       10,129
      High-tech only                  High-tech firms not in energy                      296,865
      Energy and high-tech            Energy firms that are also high-tech                 3,386
      Clean and high-tech             Clean energy firms that are also high-tech           1,414
      Fossil fuel and high-tech       Fossil fuel energy firms that are also high-tech       341
      Grid and high-tech              Grid management and high-tech                          386
      Energy efficiency & high-tech   Energy efficiency firms that are also high-tech        238
      Other energy and high-tech      Other energy firms that are also high-tech           1,007




                                                                                              69
Table 5: Energy Firms Relative to the Average Firm

                                                                         Raised           Amount
               Dep. Variable:        Acquired             IPO            Funds             Raised        Time to Exit
                                        (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)

 Energy                              0.042***         0.063***          0.145***        23.609***         -0.845***
                                      (0.006)          (0.009)           (0.009)         (4.300)            (0.132)

 Sample mean for dep.
 var.                                 0.086             0.011            0.283             13.81            7.141
 No. of Observations                 398,473           398,473          398,473           112,618           36,414
Notes: Regression results for various dependent variables to assess energy firms relative to the average firm. The
dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is acquired or has an IPO in Columns 1 and 2, respectively. In
Column 3, the dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether the firm raised VC funding. In Column 4, the
dependent variable is the amount of funding raised conditional on raising funds. In Column 5, the dependent variable
is the time to exit conditional on having a successful exit. Controls include founded year fixed effects and a dummy
for being located in the US. Standard errors are clustered by founded year. Asterisks denote * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01.


Table 6: Energy + High-Tech Firms Relative to the Average Firm

                                                                         Raised           Amount
               Dep. Variable:        Acquired             IPO            Funds             Raised        Time to Exit
                                        (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)

 Energy + High-Tech                    0.005            0.003           0.292***         -3.251**           -0.382
                                      (0.006)          (0.004)           (0.011)          (1.298)           (0.261)

 Energy Only                         0.043***         0.058***          0.182***        22.928***         -1.011***
                                      (0.006)          (0.008)           (0.010)         (4.368)            (0.150)

 High-Tech Only                        0.002          -0.009***         0.062***          -1.028          -0.305***
                                      (0.002)           (0.002)          (0.005)          (0.742)           (0.069)

 Sample mean for dep.
 var.                                 0.086             0.011            0.283             13.81            7.141
 No. of Observations                 398,473           398,473          398,473           112,618           36,414
Notes: Regression results for various dependent variables to assess energy firms relative to the average firm. The
dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is acquired or has an IPO in Columns 1 and 2, respectively. In
Column 3, the dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether the firm raised VC funding. In Column 4, the
dependent variable is the amount of funding raised conditional on raising funds. In Column 5, the dependent variable
is the time to exit conditional on having a successful exit. Controls include founded year fixed effects and a dummy
for being located in the US. Standard errors are clustered by founded year. Asterisks denote * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01.

                                                                                                                 70
Table 7: Different Types of Energy Firms Relative to the Average Firm

                                                                         Raised           Amount
               Dep. Variable:        Acquired             IPO            Funds             Raised        Time to Exit
                                        (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)

 Clean Energy                       -0.016***         0.025***          0.164***        15.784***         -0.718***
                                      (0.005)          (0.007)           (0.010)         (4.602)            (0.239)

 Fossil Fuel Energy                  0.147***         0.133***          0.111***         29.873**         -0.923***
                                      (0.019)          (0.016)           (0.017)         (14.079)           (0.175)

 Grid Management                     0.085***         0.014***          0.203***         -5.266**            0.245
                                      (0.016)          (0.005)           (0.014)          (2.076)           (0.316)

 Energy Efficiency                     0.003            0.007           0.340***          -1.571             0.506
                                      (0.015)          (0.007)           (0.028)          (2.785)           (0.440)

 Other Energy Firms                  0.020***         0.040***          0.214***         12.236**         -0.906***
                                      (0.006)          (0.008)           (0.014)          (4.377)           (0.177)

 Sample mean for dep.
 var.                                 0.086             0.011            0.283             13.81            7.141
 No. of Observations                 398,473           398,473          398,473           112,618           36,414
Notes: Regression results for various dependent variables to assess energy firms relative to the average firm. The
dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is acquired or has an IPO in Columns 1 and 2, respectively. In
Column 3, the dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether the firm raised VC funding. In Column 4, the
dependent variable is the amount of funding raised conditional on raising funds. In Column 5, the dependent variable
is the time to exit conditional on having a successful exit. Controls include founded year fixed effects and a dummy
for being located in the US. Standard errors are clustered by founded year. Asterisks denote * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01.




                                                                                                                 71
Table 8: Impact of Being High-Tech for Different Types of Energy Firms

                                                                          Raised          Amount          Time to
                   Dep. Variable:        Acquired           IPO           Funds            Raised           Exit
                                            (1)              (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)

 Clean + High-Tech                         -0.007       -0.020***        0.050**        -24.806***          0.090
                                          (0.008)         (0.006)        (0.018)          (5.659)          (0.318)

 Fossil Fuel + High-Tech                -0.135***       -0.140***       0.250***        -38.789***       1.498***
                                          (0.018)         (0.017)        (0.039)          (11.158)        (0.465)

 Grid Mgmnt. + High-Tech                -0.119***          0.002        0.218***          6.456*           1.048*
                                          (0.028)         (0.017)        (0.039)          (3.571)          (0.593)

 Energy Efficiency + High-Tech           0.084**          -0.001           0.045           0.987           1.800*
                                         (0.035)          (0.017)         (0.037)         (5.678)          (0.865)

 General Energy + High-Tech                -0.018       -0.042***       0.093***        -28.626***         -0.336
                                          (0.013)         (0.010)        (0.023)          (6.414)          (0.526)

 Clean Energy                           -0.041***        -0.021**         -0.029           0.792            0.047
                                          (0.012)         (0.008)         (0.019)         (9.992)          (0.332)

 Fossil Fuel Energy                     0.146***        0.100***        -0.111***         17.219           -0.196
                                         (0.020)         (0.020)          (0.022)        (19.833)          (0.306)

 Grid Management Energy                 0.120***        -0.043***       -0.088***       -34.000***          0.738
                                         (0.021)          (0.015)         (0.023)         (7.040)          (0.471)

 Energy Efficiency Energy               -0.069***        -0.041**       0.144***        -25.193***          0.053
                                          (0.020)         (0.016)        (0.041)          (8.269)          (0.759)

 Sample mean for dep. var.                 0.137           0.059           0.456           30.16            6.826
 No. of Observations                       8,689           8,689           8,689           3,965            1,512
Notes: Regression results for various dependent variables to assess energy firms relative to the average firm. The
dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is acquired or has an IPO in Columns 1 and 2, respectively. In
Column 3, the dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether the firm raised VC funding. In Column 4, the
dependent variable is the amount of funding raised conditional on raising funds. In Column 5, the dependent variable
is the time to exit conditional on having a successful exit. Controls include founded year fixed effects and a dummy
for being located in the US. Standard errors are clustered by founded year. Asterisks denote * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05,
*** p < 0.01.


                                                                                                                 72
Table 9: Exit of Energy Firms Relative to the Average Funded Firm

                      Dep. Variable:                    Any Exit
                                         Overall 2000-2005 2006-2012 2013-2018
                                           (1)      (1)         (2)     (3)

Clean Energy                           -0.026*** -0.025            -0.038**        -0.011
                                         (0.008) (0.016)            (0.014)       (0.007)

Fossil Fuel Energy                        0.018        0.069         0.023         -0.004
                                         (0.013)      (0.037)       (0.018)       (0.018)

Grid Management                           -0.012      -0.045         -0.011        0.007
                                         (0.017)      (0.047)       (0.027)       (0.022)

Energy Efficiency                         -0.009       0.098        -0.047*        -0.007
                                         (0.017)      (0.053)       (0.023)       (0.017)

Other Energy Firms                      -0.025**       0.018        -0.040*      -0.023**
                                         (0.012)      (0.039)       (0.018)       (0.008)

Sample mean for dep. var.                0.116         0.328         0.152          0.04
No. of Observations                     112,618        13,605        41,836        57,177
 Notes: Regressions include funded firms only. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is either
acquired or has an IPO. Controls include founded year fixed effects and a dummy for being located in the US. Standard
errors are clustered by founded year. Asterisks denote * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                                                                  73
