                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE GENDER GAP IN TECH & COMPETITIVE WORK ENVIRONMENTS? FIELD
      EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM AN INTERNET-OF-THINGS PRODUCT
                        DEVELOPMENT PLATFORM

                                          Kevin Boudreau
                                          Nilam Kaushik

                                       Working Paper 27154
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27154


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2020


For support in operationalizing the research program described here, we wish to especially thank
members of supporting organizations and particularly Maria Costa De Sousa, Hugh Courtney,
Mavez Dabas, Sylvain Demortier, Anthony Donaldson, Raj Echambadi, Koreen Geisler-Wagner,
Austen Keene, Afan Khan, Atif Khan, Abhinav Kharbanda, Dyan Khor, Raghavi
Kirouchenaradjou, Sreerag Sreenath Mandakathil, Patrick McGrath, Tucker Marion, Marc
Meyer, Robert Hughes, Michael Orr, Olga Ozhereleva, Kaushik Padmanabhan, Edwige Poinssot,
Fernando Suarez, Prathamesh Kisan Tajane, Nikin Tharan, Emery Trahan, Maureen Underhill,
Robert Whelan, and Katherine Wilhoit. For useful comments that influenced this article in
important ways, we thank Victor Bennet, Roberto Fernandez, Sharique Hasan, Olga Shurchkov,
and seminar participants at Duke University, DRUID, NBER productivity lunch, Northeastern
University, and the Academy of Management. We would also like to acknowledge generous
financial support from the Kauffman Foundation and Northeastern DMSB. The views expressed
here are those of the authors alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the institutions, funders
or supporters involved with this study. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kevin Boudreau and Nilam Kaushik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Gender Gap in Tech & Competitive Work Environments? Field Experimental Evidence
from an Internet-of-Things Product Development Platform
Kevin Boudreau and Nilam Kaushik
NBER Working Paper No. 27154
May 2020
JEL No. C9,D2,J16,J2,J71,O3

                                          ABSTRACT

Many technology companies struggle to fill all their positions and to achieve gender parity in
their ranks. One explanation for gender disparities is the possibility that men and women differ in
their willingness to work under competitive organizational environments of tech firms. To
investigate this question, this paper reports on a large platform-based field experiment in which
97,696 U.S. university-educated individuals were given the opportunity to join a tech-related
product development activity. Individuals were randomly assigned to treatments emphasizing
either competitive or collaborative interactions with other participants. We find that (1) in non-
STEM fields, the competition treatment leads to a 27% drop in participation for females in
comparison to males. However, in our main finding, (2) in STEM fields, we find no statistical
differences in men and women's responses to competition. The patterns are consistent with (3)
men in non-STEM fields exhibiting overconfidence in their likelihood of succeeding under
competition. We also find that, while participation in highest in STEM fields,(4) the ratio of
female to male participation in a field is better predicted by whether the field is male-or female-
dominated, than it is by whether it is a STEM field or not. We discuss theoretical interpretations
and implications for organizations.


Kevin Boudreau
D'Amore-McKim School of Business
Northeastern University
360 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
k.boudreau@northeastern.edu

Nilam Kaushik
Bannerghatta Road, Bengaluru, India
IIMB
India
nilam.kaushik@iimb.ac.in
1    Introduction

        Across US universities, women make up only about one in five of Computer Science and

Engineering enrollees (NSCRC, 2017). Women's share of the tech labor force is even smaller, as women's

attrition from year to year exceeds that of men, during and after university training (Silbey, 2016a). In fact,

gender sorting and separation begins earlier in life, in early years through middle and high school in math

and science subjects, before emerging in choice of university majors and workforce outcomes (Glass et al.,

2013; Kahn & Ginther, 2017). A large and vibrant literature on gender disparities provides a long list of

possible explanations for gender gaps across the economy, in general (e.g., Bertrand & Hallock, 2001;

Blevins et al., 2019; Castilla, 2015; Fernandez-Mateo & Kaplan, 2018; Guzman & Kacperczyk, 2019; Scott

& Shu, 2017; Sherf et al., 2017). To date, there has been considerably less scholarly attention--and

particularly systematic empirical research--devoted to gender gaps in the tech sector1--this, despite the

economic importance of this sector and conspicuous coverage of gender and tech in the popular media (e.g.,

Chang, 2018). (For exceptions, see: Fernandez & Campero, 2017; Lambrecht & Tucker, 2018; Murciano-

Goroff, 2018; Wynn & Correll, 2017.) Gaining more empirically-grounded understanding of explanations

for the gender gap in tech might point to effective interventions--and perhaps then also means of

moderating the "leaky pipeline" of native-born technical workers (US BLS, 2017). Gender diversity has

also been shown to be correlated with group problem-solving and innovation performance in several

contexts (Ancona & Caldwell, 1992; Bear & Woolley, 2011; Herring, 2009; Jang, 2017; Kneeland et al.,

2020; Nielsen et al., 2018; Zhang, 2020).

        This paper studies whether the tech gender gap can be explained, to any degree, by the notoriously

competitive organizational environments in the tech industry, and associated gender differences in

willingness to work in such environments. The tech industry is notorious for its highly competitive work




        1
           The question of gender within sciences has received considerably more systematic empirical study (Ceci et
al., 2014; Nosek et al., 2009).

                                                             2
culture and incentives. For example, a report by Accenture that describes work environments of Silicon

Valley firms noted, "employees are ambitious and will work harder and longer to do what it takes to get

ahead, even if that means sometimes stepping on colleagues' toes" (Harris & Alter, 2016). The New York

Times, in describing the culture at flagship tech firm Uber, observed, "the focus on pushing for the best

result has also fueled what current and former Uber employees describe as a Hobbesian environment at

the company, in which workers are sometimes pitted against one another" (Isaac, 2017). Text analysis of

25,000 job postings by analytics firm Textio revealed striking patterns in the descriptions of many tech

firms, suggesting competitively oriented organizational environments. For example, the top-three most

common words used in Microsoft's postings (relative to words used outside of tech) were "driven person,"

"insatiably," and "competing" (Snyder, 2017).2 Analogous words connoting aggressive competition were

found at many other tech leaders. Of course, the tech industry is also well-known for aggressive industrial

competition, too.

           In principle, any number of characteristics of tech organizations might shape men's and women's

willingness to join (Evetts, 1996; McIlwee & Robinson, 1992). We are motivated here to study the role of

competitiveness as one potential source of the gender gap, as there is a growing body of largely lab

experimental research suggesting systematic differences in male and female responses to competition (e.g.,

Comeig et al., 2016; Gneezy et al., 2003, 2003; Iriberri & Rey-Biel, 2019; Morin, 2015, 2015; Niederle &

Vesterlund, 2007; Paserman, 2010; Reuben et al., 2015; Shurchkov, 2012; Sutter & Glätzle-Rützler, 2015).

A tentative emerging consensus is that women could be more averse to working under competitive

conditions than are men (Croson & Gneezy, 2009). A misalignment of women's attitudes with the

organizational environment might then dissuade entry to tech-related fields and perhaps also contribute to

gender differences in attrition (Wynn & Correll, 2017). If this were the case, we might ask, for example,

whether redesign of organizational environments could moderate the gender gap (Slack Website, 2019).




           2
               Exceptions included Slack, whose top words were "lasting relationships," "meaningfully," and "care
deeply."

                                                              3
        At the same time, it remains a question whether the existing findings can necessarily be extrapolated

to explain the gender gap under a quite different set of circumstances in tech. Although the existing findings

on gender differences in response to competition have been replicated across multiple studies, these results

are drawn from lab studies, largely with student subjects, and yet only a small number of field contexts,

unrelated to tech fields. Also raising questions about the ability to extrapolate past results to the gender gap

in tech, a set of rich descriptive studies of gender interactions in technical fields provides strong suggestion

that gender differences in attitudes to competition (and collaboration) could be more nuanced and

ambivalent in male-dominated technical fields than they are in other contexts (e.g, Friesel & Timcenko,

2011; Kuyath & Yoder, 2004; Silbey, 2016). Further, others studying the antecedents of attitudes to

competition, such as self-confidence, have found that men and women in technical fields could be more

similar to one another in these respects than those in non-technical fields (Beyer & Haller, 2006; Nekby et

al., 2008). Therefore, it is an empirical question whether gender differences in attitudes to competition

generalize to tech contexts. And, we it is the case that these differences generalize, it is still a question

whether any such differences are of a magnitude to explain a significant share of the staggering one-in-five

gender gap in tech.

        To make progress on these questions, we report on a field experiment covering 97,696 alumni and

students from a large private R1 American university with top-40 ranked undergraduate programs in

Business, Computer Science, and Engineering. Study subjects are from all fields and career stages (from

youngest undergraduates to post-retirement). We focus on the decision of these individuals to participate in

a tech-related product development activity (or not). The program involves a 3-week part-time commitment

in one's off-hours, engaging in tech-related product development. The work involves conceiving and

designing applications related to the Internet of Things (IoT), a current leading area of development and

innovation in the tech industry. Prospective participants were randomly assigned to treatments designed to

generate expectations of either competitive or collaborative interactions among platform participants. The

experiment was embedded within the initial launch campaign and takeoff of the platform and prior to initial

operation.

                                                           4
        The research design here builds on past experimental methods (e.g., Flory et al., 2015; Niederle &

Vesterlund, 2007), but introduces refinements to the experimental protocol and targeted study population

that allow a larger and wider group of heterogeneous subjects to be studied. The ability to discern

differences across subjects in technical and non-technical fields is especially important here, given the

experiment is preceded by lifelong sorting of subjects into technical and non-technical fields (i.e., we should

interpret results as reflecting "sorting-of-the-already-sorted".)

        When replicating the essential approach of past studies--comparing pooled average responses by

men and women--we are able to replicate past results. We find that average female participation is 25%

lower in the Competition Treatment; and 20% lower for mean, consistent with the past research. The general

preference for collaboration is also consistent with past research (Dargnies, 2012). However, these results

are fragile when considering within sample heterogeneity; simply controlling for field fixed effects

eradicates this finding. (Participation is highest in Computer Science, Engineering and Sciences.)

        Our main results and contribution relate to comparisons between comparable men and women in

the same field. We find that the prevailing wisdom--that women are more averse to competition--is true

in non-STEM fields, where women reduce participation by 27% in response to the Competition treatment,

whereas men are statistically indifferent to Competition. Given that men in non-STEM fields might be

understood to be disadvantaged developing products in the Internet of Things than those with technical

backgrounds, this indifference by men in non-STEM fields is consistent with over-confidence (cf. Niederle

& Vesterlund, 2007), if we interpret those in non-STEM fields as being disadvantaged in competition by a

lack of relevant technical knowledge. By contrast, men and women in STEM fields have statistically

indistinguishable responses to the Competition treatment, reducing participation rates by 21% and 19%.

We find that the similarity of men's and women's responses to competition in STEM fields is consistent

with prior findings in the literature of more similar levels of self-confidence and self-efficacy among men

and women in technical fields (e.g., Beyer & Haller, 2006; Nekby et al., 2008).

        Estimates are robust to controlling for available measures of individuals' academic achievement,

opportunity costs, age and cohort, or whether the field was male- or female-dominated. (General

                                                           5
participation rates were lower with age, lower among those in primary child-rearing years, and lower among

females with high GPAs. We also find that the relative participation rates of females to males are especially

well predicted by whether the field was male- or female-dominated. As we later discuss, these associations

are potentially indicative of gender socialization within fields. Most important to our main research

questions, we find these relationships are unrelated to effects of the Competition treatment.

        And so, could gender differences in attitudes to competitive organizational environments explain

the gender gap in tech? Prima facie, it is far from clear. The gender differences in responses to competition

observed here are small relative to the staggering one-in-five gender gap; moreover, the differences that do

appear do not even relate to those in technical STEM fields. However, we discuss organizational and policy

implications when interpreting results as reflecting the lifelong gender sorting and separation to distinct

fields that occurs prior to the sorting that occurs within the experiment, itself.

        This study draws together and contributes to three literatures. First, it contributes to the vast

literature on gender disparities in organizations general (e.g., Bertrand & Hallock, 2001; Blevins et al.,

2019; Castilla, 2015; Fernandez-Mateo & Kaplan, 2018; Guzman & Kacperczyk, 2019; Scott & Shu, 2017;

Sherf et al., 2017). In this case, we isolate the effects of a particular behavioral mechanism on the gender

gap--gender differences in attitudes to competition. Here, we add to the small but growing number of

papers providing systematic empirical evidence on gender in tech. We also contribute to research on gender

differences in attitudes to competition (e.g., Comeig et al., 2016; Gneezy et al., 2003, 2003; Iriberri & Rey-

Biel, 2019; Morin, 2015, 2015; Niederle & Vesterlund, 2007; Paserman, 2010; Reuben et al., 2015;

Shurchkov, 2012; Sutter & Glätzle-Rützler, 2015). Relative to this literature, we illustrate--with a large

and wide study population--that gender differences in responses to competition can vary by field, providing

a contrasting example counter to usual findings in this literature. The focus on field experiments, and

particularly at scale, remains rare in this literature (see Flory et al. (2015) for a notable exception). In this

regard, this study is distinct for its especially larger scale, while systematically observing heterogeneous

participants. We also drew upon rich descriptive studies that characterize gender interactions in technical

fields collaboration (Friesel & Timcenko, 2011; Kuyath & Yoder, 2004; Silbey, 2016). We contribute to

                                                            6
this literature with large-scale empirical evidence that is less rich and nuanced but provides causal evidence

to add to and complement our understanding of these complex behavioral environments.


2     Gender-Based Sorting & Competitive Organizational Environments

2.1    Evidence on Gender Differences in Responses to Competition

        A growing body of largely lab experimental research finds, in many cases, that a greater proportion

of male subjects exhibit a willingness to work under competitive conditions than do female subjects. The

typical experiment follows this template: a group of participants are recruited to the experiment and

introduced to a task such as solving puzzles, completing math problems, etc. and are asked to choose

between a (non-competitive) piece rate payment scheme or a (competitive) tournament incentive scheme--

thus distilling the nature of a competitive work environment down to how payoffs are allocated.

        For example, Niederle and Vesterlund's lab experimental study of 80 students from the University

of Pittsburgh has become a key reference and referent experimental protocol in this literature. The group of

half men and half women who performed arithmetic (Niederle & Vesterlund, 2007) calculation for five

minutes and could choose to work under the competitive or non-competitive payoff scheme. Subjects could

be paid $1 for the piece-rate regime, or could alternatively choose to compete with another person could

and be paid $3 for winning (along with payments for participating in the experiment). Men chose the

competitive regime twice as often as the women (73 percent versus 35 percent), with low-skilled men

entering the competitive tournament too often, and high-skilled women not entering as much. Men's

performance also increased under competition.3 The main results have been replicated across a range of

study groups, tasks, and variants on the original protocol (e.g., Comeig et al., 2016; Gneezy et al., 2003;

Iriberri & Rey-Biel, 2019; Morin, 2015, 2015; Paserman, 2010; Reuben et al., 2015; Shurchkov, 2012;



         3
           Of course, it is not possible to unambiguously estimate a causal "gender effect"--even when one compares
men and women in a randomized controlled experiment. The sex of individuals in any research study group is likely
to be correlated with any number of omitted variables; neither random assignment nor deliberate sampling strategies
allows the coefficient on a gender dummy to be interpreted as a "gender effect" (Holland, 1986). Nonetheless, in
Niederle and Vesterlund's study, the result gains credence by showing men and women performance similarly, on
average, in the task prior to the experiment.

                                                             7
Sutter & Glätzle-Rützler, 2015). (Closely-related studies find instances where women are also shown to

have a preference for collaboration (e.g., Kuhn & Villeval, 2015).)

        These findings of residual differences between male and female subjects have been described as

gender differences in "attitudes" towards or "preferences" for competition within this research stream, with

some suggestion these differences could be based on biological or evolutionary factors (Buser, 2009;

Croson & Gneezy, 2009; Knight, 2002; Lippa, 1998), gender differences in confidence and self-efficacy

(Comeig et al., 2016; Niederle & Vesterlund, 2007), and socialization of beliefs and stereotypes around

gender-role incongruity (e.g., Günther et al., 2010).4

2.2    Competition and Gender Sorting

        Several recent papers have built on the main results of this literature and asked whether gender

differences in attitudes to competition leads to sorting in education and employment contexts. For example,

Reuben et al. (2015) assess MBA students' attitudes to competition and find that, in the following decade,

gender differences in taste for competition correlate with wages and likelihood of working in high-paying

industries. Saccardo et. Al (2018) estimate the magnitude of the gender gap in competitiveness in a lab

experiment and find that the top 10% of the competitiveness distribution is comprised of men. Their results

suggest that although women may choose to select into moderately competitive environments, they may

opt out of highly competitive ones. We may, therefore, expect fewer women to commit to career paths in

segments of the labor market that are highly competitive in nature.

        Perhaps closest to the methodology of the current study, work by Flory et al., 2015 is notable for

documenting a first large-scale field experiment that tests whether competitive incentives advertised in

Internet job postings for administrative assistant jobs leads to gender-sorting among 6,779 job seekers. In

the main arm of their experiment, the authors randomly varied compensation schemes advertised--

including competitive or team-based compensation schemes--across jobs and cities. The authors find that



        4
           Gender differences in experiments have also been reported in relation to factors that are coincident with
competition, such as risk-taking, preferences for high-powered incentives, psychological "choking," and subjective
beliefs concerning the implications of competition (Croson & Gneezy, 2009).

                                                             8
women in cities with higher prevailing local wages were less likely to apply to competitively oriented job

postings than were women in cities with lower local wages. They interpret the pattern as suggesting that

women will tend to avoid the competitively oriented job postings if there are other local opportunities.

         Perhaps closer to our focus here on the tech industry than administrative assistant jobs, is research

finding associations between competitive environments and gender differences in sorting and performance

in mathematical training, among young people (e.g., Buser et al., 2017; Jurajda & Münich, 2011; Ors et al.,

2013).

2.3      Competitive Organizational Environments & the Tech Gender Gap?

         Given the notoriously competitive organizational environments in tech (see Introduction), the

above findings suggest that gender differences willingness to work under competitive conditions might at

least partly explain the gender gap in tech, adding to a number of explanations. If this were the case, it

would still be an empirical question whether this factor accounts for much of the staggering one-in-five

gender gap (see Introduction). However, as outlined below, it is even a question whether past findings can

be extrapolated to explain the gender gap, at all.

Possible Limits to Extrapolating Prior Studies

         In view of the considerable degree of replication of results and even an emerging tentative

consensus that women are more averse to competition than are men, there are a considerable number of

studies suggesting exceptions to this rule. These exceptional studies and their interpretations suggest that

gender differences in responses to competition could depend on the nature of the task (Dreber et al., 2011;

Günther et al., 2010; Shurchkov, 2012), familiarity with a domain of knowledge (Wieland & Sarin, 2012),

the gender composition of the competing group (Gneezy et al. 2003; Gneezy and Rustichini, 2004;

Antonovics et al., 2009), the background and culture of the study group (Andersen et al., 2013, 2013; Booth

et al., 2019), socialized perceptions of gender-role congruity (Günther et al., 2010) and age (Flory et al.,

2018). Further, Apicella et al. (2017) find that gender differences disappear when competing with oneself,

rather than competing with others. Dargnies (2012) reports of men and women preferring to collaborate



                                                          9
with others rather than entirely competing on their own, before entering into a set of steps following the

Niederle-Vesterlund protocol. Therefore, even the existing largely lab experimental research, distant as it

may be to tech industry contexts, already raises questions concerning boundary conditions and limits the

applicability of main consensus findings.

Ambivalence to Competition and Collaboration in Tech Fields

        Outside of what is known from the literature on gender differences in responses to competition,

there are also important insights that can be drawn from the research describing the role that gender plays

in interactions in tech fields. One possible source suggested by the literature of gender differences in

responses to competition (and collaboration) in STEM fields relates to more complex or ambivalent

responses in a highly gender-socialized contexts. For example, rich case study evidence indicates that

female engineers are often not so much averse to competition, as they are averse to teams and collaboration.

This is because teamwork can subject females to gender-stereotyped expectations and work role

assignments or other forms of bias, when working with male counterparts (Cech et al., 2011; Cheryan et

al., 2017; Choi, 2013; Foor et al., 2013; McIlwee & Robinson, 1992; Moss-Racusin et al., 2018; Silbey,

2015, 2016b). Other observers describing women in technical fields, as Engineering, in fact point to

Engineering competitions as a means of further engaging and socializing women and girls into the field,

rather than dissuading them (Friesel & Timcenko, 2011; Kuyath & Yoder, 2004; Notter, 2010). The

interaction between competition or collaboration and gender are consistent with prior claims in the literature

that gender and peer effects could play an important moderating role (Gneezy et al. 2003; Gneezy and

Rustichini, 2004; Antonovics et al., 2009).

Behavioral Similarities of Men and Women in Technical Fields

        A second set of particulars in tech fields that raises still more questions relates to the behavioral

orientations of men and women who pursue technical fields. As context, prior research finds that men's

higher inclination towards competition can be related to over-confidence in expected performance (Niederle

& Vesterlund, 2011). By contrast, numerous past studies have suggested women may experience lower



                                                         10
self-efficacy, or subjective perceptions of their own capacity (Correll, 2001, p.; Marra & Bogue, 2006;

Tang, 2019), which would then discourage them from competing with others. However, evidence on those

in STEM fields suggests that women in technical fields have may be more similar to their male peers in

terms of self-efficacy than they are to females in other fields (Beyer & Haller, 2006). Moreover, despite the

preponderance of evidence pointing to lower self-efficacy among women--and especially in mathematical

activities (Ellis et al., 2016)--those women who choose to self-select into male-dominated fields may in

fact diverge from this tendency, and in fact relatively over-confident (Nekby et al., 2008).

         From these arguments and the qualifications of the existing results in literature on gender attitudes

to competition, the relation between gender, competition, and willingness to participate is a complex

question and we treat this as an empirical question.


3    Research Context

         This research was carried out in collaboration with Northeastern University's IoT Open Innovation

Lab. Northeastern University is a large R1 research-oriented University in the United States, based in

Boston, founded in 1898. It has roughly 18,000 undergraduate students, 8,000 graduate students and more

than two hundred thousand alumni. The university is ranked 40th according to US News Reports' list of

best US universities, featuring nationally ranked undergraduate programs in Engineering, Computer

Science, and Business. The average high school admittance GPA at Northeastern is 4.04 with an admittance

rate of 18%.6 The large majority of the school's alumni live in the United States, with largest clusters in

Massachusetts, New York, and California.




         6
            These facts were sourced from the following link https://www.prepscholar.com/sat/s/colleges/Northeastern-
University-SAT-scores-GPA. Parenthetically, although the academic curriculum and range of fields offered is
relatively typical of large private universities in the United States, the student population of this university is
distinguished by the university's "cooperative" experiential education program. This implies that the vast majority of
students alternate between 6-month academic terms to 6-month professional employment in industry positions within
their field of study (with most students taking three 6-month work terms in their field before graduating). Thus, the
study population here--students and alumni alike--will have industry experience working in their fields.

                                                              11
3.1    Background: The Internet of Things (IoT)

           The Internet of Things or "IoT" refers to a wide set of mostly yet-to-be-imagined products, services,

and systems that connect machines, infrastructure, consumer products and other things, while making use

of the intelligence created by data collection and networking. In another sense, IoT represents a

recombination of existing information technologies, combined into a single technological "stack,"

including artificial intelligence, wireless networks, sensors, software, data science methods, control

systems, "big data" and cloud-based computing, information security, robotics, and the like. Thus, IoT

product and services are, in many ways, also directly representative of today's tech industry. It is therefore

not surprising that differences in gender representation in tech have been reflected equally in this emerging

sector.7

           IoT also has special economic relevance and applies to most every sector of the economy, just as

in earlier generations of the Internet. The technologies making up the IoT technology "stack" represent a

general purpose bundle of technological capabilities that are associated with visions of a "Fourth Industrial

Revolution" (Schwab, 2017) or a "Second Machine Age" (Brynjolfsson & Mcafee, 2014; McAfee &

Brynjolfsson, 2018). For example, many of the prevalent technological changes in these theses--

automation, artificial intelligence, and robotics--are subsets of the IoT technical stack. Thus, IoT is

expected to be applicable across the economy, as another example of a general purpose technology

(Trajtenberg, 2019). Accordingly, management consultants McKinsey & Company predict that IoT could

grow to trillions of dollars in the next decade and as much as 10 percent of global economic output (Patel

et al., 2017).

3.2    IoT Product Development Program & Platform

           We worked with Northeastern's IoT Open Innovation Lab, which runs a program that allows

Northeastern's alumni and students to be assembled into teams and compete with one another in designing




           7
          See "Women of IoT say push diversity, don't patronize and don't discriminate" downloaded at
https://www.iot-now.com/2018/10/09/89071-women-iot-say-push-diversity-dont-patronise-dont-discriminate/

                                                            12
new tech products related to IoT. The entire program is structured and run on an online product development

platform.

           The program's goals are to provide participants with opportunities to design IoT product

("applications"), while gaining understanding of IoT building-block technologies, how they fit together and

overall architecture of IoT systems. These goals are accomplished through a series of part-time learning-

by-doing product development activities to be pursued in off-hours, organized as team-based "challenges,"

designed as team-based rank-order tournaments. To facilitate system design, participants were to engage

with a drag-and-drop tool to design the technical architecture and visually convey the key workings of their

designs, while also working through a structured series of questions to convey key workings of their

designs.

           A key tenet of the program's design was to create technical challenges and learning opportunities

for users from a wide variety of backgrounds. For example, those with highly advanced knowledge in

related tech areas could provide rich technical detail with their designs, well above the bare minimum

requirements for completing a submission. Further, pre-testing of the platform with advanced users

confirmed that the technology stack in IoT was considerably broader than their areas of experience. For

those with little knowledge of IoT and key technology concepts, the platform was designed to create clear

steps and baseline concepts to allow them to understand how technologies fit together and what process

steps they should follow to successfully learn about the technologies and to subsequently create a design

concept. The minimum level of design consists of a high-level architecture design and some description of

data flow and functionality. In these ways, the platform user experience was designed with a philosophy

and approach of "low floors and high ceilings" (Boaler, 2016) to meaningfully engage the widest possible

range of possible participants--with all participants finding the challenge accessible and also meaningful

and, indeed, challenging.8 Step-by-step instructions and scope for developing either highly detailed or quite



           8
           We pretested the platform, itself, on 30 individual students drawn from all fields across the university and
several administrative staff. We also pretested the platform with teams formed from 79 graduate business students.
Participants uniformly reported awareness that this was to be a tech-related tasks. It was relevant, in the majority of

                                                              13
basic designs created additional scope for low floors and high ceilings of challenge, difficulty, and ambition.

The digital nature of the platform and ability to carry out the work either synchronously or asynchronously,

to communicate and to collaborate on the platform also enhanced accessibility. The program and platform

were designed to allow online interactions and guided work steps; however, collocated individuals could

certainly also work side-by-side and in person. Apart from technical aspects, designs created on the platform

also require a description of target users, needs and use cases, and basic analysis of costs and benefits of

advancing to build a prototype.

         Participants are not charged to participate but bear the opportunity cost of time in participating, in

hours outside or school or work or other responsibilities. Participants benefit from engaging in interesting

projects, from learning, from enjoying interacting and networking with other university community

members, from getting feedback on designs, and from cash prizes for individuals in top-ranked design

teams. Several teams have benefitted too from taking their conceptions and designs and feedback through

to follow-on entrepreneurial development off the platform.

         There are now over 5,500 participants on the platform, with participants distributed across all fields

of training and career stages. Participants reside in 50 U.S. states, and countries throughout the Americas,

Europe, Australia, and Asia, and several African nations. Participants span all fields of study, include a

wide range of students, professionals, entrepreneurs, retirees, investors, military veterans, businesspeople,

unemployed and under-employed, educators and teachers, technical experts and engineers and computer

science graduates, unemployed or under-employed workers, Ph.D. researchers, and the physically

handicapped.9




cases, to explicitly state that the product development steps would be designed in a way to allow them to successfully
proceed and complete the tasks, although those with more technical background should be able to provide more
detailed technical responses. In those pretests, the individuals also proceed to in fact complete the steps, confirming a
large variation in depth and detail in designs produced.
          9
            The program was designed for people do engage on the platform and, by its design, allow people to engage
through learning-by-doing in a structured environment, where interactions and collaborations could take place wholly
online, whether synchronously or asynchronously. It was still possible for people to meet in-person, in cases where
they were collated, and still work over the platform.

                                                               14
4     Field Experimental Research Design

          To explore the question of whether men and women respond differently to the expectation of a

competitive organizational environment when choosing to pursue a tech-related opportunity or not, we

carry out a large field experiment, described in this section.

4.1     Timeline & Random Assignment Procedure

Platform Launch Campaign

         We "embedded" the experiment in the initial launch campaign of the IoT Open Innovation lab

platform described above. The goal of this initial growth campaign was to carry out a one-time intensive

outreach to gain a "critical mass" of participants on the platform, as the value generated on the platform

depends on interactions among participants. Embedding our experiment in this initial launch allowed us to

be part of a one-time process of mass communicating with 97,696 potential adopters of the platform, given

a known roster of alumni and students. (This number of 97,696 is the subset of all students and all alumni

who were involved in mass communications, for which anonymized descriptive data were available for our

analysis.) Embedding this experiment within the initial launch of the program allowed us to implement the

research prior to individuals having prior experience with or knowledge of the platform.

Assignment to Separate Email Outreach & Sign-up Platforms

         The launch campaign involved contacting students and alumni for whom contact details were

available (and in the case of alumni, those who had opted into university communications). An introductory

email served to introduce the opportunity and invited the individual to click through to the program platform

to learn more details and to join (see Appendix). Subjects received emails at 10 am EST. Individuals were

randomly assigned to be contacted over 67 business days.10 Individuals who did not act on the email were

sent a single reminder seven days later (also at 10am EST). We explicitly added a line in the email stating




         10
           Spreading invitations over time mitigated the risk of any one day providing eccentric results, while also
allowing the engineering team to carefully monitor the performance of the platform in relation to scaling and growth.
Staggered roll-out was also used to test an orthogonal treatment of informing potential adopters of the number of prior
adoptions. This secondary intervention was orthogonal to this study and has no effect on the results reported here.

                                                              15
that the invitation was not transferable or to be forwarded. Nonetheless, there were 26 instances of

forwarding of emails; we were able to detect such forwarding and we removed these instances from our

analyses. Opening rates for females and males were statistically identical, with 46.5 percent of females and

45.9 percent of males opening.

        Individuals were randomly assigned to Competition or Collaboration treatments, designed to

influence subjects' expectations regarding the nature of interactions with other participants while engaging

in product development activities in the program. Both treatments consisted of mostly identical introductory

emails and the ability to click through to a platform with further information and the ability to sign-up to

participate (see Appendix). The all facets of the treatments were identical excepts for several narrowly

specified differences. Within the introductory emails, Competition and Collaboration treatments were

distinguished only by a subset of words (which were also bolded for emphasis in the reader's mind). Here

is an excerpt from the email in the Competition treatment:

        "This is a two-sided competitive platform to ideate and innovate "smart" Internet of Things
        (IoT) products and services--using hardware, software, networking, data and algorithms.
        On one side of the platform, companies seek solutions to their IoT innovation challenges.
        On the other side, you will compete with other participants to solve IoT innovation
        problems of companies for cash and other benefits."


        In the case of the Collaboration treatment, the bolded words were replaced with "collaborative

platform," and "you will work within a team to solve IoT innovation." Therefore, the content and length of

letters were virtually identical, with differences bolded for emphasis. We were able to alternatively

emphasize either competitive or collaborative descriptions, as they were both true: the program they would

soon enter into involved competition among teams.

        Clicking through from the email ("Click HERE to learn more and to sign up to the platform") sent

the individual to an online sign-up platform page. The sign-up platforms for the Competition and

Cooperative treatments were mostly identical in content, length, and structure. The platforms provided a

brief high-level description of the technical nature of the Internet of Things, described the opportunity to

create new products and applications, and offered a means of signing up (using LinkedIn credentials). the


                                                        16
landing pages of the platforms also repeated (and continued to bold) the same key bolded messages from

the emails, for reinforcement of the differences across treatments. The landing page of the platforms for

each treatment also used similar color schemes and design motifs, however, that in the Competition

treatment further emphasized competition by showing stylized figures of people running in a race (see

Appendix).11 The platform provides more basic background on the Internet of Things and also steps to

signing-up.

Randomization Procedure

        Randomization was carried out in a way as to block randomize individuals by field, with equal

numbers of men and women being randomly assigned by treatment. These groups were then distributed

randomly across the 67-day outreach campaign in a way that the distribution of fields and of gender across

any one day was held to the population average.

Signing-up of Participate

        We emphasize again that this priming of subjects took place before the initial launch and operation

of the platform; the messaging and information provided here were meant to deliberately influence

expectations of what they will encounter. The emphasis was to ensure they understood the essential

technical definition of the Internet of Things (as being made up of a wide range of information

technologies), of the sort of product development opportunities that could exist, that this program and

platform would be designed to admit people from all fields, and was being made available only to alumni

and students in the university community, and would be in the interest of exposing community members to

new technologies. Further, the intent in the Competitive and Collaboration treatments was to influence

expectations by quite literally using the words "competition" and "collaboration," rather than imposing any




         11
            We repeated key messages of the introductory emails on the landing pages with the interest of reinforcing
expectations and the strength of the experimental priming. Consistent with this intent, the analysis provides similar
results whether analyzing the choice to join participate conditional on going to the landing page or analyzing the
decision to go to the sign-up platform after seeing the note. The former, reported here, provides more statistically
significant results, again consistent with the stronger effect.

                                                             17
particular interpretation or definition on those words. It was also emphasized that this would require a

commitment of 3-weeks during off-hours. Mention was made too of "prizes and benefits," in general.

        Based on that level of priming, subject on the platform could elect to participate. This was done by

clicking on a red "join and participate" button prominently displayed on the site. Users were prompted to

sign-in with their LinkedIn password. This sign-in and authentication takes place through an API with the

LinkedIn site, and users were prompted that their LinkedIn picture, name, link and brief blurb would be

used to create their platform profiles.

Experimental Protocol Relative to the Prior Literature

        The framework here is similar to, but slightly differs from some of the experimental protocols

described in Section 2, in which subjects select into a task (the lab experiment) and then choose a

competitive or alternative regime within the experiment. Here, instead, we focus on the decision to

participate, conditional on individuals being randomly assigned to the Competition or Collaboration

organizational environment--without having to explicitly self-select into the experiment. Our study

population is therefore able to be a wide risk set of potential participants. In this sense, the approach is

closer to that of Flory et al. (2015), which focuses on a participation decision of a kind, or at least a decision

to apply (where they focus on a pre-existing population of job seekers of administrative assistant

employment).      Also     worth     noting,     we     refer    to    "competitive"     and     "collaborative"

work environments, allowing subjects to conceived of whatever images they have of these things, rather

than focusing only on the schedule by which payoffs are bestowed. This may allow us to better bridge the

multiple literatures we draw on here.

4.2    Study Population & Randomization Checks

        In this initial launch of the platform, our sample covers 97,696 people: 7,584 currently enrolled

students and 90,112 alumni. (The total number of individuals invited to join in the initial campaign was

110,492; however, it is only for these 97,696 for which we have data on individual characteristics.) We do

not have data on their location, but the distribution of the university's alumni is known by university



                                                            18
officials to be concentrated in the United States, with largest clusters in Massachusetts, California, and New

York. This population or "risk set" of potential participants covers all fields and individuals from earliest

years of university through to retirement. Table 1 describes main variables that will be used in the analysis.

Table 2 summarizes the distribution of individuals and gender breakdowns by field and by cohort.

                                                             <Table 1>

                                                             <Table 2>



        Further, while randomization should ex-ante lead to equal groups in treatment and control, Table

3 tests and confirms that balance of groups was achieved ex post.

                                                             <Table 3>


5     Results

        This section presents the results of the experiment. In the first subsection, we report the baseline

mean gender differences and treatment effects. In the next two subsections, we report the mean gender

differences across fields and within fields. In the last subsection, we attempt to rule out alternative

explanations.

5.1    Baseline Mean Gender Differences and Treatment Effects

        Table 4 presents estimates of population-average differences between men and women in rates of

participation and how these rates change under the Competition treatment. The main purpose of this section

is to replicate usual practice of presenting average gender differences, revealing results consistent with past

literature on gender differences in attitudes to competition (Section 2.1). A linear probability model is

estimated by OLS with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors reported.12

        Model (1) summarizes overall gender differences in participation across the experimental

population, regressing the decision to participate or not on a female indicator variable and a constant.




        12
             A linear model will ease interpretation of a number of interaction terms that are central to the investigation.

                                                                 19
Coefficients are expressed as percentage points (i.e., 100 = 100 percent). The constant term, or probability

of males participating, is 3.19% (s.e. = 0.08%), with the coefficient on females being negative 0.67% (s.e.=

0.11%). These estimates imply that females are 21% less likely to participate than men, overall. (The low

adjusted-R^2 statistic is consistent with a high variance in cases of a binary outcome variable with a low

mean incidence of 1's.) These differences in willingness-to-participate between men and women exist over

different ages, those with different grade point averages, and over students and graduates, as shown in

Figure 1.

                                                      <Figure 1>

        Model (2) estimates the effect of being in the competitive treatment versus the collaborative

treatment, introducing the treatment dummy into the model. Those assigned to the competitive treatment

are, on average, 0.71 percentage point less likely to participate.

        To measure any differences in men and women's responses to competition, model (3) introduces

an interaction term between the treatment effect and gender. This interaction term is found to be statistically

zero. Note, however, a zero-interaction term still implies a greater proportional response of women to the

Competition treatment. A similar absolute diminution in participation relative to a lower baseline

participation level implies a greater proportional effect of competition among women. Women reduce their

participation by 25% under competition; whereas men reduce their participation by 20% under competition.

        The results are unaffected by controlling for the particular day in which the individual received the

invitation to join over the 67-day campaign (model 4), controlling for students versus alumni (model 5), or

controlling for individual fixed effects for year of graduation (model 6). The more negative effect for

women is consistent with past findings on gender differences in attitudes to competition (Section 2.1). The

absolute preference of both men and women for working with others in teams is consistent with prior work

by Dargnies (2012).

                                                      <Table 4>

        As part of this baseline analysis, we also wish to assess whether the patterns we are measuring

relate particularly to this IoT product development activity, or whether they simply might reflect a

                                                          20
willingness to participate in extracurricular activities, more generally. To do so, model (8) replaces the

dependent variable with a count of the number of clubs and extracurricular activities listed on LinkedIn for

students. (Model (7) simply begins by showing that re-estimating the earlier model on just the data for

which we have extracurricular activity data does not affect results.) We are able to match data for 8,460

students in our data. As reported in model (8), we see starkly different patterns. Whereas women are, on

average, less willing to participate in this IoT product development in comparison to men, the coefficient

on Female for club participation is positive, indicating the very opposite. (Of course, coefficients on the

treatment is statistically zero for this model.)

5.2    Differences Across Fields

        As we study willingness to participate in (i.e., sort into) this tech product development activity,

inevitably we are studying a population that has already sorted into technical and non-technical fields. Table

5 reports the implications of controlling for these cross-field differences. This section principally shows the

earlier results are annihilated by simply controlling for field fixed effects.

        Models (1) and (3) re-report the population-average results, as comparison. Models (2) and (4) re-

estimate those models with field fixed effects. The coefficients on the field fixed effects (ordered by

magnitude) indicate that those in STEM fields of Computer Science, Engineering, and Science participate

more than those in other fields, as would be expected given the nature of the activity. However, accounting

for field differences does not entirely account for the gender difference. The coefficient on Female in

models (2) and (4) is not zero and, in fact, becomes positive.

        Therefore, on the one hand, the results clearly indicate controlling for fields (accounting for

differences in how men and women tend to sort to different fields) has a first-order effect in accounting for

population-average gender differences in the experiment. On the other hand, the flipping of sign is

consistent with important within-field differences that deserve closer examination.

                                                       <Table 5>




                                                           21
5.3    Main Results: Differences Within Fields

        This section more closely examines within-field differences between STEM and non-STEM fields.

The main finding here is that when more closely comparing comparable men and women in the same field,

we find the usual finding of women being more averse to competition than men, but only in non-STEM

fields. In STEM fields, there are not statistical differences between men and women's responses to

competition. Results of this section are reported in Table 5.

        Model (1) first re-reports the earlier overall gender differences and responses to treatment,

controlling for fields. Models (2), (3), and (4) introduce an indicator for Engineering, Computer Science,

or Sciences--those fields with highest participation-- which we refer to as the STEM indicator.13 Model

(2) through (4) progressively introduce interactions between STEM, Female, and Competition. (STEM,

itself, is redundant to the field fixed effects.) Models (2), (3), and (4) reveal a large significant coefficient

on STEM Field × Female, roughly one percentage point. This indicates that the difference in participation

between males and females in STEM is much larger than the difference in participation between males and

females in non-STEM fields.14

                                                        <Table 5>

        While the point estimate of the coefficient on Competition remains negative across models (2), (3),

and (4), the most flexible specification in model (4) leads the coefficient on the interaction Female ×

Competition to become more negative and statistically significant (at p=5%). This gender differences in

the treatment effect is only significant in the case of women in non-STEM fields.

        Given the great many interactions to interpret in model (4), we more explicitly report results

stratified by non-STEM and STEM fields in models (5) and (6). This most explicit reporting shows the

coefficient on Female × Competition is -0.47 percentage points and significant at p=5%, in the case of non-



         13
            We did not include Health Sciences and Nursing in this STEM indicator on the basis of the clear overall
participation differences with Computer Science, Engineering and Sciences.
         14
            The interaction between STEM Field × Competition is also significant and negative. However, we interpret
this as effectively just a scaling of the generally negative competition effect in the case of STEM, as overall
participation and overall effects are each larger in STEM.

                                                             22
STEM subjects in model (5). This is a large difference between men and women's response to competition,

considering that overall participation rate by non-STEM women is 1.98 percent. By comparison, in STEM

fields, the interaction term between Female × Competition is not statistically different from zero. The

response of males to competition in non-STEM fields is statistically not statistically distinguishable from

zero, despite the extraordinarily large sample size here. (If we were to regard the small point estimate of

the coefficient on Competition to be meaningful, even then women's negative response to competition is a

full 5.3 times greater, i.e., 5.3 = (-047-0.11) / (-0.11).)

         Results in the STEM subsample are quite different, as in model 6), with men and women responding

similarly to competition, as per the highly negative coefficient on Competition of -0.87 percentage points,

significant at p=1%. In great contrast to the results in the non-STEM model (5), where the coefficient on

Female × Competition was many times larger than the coefficient on Competition, in the STEM model (6)

the coefficient on Female × Competition is statistically indistinguishable from zero,15 meaning the response

of men and women is statistically undetectable even when comparing tens of thousands of observations. At

the bottom of Table 5, we summarize by expressing the significant coefficient results in relation to average

participation by men and women in STEM and non-STEM fields.

5.4      Robustness

         The previous section presented the main findings of fact--that there are significant gender

difference in responses to the Competition treatment in non-STEM fields, but not in STEM fields. Here we

exploit the available data to examine robustness. Model (1) of 7 begins by re-reporting the earlier patterns

found.




         15
          In finding a null empirical result, it should always be a question of whether the estimate is simply under-
powered. If the point estimate were indeed truly meaningful, this would imply that differences between men and
women's responses to competition are sufficiently subtle that even tens of thousands of observations of STEM men
and women are insufficient for detecting any meaningful difference in responses.

                                                              23
Individual Controls

         Model (2) considers the possibility the age and cohort distribution of men and women could

somehow vary across fields in ways that account for differences in responses to competition, adding a linear

cohort trend to the model. This has no effect on main results. (Results are similarly unaffected by controlling

for either a quadratic time trend or distinct trends for either sex.)

         Another determinant of participation is likely to be an Individuals' opportunity costs, where the

relevant question is whether opportunity costs could somehow influence responses to competition. To test

for such a possibility, include one particular measure of variation in opportunity costs, being on prime child-

rearing years from late twenties to mid-thirties (controlling for a more general age trend). Model (3)

includes an indicator switched on for ages 29 through 35 (or rather an approximation of ages based on

graduation year)16 along with an interaction with gender. We find child-rearing years are associated with

significantly lower participation, but main results remain unchanged. (Again, controlling for linear,

quadratic, or gender interactions in cohort trends does not alter results.)

                                                           <Table 7>

         We next attempt to find evidence that variation in measures of the achievement of subjects could

somehow explain our results. For example, women score slightly higher grades, on average, in STEM

fields. We use undergraduate cumulative GPA as a proxy for such differences. We have these data for

13,926 individuals from cohorts graduating in 2009 or later. Model (4) begins by re-estimating the main

model on this subsample, revealing similar patterns of signs on main coefficients. It is not surprising that

coefficients are larger, given younger subjects are more likely to participate. Model (5) re-estimates the

model while including GPA, along with this term interacted with gender. Main coefficient estimates are

again unaffected. The estimates reveal that high-GPA women were less likely to participate.




         16
           The average college-educated American women has her first child at the age of 30.3 (Bui & Miller, 2018).
We did not find a definitive source of the distribution over time, but results are insensitive to shifting this age range
by 3 years on upper or lower bounds. Note, in this cross-section, the age is also the graduation cohort--and therefore
open to multiple interpretations.

                                                               24
Field Controls

        In the earlier review and discussion of Section 2.3, prior descriptive studies point to the possibility

of gender and social factors playing some role in attitudes to competition and collaboration. To attempt to

detect evidence that such factors might somehow explain our main findings of fact, consider that % Female

Field may somehow explain our results. Given this variable is correlated with STEM fields, we first

estimate relationships with this variable in model (6).

        The results presented in model (6) are striking. We find a strong relationship between participation

and % Female Field × Female. Figure 2 graphically presents this relationship in a simple descriptive plot

between genderedness of fields and differences in participation between women and men. Female

participation is significantly greater among women in male-dominated fields. Plotting this relationship for

subfield (majors) in Figure 3 reveals a similar pattern.

                                                     <Figure 2>

                                                     <Figure 3>



        Allowing for the highly significant relationship in the full model, in model (7), shows that main

results are entirely robust to accounting for this strong relationship with % Female Field. It is also the case

that the relationship between overall levels of female participation and gender composition is unaffected.

To make this point even more clearly, Table 8 re-states these same results in the form of stratified

regressions on STEM and non-STEM subsamples. The main coefficient results appear to be remarkably

similar to those of models (5) and (6) of Table 5, while at the same time there appears to be a strong negative

relationship between % Female Field × Female in both STEM and non-STEM fields.

                                                      <Table 8>




                                                           25
6     Discussion

6.1    Interpretation of Main Results: Responses to Competition

           The preceding results diverge from most past studies gender differences on attitudes to competition,

which document differences in average responses of male and female subjects in response to competition.

(We were, ourselves, able to replicate findings by comparing mean differences in pooled comparisons.)

Behavioral Similarities of Men and Women in Technical Fields

           The earlier literature review (Section 2.3) suggested two possible explanations for why gender

differences in responses to competition could be attenuated in technical fields. One explanation suggests

that men's and women's confidence and self-efficacy--both antecedents to attitudes to competition--might

be more similar in technical fields than in other areas (e.g., Beyer & Haller, 2006; Nekby et al., 2008). This

is consistent with the responses to competition here being statistically identical. Consistent with divergences

from this pattern outside of technical fields, the particular form of differences between men and women

outside of STEM fields is consistent with men in non-STEM fields behaving with over-confidence. Despite

having a clear disadvantage in tech-related competition (not being STEM-trained), non-STEM males were

statistically equally likely to participate under Competition and Collaboration treatments (cf. Niederle &

Vesterlund, 2007).

           Perhaps better reflecting an expectation of greater prospects of success when collaborating, women

in non-STEM fields, and both men and women in STEM fields were more likely to participate under the

Collaboration treatment. This especially stands to reason in the case of the Internet of Things, given that

the scope of technologies and skills required will tend to mean that no single person will tend to be expert

in each.

           Also standing to reason, the negative effect of competition on females in non-STEM fields (-27%)

was more pronounced than the negative effect on males and females in STEM (-21% and -19%). We should

expect that a rational individual from a non-STEM field would be more conservative in entering a tech-

related product development project without collaboration from others. The preference for the Collaborative



                                                           26
treatment over the Competitive treatment among those in STEM fields is itself consistent with these

individuals having enough awareness of the Internet of Things to understand it is an area in which many

sorts of skills need to be combined and the benefits of working with others (cf. Dargnies, 2012). Men and

women with common technical training might also be expected to have a similar belief about how well

their skills might apply to a new tech opportunity, as the Internet of Things.

Ambivalence to Competition and Collaboration in Tech Fields

        A second explanation suggested from prior literature (Section 2.3), is that women could experience

complex and possibly ambivalent attitudes towards competition (and collaboration) in highly-gendered

environments where they encounter stereotypes (e.g., Cech et al., 2011; Cheryan et al., 2017; Choi, 2013;

Foor et al., 2013; McIlwee & Robinson, 1992; Moss-Racusin et al., 2018; Silbey, 2015, 2016b). We did

find a strong association between female participation in a field and whether the field was either male-

dominated or female-dominated. However, we found no evidence that this association could explain or

explain away the patterns related to the effect of the Competition treatment.17

6.2    A Secondary Finding: Female Participation in Male-Dominated Fields

        Although secondary to our main research questions, the finding of a strong association between

female:male participation in a field and whether a field is male- or female-dominated (Figures 2 and 3) in

this tech-related product development activity is itself noteworthy. Females in male-dominated fields were

more likely to participate than their male counterparts. The opposite is true in female-dominated fields.

Remarkably, this result holds for both STEM and non-STEM fields, as in models (1) and (2) of Table 8.

Female participation (conditional on field) is even better predicted by gender composition (% Female Field

× Female) than it is by whether the field is technical or not (STEM Field × Female). The association

between female participation and gender composition of field also appears to be unrelated to the

Competition treatment effects, given including this factor as a control has no effect on main results, i.e.,




        17
           It remains plausible that in more male dominated fields, there is increased and equal ambivalent response
to both competition and to collaboration.

                                                             27
models (6) and (7) of Table 7. A possible role played by gender socialization and peer effects--e.g., gender

stereotypes, expectations, roles, and norms--has, itself, also been a suggested or conjectured in prior

literature (e.g., Niederle & Vesterlund, 2007; Rocha & Van Praag, 2020). This predictiveness of gender

composition is also analogous to Zölitz and Feld's (2018) finding that the gender composition of peers

shapes men and women's choice to enter into STEM fields in the first place At the same time, it remains

possible that gender composition could simply reflect some underlying field characteristic.

        More generally, this striking relationship with gender composition, even controlling for the nature

of fields, is consistent with the technical nature of STEM fields being an unsatisfactory explanation, on its

own, of variation in participation in STEM fields. For example, female participation is lowest in Computer

Science and Engineering (most relevant to tech) and Physical Sciences; but it relatively high in other STEM

fields, including Chemistry, Biology and Math degrees (National Science Foundation, 2014). Even within

given STEM fields, there are large differences across countries, with a larger gender gap in the US and

Western Europe than is found in certain countries of Eastern Europe and Asia (Mellström, 2009; Stoet et

al., 2016). Even within particular STEM fields in particular countries, we see considerable variation in

gender gaps over time, as is famously the case in Computer Science where women once dominated (Abbate,

2003, 2012).

6.3    Implications of Experimental Design

        The results also reveal the importance of refinements in experimental research design. The research

design closely built on advances of past research designs (Flory et al., 2015; Niederle & Vesterlund, 2007),

while redefining details of the experimental protocol and study population that allowed us to engage in

experimentation at scale (Muralidharan & Niehaus, 2017). More importantly, here we are able to study

within-sample variation across heterogeneous subjects in different fields. This is especially relevant as

sorting in our experiment into a tech-related field is preceded by subjects having themselves sorted into

technical and non-technical related fields.

        In Section 5.1, we began by effectively replicating past results within pooled data, showing that

mean proportional responses of men and women to competition differed, as in the past literature. This is

                                                         28
especially important as it suggests we would have simply found similar results as past research had we

either run an identical experiment as a small lab study and not been able to meaningfully probe

heterogeneity (even if in a perfectly representative sample). Equally, had we focused on a single narrow

sector of the labor market in the field, and particularly in non-STEM labor markets, we should not have

found the results reported here. It is by including both subjects in STEM fields and those in non-STEM

fields, we most explicitly reveal the contrast represented here.


7    Conclusions

        Prior research has reported systematic differences in men and women's responses to competition

in lab and several field contexts. This paper sought to understand whether these past results could be

extrapolated to understand the propensity of men and women to sort into notoriously competitive

organizational environments of tech firms. The field experiment reported here built on the prior research

while featuring a tech-related product development activity. We also refined details of experimental

protocols and subject sampling to allow to test for differences among those in both technically-related

STEM fields and non-STEM fields.

        We find that women in non-STEM fields respond significantly more negatively than their male

counterparts to the Competition treatment (amounting to -27% change in rates for females and no

statististically signficiant change in the participation of males). By contrast, in STEM fields, women and

men's responses to the Competition treatment are statistically identical (amounting to a -19% change in

rates for women and -21% change in rates for men). These basic patterns were robust to controls for age

and cohort, GPA and a measure of opportunity costs, and variation in gender composition across fields.

        Of the interpretations suggested by the literature for main results, as we discussed in the previous

section, the theory that most straightforwardly explains the patterns is that men and women in STEM are

more similar in levels of self-confidence and self-efficacy--both antecedents to responses to competition--

than are men and women in the wider population in non-STEM fields (e.g., Beyer & Haller, 2006; Nekby




                                                         29
et al., 2008). Within this interpretation, the responses to competition are consistent among men in non-

STEM fields are consistent with exhibiting overconfidence (cf. Niederle & Vesterlund, 2007).

        The organizational implications of these findings must be approached with some caution. The most

direct reading of the results does not offer any immediate suggestion that the large one-in-five gender gap

in tech (see Introduction) is be explained by gender differences in attitudes to competition. The magnitudes

of effects here are much smaller than the one-in-five and center on those in non-STEM fields, altogether.

        On the other hand, if we consider that the study population has sorted itself into technical and non-

technical fields prior to the experiment, it might not be surprising to find that those who had sorted to STEM

fields respond similarly, whereas women in non-STEM fields are more averse to competition. This could

be the case if STEM fields are more competitive and competitiveness is a basis for sorting. This could also

be the case through socialization within field. This explanation is perhaps closest to prior interpretations of

women being tending to be more averse to competition than are men (Croson & Gneezy, 2009), while

allowing for some degree of heterogeneity in the population. In this interpretation, gender sorting and

competition plays out within long-run patterns of gender sorting and separation (Glass et al., 2013; Kahn

& Ginther, 2017). Effective interventions, in this case, would be those that somehow address lifelong

sorting and separation processes, where prominence of competition could be salient. Isolated policy

interventions or organizational re-designs by tech firms--who encounter workers well into the lifelong

process of sorting and separation--could have little systematic effect on the gender gap in tech. From a

firm strategic perspective, however, there might be scope for at least competing for a subset of workers on

the basis of differentiated organizational approaches--given the results here suggest there could be

considerable heterogeneity in workers' willingness to work under competition or cooperation (cf. Boudreau

& Lakhani, 2011).

        At the same time, we wish to emphasize that the greater aversion to competition among non-STEM

women (relative to STEM men and women) could simply be viewed as perfectly sensible--given that

competing outside of one's field should typically be expected to bring worse outcomes. This interpretation



                                                          30
shines a brighter light on the question of why men in non-STEM fields are indifferent to competition, and

seemingly over-confident.

Limitations & Future Research

        The greatest strength of this study was in documenting cross-field and within-gender heterogeneity

in responses to competition. However, beyond the findings of fact, our theoretical interpretations, much

like those in prior research, rise only to a level of claiming consistency with certain explanations. Clearly

studies that might add still more observable individual characteristics might have provided incrementally

greater insights. However, we speculate that it may require far more discerning experimental studies

focused on micro-behavioral mechanisms with novel measurement strategies or additional rich descriptive

case studies and ethnographic investigations to better ascertain what is truly going on in the minds of

subjects.

        Another question we are left with here is whether the results we observe are inherently related to

the link between the tech-related task and its greater relevance to technically-trained subjects--or is it

simply relevant that the task requires relevant knowledge that the technically-trained subjects possess. For

example, would we find similar results had we considered, say, dentists and non-dentists working on

dentistry problems--or nurses and non-nurses working on a nursing problem? More precise understanding

of mechanisms may require confronting these issues.

        Another more fundamental limitation of empirical research on gender, as here, is the use and

interpretation of an indicator variable to measure differences between men and women. Any use of a gender

indicator variable--whether in an RCT or otherwise--cannot possibly unambiguously measure a "gender

effect," or any sort of all-else-being-equal comparison between men and women (Holland, 1986). Gender

will be closely intertwined with an array of other personal characteristics shaping outcomes. Simply adding

"control" variables cannot wholly truly control for possible spurious effects (Oster, 2019). And therefore,

the results here, as in other empirical research on gender, must be read with great caution and with the

suspicion that reported coefficients reflect factors other than just the sex of subjects.



                                                           31
References

Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1992). Demography and design: Predictors of new product team
         performance. Organization Science, 3(3), 321­341.
Andersen, S., Ertac, S., Gneezy, U., List, J. A., & Maximiano, S. (2013). Gender, competitiveness, and
         socialization at a young age: Evidence from a matrilineal and a patriarchal society. Review of
         Economics and Statistics, 95(4), 1438­1443.
Apicella, C. L., Demiral, E. E., & Mollerstrom, J. (2017). No gender difference in willingness to compete
         when competing against self. American Economic Review, 107(5), 136­40.
Bear, J. B., & Woolley, A. W. (2011). The role of gender in team collaboration and performance.
         Interdisciplinary Science Reviews, 36(2), 146­153.
Bertrand, M., & Hallock, K. F. (2001). The gender gap in top corporate jobs. ILR Review, 55(1), 3­21.
Beyer, S., & Haller, S. (2006). Gender differences and intragender differences in computer science students:
         Are female CS majors more similar to male CS majors or female nonmajors? Journal of Women
         and Minorities in Science and Engineering, 12(4).
Blevins, D. P., Sauerwald, S., Hoobler, J. M., & Robertson, C. J. (2019). Gender Differences in Pay Levels:
         An Examination of the Compensation of University Presidents. Organization Science, 30(3), 600­
         616.
Boaler, J. (2016). Mathematical mindsets: Unleashing students' potential through creative math, inspiring
         messages and innovative teaching. John Wiley & Sons.
Booth, A., Fan, E., Meng, X., & Zhang, D. (2019). Gender differences in willingness to compete: The role
         of culture and institutions. The Economic Journal, 129(618), 734­764.
Boudreau, K. J., & Lakhani, K. R. (2011). The confederacy of heterogeneous software organizations and
         heterogeneous developers: Field experimental evidence on sorting and worker effort. In The rate
         and direction of inventive activity revisited (pp. 483­502). University of Chicago Press.
Brynjolfsson, E., & Mcafee, A. (2014). The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a
         Time of Brilliant Technologies. W. W. Norton & Company.
Bui, Q., & Miller, C. (2018). The Age That Women Have Babies: How a Gap Divides America. The New
         York Times.
Buser, T. (2009). The impact of female sex hormones on competitiveness. Tinbergen Institute Discussion
         Paper.
Buser, T., Peter, N., & Wolter, S. C. (2017). Gender, competitiveness, and study choices in high school:
         Evidence from Switzerland. American Economic Review, 107(5), 125­30.
Castilla, E. J. (2015). Accounting for the gap: A firm study manipulating organizational accountability and
         transparency in pay decisions. Organization Science, 26(2), 311­333.
Cech, E., Rubineau, B., Silbey, S., & Seron, C. (2011). Professional role confidence and gendered
         persistence in engineering. American Sociological Review, 76(5), 641­666.
Ceci, S. J., Ginther, D. K., Kahn, S., & Williams, W. M. (2014). Women in academic science: A changing
         landscape. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 15(3), 75­141.
Chang, E. (2018). Brotopia: Breaking Up the Boys' Club of Silicon Valley. Portfolio.
Cheryan, S., Ziegler, S. A., Montoya, A. K., & Jiang, L. (2017). Why are some STEM fields more gender
         balanced than others? Psychological Bulletin, 143(1), 1.
Choi, K. S. (2013). Evaluating gender significance within a pair programming context. 2013 46th Hawaii
         International Conference on System Sciences, 4817­4825.


                                                        32
Comeig, I., Grau-Grau, A., Jaramillo-Gutiérrez, A., & Ramírez, F. (2016). Gender, self-confidence, sports,
          and preferences for competition. Journal of Business Research, 69(4), 1418­1422.
Correll, S. J. (2001). Gender and the career choice process: The role of biased self-assessments. American
          Journal of Sociology, 106(6), 1691­1730.
Croson, R., & Gneezy, U. (2009). Gender differences in preferences. Journal of Economic Literature, 47(2),
          448­74.
Dargnies, M.-P. (2012). Men too sometimes shy away from competition: The case of team competition.
          Management Science, 58(11), 1982­2000.
Dreber, A., Von Essen, E., & Ranehill, E. (2011). Outrunning the gender gap--Boys and girls compete
          equally. Experimental Economics, 14(4), 567­582.
Ellis, J., Fosdick, B. K., & Rasmussen, C. (2016). Women 1.5 times more likely to leave STEM pipeline
          after calculus compared to men: Lack of mathematical confidence a potential culprit. PloS One,
          11(7), e0157447.
Evetts, J. (1996). Gender and career in science and engineering (Vol. 2). CRC Press.
Fernandez, R. M., & Campero, S. (2017). Gender sorting and the glass ceiling in high-tech firms. ILR
          Review, 70(1), 73­104.
Fernandez-Mateo, I., & Kaplan, S. (2018). Gender and organization science: Introduction to a virtual
          special issue. Organization Science, 29(6), 1229­1236.
Flory, J. A., Gneezy, U., Leonard, K. L., & List, J. A. (2018). Gender, age, and competition: A disappearing
          gap?      Journal      of    Economic      Behavior      &     Organization,     150,    256­276.
          https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2018.03.027
Flory, J. A., Leibbrandt, A., & List, J. A. (2015). Do competitive workplaces deter female workers? A large-
          scale natural field experiment on job entry decisions. The Review of Economic Studies, 82(1), 122­
          155.
Foor, C. E., Walden, S. E., Shehab, R. L., & Trytten, D. A. (2013). "We weren't intentionally excluding
          them... just old habits": Women,(lack of) interest and an engineering student competition team.
          2013 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), 349­355.
Friesel, A., & Timcenko, O. (2011). Competition-motivated teamwork and narratives to motivate girls for
          engineering. 22nd EAEEIE Annual Conference.
Glass, J. L., Sassler, S., Levitte, Y., & Michelmore, K. M. (2013). What's so special about STEM? A
          comparison of women's retention in STEM and professional occupations. Social Forces, 92(2),
          723­756.
Gneezy, U., Niederle, M., & Rustichini, A. (2003). Performance in competitive Environments: Gender
          differences. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1049­1074.
Günther, C., Ekinci, N. A., Schwieren, C., & Strobel, M. (2010). Women can't jump?--An experiment on
          competitive attitudes and stereotype threat. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 75(3),
          395­401.
Guzman, J., & Kacperczyk, A. O. (2019). Gender gap in entrepreneurship. Research Policy, 48(7), 1666­
          1680.
Harris, J., & Alter, A. (2016). Corporate Culture: California Dreaming. Accenture Briefing.
Herring, C. (2009). Does diversity pay?: Race, gender, and the business case for diversity. American
          Sociological Review, 74(2), 208­224.
Holland, P. W. (1986). Statistics and causal inference. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
          81(396), 945­960.


                                                        33
Iriberri, N., & Rey-Biel, P. (2019). Competitive pressure widens the gender gap in performance: Evidence
          from a two-stage competition in mathematics. The Economic Journal, 129(620), 1863­1893.
Isaac, M. (2017, February 22). Inside Uber's Aggressive, Unrestrained Workplace Culture. New York
          Times.
Jang, S. (2017). Cultural brokerage and creative performance in multicultural teams. Organization Science,
          28(6), 993­1009.
Jurajda, S., & Münich, D. (2011). Gender gap in performance under competitive pressure: Admissions to
          Czech universities. American Economic Review, 101(3), 514­18.
Kahn, S., & Ginther, D. (2017). Women and STEM. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kneeland, M. K., Schilling, M. A., & Aharonson, B. S. (2020). Exploring Uncharted Territory: Knowledge
          Search Processes in the Origination of Outlier Innovation. Organization Science.
Knight, J. (2002). Sexual stereotypes. Nature Publishing Group.
Kuhn, P., & Villeval, M. C. (2015). Are women more attracted to co-operation than men? The Economic
          Journal, 125(582), 115­140.
Kuyath, S. J., & Yoder, L. (2004). Diversity in Engineering Technology: Competitions. Age, 9, 1.
Lambrecht, A., & Tucker, C. E. (2018). Algorithmic bias? An empirical study into apparent gender-based
          discrimination in the display of STEM career ads. An Empirical Study into Apparent Gender-Based
          Discrimination in the Display of STEM Career Ads (March 9, 2018).
Lippa, R. (1998). Gender-related individual differences and the structure of vocational interests: The
          importance of the people­things dimension. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(4),
          996.
Marra, R. M., & Bogue, B. (2006). Women engineering students' self efficacy­a longitudinal multi-
          institution study. Women in Engineering ProActive Network.
McAfee, A., & Brynjolfsson, E. (2018). Machine, Platform, Crowd: Harnessing Our Digital Future (1
          edition). W. W. Norton & Company.
McIlwee, J. S., & Robinson, J. G. (1992). Women in engineering: Gender, power, and workplace culture.
          SUNY Press.
Morin, L.-P. (2015). Do men and women respond differently to competition? Evidence from a major
          education reform. Journal of Labor Economics, 33(2), 443­491.
Moss-Racusin, C. A., Sanzari, C., Caluori, N., & Rabasco, H. (2018). Gender bias produces gender gaps in
          STEM engagement. Sex Roles, 79(11­12), 651­670.
Muralidharan, K., & Niehaus, P. (2017). Experimentation at scale. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
          31(4), 103­24.
Murciano-Goroff, R. (2018). Missing women in tech: The labor market for highly skilled software
          engineers. Work in Progress. Http://Stanford. Edu/ Ravivmg/Papers/JMP. Pdf.
Nekby, L., Thoursie, P. S., & Vahtrik, L. (2008). Gender and self-selection into a competitive environment:
          Are women more overconfident than men? Economics Letters, 100(3), 405­407.
Niederle, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2007). Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do Men Compete Too
          Much? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 1067­1101.
Niederle, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2011). Gender and competition. Annu. Rev. Econ., 3(1), 601­630.
Nielsen, M. W., Bloch, C. W., & Schiebinger, L. (2018). Making gender diversity work for scientific
          discovery and innovation. Nature Human Behaviour, 2(10), 726­734.
Nosek, B. A., Smyth, F. L., Sriram, N., Lindner, N. M., Devos, T., Ayala, A., Bar-Anan, Y., Bergh, R., Cai,
          H., & Gonsalkorale, K. (2009). National differences in gender­science stereotypes predict national


                                                        34
         sex differences in science and math achievement. Proceedings of the National Academy of
         Sciences, 106(26), 10593­10597.
Notter, K. B. (2010). Is competition making a comeback? Discovering methods to keep female adolescents
         engaged in STEM: A phenomenological approach.
NSCRC. (2017). Snapshot Report Science and Engineering Degree Completion by Gender, National
         Student        Clearinghouse        Research          Center.     https://nscresearchcenter.org/wp-
         content/uploads/SnapshotReport27r.pdf
Ors, E., Palomino, F., & Peyrache, E. (2013). Performance gender gap: Does competition matter? Journal
         of Labor Economics, 31(3), 443­499.
Oster, E. (2019). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence. Journal of Business
         & Economic Statistics, 37(2), 187­204.
Paserman, M. D. (2010). Gender Differences in Performance in Competitive Environments? Evidence from
         Professional Tennis Players.
Patel, M., Shangkuan, J., & Thomas, C. (2017). What's new with the Internet of Things? McKinsey &
         Company. https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/semiconductors/our-insights/whats-new-with-
         the-internet-of-things
Reuben, E., Sapienza, P., & Zingales, L. (2015). Taste for Competition and the Gender Gap Among Young
         Business Professionals. NBER Working Paper No. 21695.
Rocha, V., & Van Praag, M. (2020). Mind the gap: The role of gender in entrepreneurial career choice and
         social influence by founders. Strategic Management Journal.
Schwab, K. (2017). The fourth industrial revolution. Currency.
Scott, E. L., & Shu, P. (2017). Gender gap in high-growth ventures: Evidence from a university venture
         mentoring program. American Economic Review, 107(5), 308­11.
Sherf, E. N., Tangirala, S., & Weber, K. C. (2017). It is not my place! Psychological standing and men's
         voice and participation in gender-parity initiatives. Organization Science, 28(2), 193­210.
Shurchkov, O. (2012). Under pressure: Gender differences in output quality and quantity under competition
         and time constraints. Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(5), 1189­1213.
Silbey, S. S. (2015). The elephant in the room: Constraints and consequences of a four-year undergraduate
         engineering degree. Engineering Studies, 7(2­3), 164­167.
Silbey, S. S. (2016a). Why do so many women who study engineering leave the field. Harvard Business
         Review, 1­2.
Silbey, S. S. (2016b). Why do so many women who study engineering leave the field. Harvard Business
         Review, 1­2.
Slack Website. (2019). In good company: How to create a culture of collaboration at work.
         https://slackhq.com/culture-collaboration-work
Snyder, K. (2017). 1000 different people, the same words: What hiring language from 25,000 recent job
         descriptions tells us about corporate cultural norms. Medium. https://medium.com/textio/1000-
         different-people-the-same-words-6149b5a1f351
Sutter, M., & Glätzle-Rützler, D. (2015). Gender differences in the willingness to compete emerge early in
         life and persist. Management Science, 61(10), 2339­2354.
Tang, T. (2019). Sources of Girls' Math Self-Efficacy Beliefs.
Trajtenberg, M. (2019). Artificial Intelligence as the Next GPT. The Economics of Artificial Intelligence:
         An Agenda, 175.



                                                        35
US BLS. (2017). Trends among native- and foreign-origin workers in U.S. computer industries. United
         States Bureau of Labor Statistics. https://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2017/article/trends-among-
         native-and-foreign-origin-workers-in-us-computer-industries.htm
Wieland, A., & Sarin, R. (2012). Domain specificity of sex differences in competition. Journal of Economic
         Behavior & Organization, 83(1), 151­157.
Wynn, A. T., & Correll, S. J. (2017). Gendered perceptions of cultural and skill alignment in technology
         companies. Social Sciences, 6(2), 45.
Zhang, L. (2020). An institutional approach to gender diversity and firm performance. Organization
         Science, 31(2), 439­457.
Zölitz, U., & Feld, J. (2018). The effect of peer gender on major choice. University of Zurich, Department
         of Economics, Working Paper, 270.




                                                       36
Tables

Table 1 Descriptive Statistics of Main Variables

Variable                No. Obs.     Mean     Std. Dev. Description
Participation             97,696     2.85          16.65   Indicator for choosing to participate in
                                                           the activity (multiplied by 100)
Competition               97,696     0.50          0.50    Treatment effect indicator
Female                    97,696     0.44          0.50    Sex Indicator
STEM                      97,696     0.33          0.47    Indicator switched on if field is
                                                           Computer Science, Engineering, or
                                                           Sciences
Student                   97,696     0.08          0.27    Indicator switched on for currently-
                                                           enrolled students, as opposed to alumni
                                                           graduates
Graduation Year           97,696     1999           16     Year of graduation
GPA                       36,345     3.01          1.17    Cumulative undegraduate grade point
                                                           average (available for those graduating
                                                           2009 or later)
No. Clubs                  8,590     1.25          1.84    Count of number of clubs and
                                                           extracurricular activities listed on
                                                           Linkedin listings (available for those
                                                           graduating after 2015 and matched)




                                                      37
Table 2 Study Population by Field and Graduation Year

                       I.


Field                       N        Females : Total
Business              24,571               36%
Computer Science       3,595               26%
Design & Media         6,536               61%
Engineering           20,067               19%
Health Science &      16,677               77%
Nursing
Humanities            13,931               49%
Law                    3,683               57%
Sciences
Sciences               8,636               56%
                                           8537
Total                 97,696               45%

                       II.


Decade of
Graduation        N             Females : Total
<1960            1,253                9%
1960s            3,936               15%
1970s            9,037               30%
1980s           11,864               41%
1990s           11,495               45%
2000s           19,530               52%
>2010           40,581               49%
Total           97,696               45%




                                                       38
Table 3 Comparison of Treatment and Control Groups

                       Competition Collaboration          Standard
Variable                Treatment   Treatment             Deviation
Female                     44%           45%                50%
STEM                       33%           33%                47%
GPA                         3.0           3.0                1.2
Student                     8%            8%                27%
% Females in Field         45%           45%                20%
Age                        37.8          37.7               16.2
Business                   25%           25%                43%
Computer Science            4%            4%                19%
Engineering                20%           21%                40%
Health Studies & Nursing   17%           17%                37%
Humanities                 14%           14%                35%
Law                         4%            4%                19%
Media & Design              7%            7%                25%
Sciences
Sciences                    9%            9%
                                         8537               28%
                                                            8.84




                                                     39
Table 4 Baseline (Aggregate Population Average) OLS Linear Probability Estimates of Gender Differences & Treatment Effect

      Dep. Var.:                                  Participation [Percentage Points]                                No. Clubs
        Model:           (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)              (6)         (7)          (8)
                                                                  Day    Students v.                 Clubs Data
                       Gender      Treatment      Interaction Assignment Graduates          Cohort   Subsample       Placebo
 Female        -0.67*** -0.67*** -0.67*** -0.67*** -0.81*** -1.13***                                 -2.64***       0.38***
                 (0.11)  (0.11)   (0.16)   (0.16)    (0.16)  (0.16)                                    (0.91)        (0.06)
 Competition            -0.71*** -0.71*** -0.71*** -0.73*** -0.74***                                  -2.12**         -0.06
                         (0.11)   (0.15)   (0.15)    (0.15)  (0.15)                                    (0.93)        (0.05)
 Female × Competition              0.00     -0.01     0.02    0.01                                      0.46          -0.10
                                  (0.21)   (0.21)    (0.21)  (0.21)                                    (1.23)        (0.08)
 Student                                            6.75***
                                                     (0.33)
 Constant       3.19*** 3.54*** 3.54*** 2.76*** 3.08*** 0.74***                                      10.94***       1.12***
                 (0.08)  (0.10)   (0.11)   (0.38)    (0.11)  (0.15)                                   (0.69)         (0.04)
 Day FEs                                      Y
 Grad Year FEs                                                  Y
 Adjusted R^2    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.001    0.012    0.019                                    0.003         0.009
        Statistical female competition effect :
                     avg female participation        -25%       -25%         -32%           -31%        -26%           n/a

          Statistical male competition effect :
                       avg male participation        -20%       -20%         -24%           -21%        -19%           n/a



Note. OLS Linear probability model coefficients are reported as percentage points. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors reported in brackets. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1. No. observations = 92,678. The variable % Females in Field is not included in the model, as it is collinear with field fixed effects. The Statistical
female competition effect : avg female participation is the treatment effect, based coefficient estimates that are statistically distinguishable from zero, divided by
the mean participation level of either men or women in either STEM or non-STEM fields. This denominator, mean participation levels, is directly calculated from
the data (it cannot be directly read from the model, given the inclusion of many fixed effects).


                                                                                       40
Table 5 OLS Linear Probability Estimates of Gender Differences & Treatment Effect, Controlling for
Cross-Field Differences

      Dep. Var.:         Participation [Percentage Points]
        Model:          (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)
                    Population Controlling Population Controlling
                       Avg.      Fields       Avg.      Fields
Female              -0.67***       0.25**      -0.67*** 0.40**
                     (0.11)        (0.12)        (0.16)   (0.17)
Competition                                    -0.71*** -0.43***
                                                 (0.15)   (0.15)
Female × Competition                              0.00     -0.29
                                                 (0.21)   (0.21)
Computer Science         7.03***                         7.25***
                          (0.43)                          (0.44)
Engineering              3.96***                         4.18***
                          (0.14)                          (0.16)
Sciences                 2.98***                         3.18***
                          (0.20)                          (0.22)
Business                 2.75***                         2.96***
                          (0.11)                          (0.14)
Design & Media           2.59***                         2.80***
                          (0.22)                          (0.24)
Humanities               2.07***                         2.28***
                          (0.14)                          (0.16)
Law                      1.42***                         1.63***
                          (0.22)                          (0.23)
Health Science & Nursing 1.06***                         1.27***
                          (0.13)                          (0.16)
Constant        3.19***                         3.54***
                 (0.08)                          (0.11)
Field FEs                   Y                                Y
Female response to competition:                   -25%         -11%
Male response to competition:                     -20%         -12%
Adjusted R^2          0.000         0.030         0.001        0.030

Note. OLS Linear probability model coefficients are reported as percentage points. Heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors reported in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. No. observations = 92,678. The variable %
Females in Field is not included in the model, as it is collinear with field fixed effects. The Statistical female
competition effect : avg female participation is the treatment effect, based coefficient estimates that are statistically
distinguishable from zero, divided by the mean participation level of either men or women in either STEM or non-
STEM fields. This denominator, mean participation levels, is directly calculated from the data (it cannot be directly
read from the model, given the inclusion of many fixed effects).


                                                                41
Table 6 Cross-Field Differences of Within-Field Gender Differences & Treatment Effects

              Dep. Var.:                        Participation [Percentage Points]
                Model:          (1)            (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)                   (6)
                             Baseline                 STEM Interaction                non-STEM        STEM
Female               0.40**                    0.12          0.18           0.20         0.20       1.13***
                     (0.17)                  (0.17)        (0.18)         (0.19)       (0.19)        (0.40)
Competition         -0.43***               -0.42***         -0.13          -0.11        -0.11      -0.87***
                     (0.15)                  (0.15)        (0.17)         (0.18)       (0.18)        (0.26)
Female × Competition -0.29                    -0.29        -0.43*        -0.47**      -0.47**         -0.32
                     (0.21)                  (0.21)        (0.22)         (0.23)       (0.23)        (0.50)
STEM Field × Female                         1.00***       1.01***         0.93**
                                             (0.31)        (0.31)         (0.44)
STEM Field × Competition                                 -0.71***        -0.76**
                                                           (0.26)         (0.32)
STEM Field × Female × Competition                                           0.15
                                                                          (0.55)
Field FEs                        Y              Y            Y               Y            Y             Y
Adjusted R^2                   0.03           0.03          0.03          0.03          0.02          0.05
                                            Statistical female competition effect :
                                                                                         -24%         -19%
                                                         avg female participation
                                              Statistical male competition effect :
                                                                                          0%          -22%
                                                           avg male participation


Note. OLS Linear probability model coefficients are reported as percentage points. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors reported in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. No. observations = 92,678. The variable % Females in
Field is not included in the model, as it is collinear with field fixed effects. The Statistical female competition effect :
avg female participation is the treatment effect, based coefficient estimates that are statistically distinguishable from
zero, divided by the mean participation level of either men or women in either STEM or non-STEM fields. This
denominator, mean participation levels, is directly calculated from the data (it cannot be directly read from the model,
given the inclusion of many fixed effects).




                                                                 42
Table 7 Robustness Tests

           Dep. Var.:                           Participation [Percentage Points]
             Model:        (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)           (6)            (7)
                                                Opportunity       GPA
                        Main Result    Cohort                               GPA       Genderedness of Field
                                                  Costs        Subsample
Female                     0.20          -0.10    0.01           -0.17        0.79   1.89***       1.55***
                         (0.19)         (0.19)  (0.20)          (0.35)      (0.60)    (0.53)        (0.43)
Competition               -0.11          -0.01   -0.01           -0.40       -0.42     -0.44         -0.02
                         (0.18)         (0.18)  (0.18)          (0.34)      (0.34)    (0.37)        (0.18)
Female ×                -0.47**        -0.57** -0.58**          -0.73*       -0.71    -1.30*       -0.57**
Competition              (0.23)         (0.23)  (0.23)          (0.44)      (0.44)    (0.66)        (0.23)
STEM Field ×             0.93**           0.44    0.38           -0.89       -0.87                   -0.14
Female                   (0.44)         (0.44)  (0.44)          (0.66)      (0.66)                  (0.44)
STEM Field ×            -0.76**       -0.84*** -0.83***        -1.33**     -1.31**                -0.83***
Competition              (0.32)         (0.31)  (0.31)          (0.56)      (0.56)                  (0.31)
STEM Field ×               0.15           0.20    0.22          2.10**      2.09**                    0.18
Female ×                 (0.55)         (0.55)  (0.55)          (0.84)      (0.84)                  (0.55)
Competition
Childrearing Years                             -0.98***
                                                (0.22)
Childrearing Year × Female                       -0.43
                                                (0.27)
GPA                                                                          0.12
                                                                            (0.12)
GPA × Female                                                               -0.33**
                                                                            (0.16)
% Female Field × Female                                          -0.04***                         -0.03***
                                                                  (0.01)                           (0.01)
% Female Field × Competition                                       0.00
                                                                  (0.01)
% Female Field × Female × Competition                              0.02
                                                                  (0.01)
Graduation Year              -0.09*** -0.09*** -0.08*** -0.08*** -0.09***                         -0.09***
                               (0.00)  (0.00)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.00)                           (0.00)
Field FEs               Y         Y       Y        Y        Y        Y                                Y
Adjusted R^2               0.03         0.04      0.04           0.04       0.04      0.04           0.04
No. Obs.                 97,696        97,696    97,696        36,345      36,345    97,696         97,696




                                                          43
Table 8 Competition Treatment Effects by STEM and Gender, Conditional on Gender Composition of
Fields

                         Dep. Var.:           Participation [Percentage Points]
                           Model:                (1)                    (2)
                                           non-STEM Fields                STEM Fields
Female                                           1.19**                      1.64**
                                                 (0.47)                      (0.68)
Competition                                       -0.05                     -0.84***
                                                 (0.18)                      (0.26)
Female × Competition                            -0.54**                       -0.42
                                                 (0.23)                      (0.50)
% Female Field × Female                        -0.02***                     -0.05***
                                                 (0.01)                      (0.01)
Graduation Year                                -0.06***                     -0.13***
                                                 (0.00)                      (0.01)
Field FEs                                           Y                           Y
Adjusted R^2                                      0.03                        0.06
No. Obs.                                         65,761                      31,935
 Statistical female competition effect
                                                  -27%                         -19%
           : avg female participation
   Statistical male treatment effect :
                                                   0%                          -21%
             avg male participation

Note. OLS Linear probability model coefficients are reported as percentage points. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors reported in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. No. observations = 92,678. The variable % Females in
Field is not included in the model, as it is collinear with field fixed effects. The Statistical female competition effect :
avg female participation is the treatment effect, based coefficient estimates that are statistically distinguishable from
zero, divided by the mean participation level of either men or women in either STEM or non-STEM fields. This
denominator, mean participation levels, is directly calculated from the data (it cannot be directly read from the model,
given the inclusion of many fixed effects).




                                                                 44
     Figures


             Participation [Percent]
                     5 10 15
                                                          I.                                                                   II.
                                                                                                         Female
                                                                                               Alumni
                                                                                                           Male

                                                                                                         Female
                                                                                     Graduate Students
                                                                                                           Male
                0




                                           20        40               60   80                            Female
                                                          Age                   Undergraduate Students
                                                                                                           Male
                                                               Male
                                                               Female                                             0       5       10       15
                                                                                                                      Participation [Percent]



                                                          III.
             Participation [Percent]
                2 3 4 5 6 7




                                       2        2.5       3         3.5    4
                                                  Grade Point Average

                                                               Male
                                                               Female




Figure 1 Gender Differences in Participation by Age, Student vs. Alumni, and GPA
Note. In Panel I Age is used rather than graduation year, in the interest of more direct interpretation. Age is based on
graduation year and approximated according to the approximation that graduation occurs at the age of 22 or
thereabouts. Panel III summarizes differences in participation across males and females in relation to GPA with
quadratic fitted curve.




                                                                                45
Figure 2 Females in Traditionally Male-Dominated Fields are More Willing to Participate than their Male Counterparts
Figure 3 Females in Traditionally Male-Dominated Majors are More Willing to Participate than their Male Counterparts (relative numbers shown
with bubble size)

                                                                        47
    Appendix




       Fig. A1 Description of IoT Project Work: Design of Use Case, Technology Architecture, and

Business Case for Prototype
Fig. A2 Sample Section of Technology Architecture Design Steps
Fig. A3 Sample Technology Design Drag-and-Drop Design Tool
Dear <name>,
I'm reaching out to invite you to the university's new IoT Open Innovation platform, linking our students,
alumni, staff, faculty and affiliated companies.
This is a two-sided collaborative platform to ideate and innovate "smart" Internet of Things (IoT)
products and services--using hardware, software, networking, data and algorithms.
On one side of the platform, companies seek solutions to their IoT innovation challenges. On the other
side, you will work within a team to solve IoT innovation problems of companies for cash and other
benefits.


Click HERE to learn more and to sign up to the platform.

        (This invitation is not transferable or to be forwarded.)



        Fig. A4 Collaborative Condition Invitation
Dear <name>,
I'm reaching out to invite you to the university's new IoT Open Innovation platform, linking our students,
alumni, staff, faculty and affiliated companies.
This is a two-sided competitive platform to ideate and innovate "smart" Internet of Things (IoT)
products and services--using hardware, software, networking, data and algorithms.


        On one side of the platform, companies seek solutions to their IoT innovation challenges. On the

other side, you will compete with other participants to solve IoT innovation problems of companies for

cash and other benefits.

Click HERE to learn more and to sign up to the platform.

        (This invitation is not transferable or to be forwarded.)



        Fig. A5 Competitive Condition Invitation
Fig. A6 Collaborative Condition Landing Page
Fig. A7 Competitive Condition Landing Page
