                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         POVERTY, DEPRESSION, AND ANXIETY:
                         CAUSAL EVIDENCE AND MECHANISMS

                                      Matthew W. Ridley
                                         Gautam Rao
                                       Frank Schilbach
                                       Vikram H. Patel

                                      Working Paper 27157
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27157


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          May 2020, Revised November 2020




We thank Victoria Baranov, Teresita Cruz Vital, Jishnu Das, Emily Gallagher, Johannes
Haushofer, Anne Karing, Jing Li, Crick Lund, Malavika Mani, Kate Orkin, Jennifer Pan, and
Keshav Rao for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank the editor and six anonymous
referees for detailed comments and helpful suggestions. We thank Chris Roth and Lukas Hensel
for kindly providing us the data needed to construct Figure 3. All authors contributed equally.
The authors have no competing interests. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Matthew W. Ridley, Gautam Rao, Frank Schilbach, and Vikram H. Patel. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Poverty, Depression, and Anxiety: Causal Evidence and Mechanisms
Matthew W. Ridley, Gautam Rao, Frank Schilbach, and Vikram H. Patel
NBER Working Paper No. 27157
May 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. D03,I1,I3,O1

                                         ABSTRACT

Why are people living in poverty disproportionately affected by mental illness? We review the
interdisciplinary evidence of the bi-directional causal relationship between poverty and common
mental illnesses ­depression and anxiety ­ and the underlying mechanisms. Research shows that
mental illness reduces employment and therefore income and that psychological interventions
generate economic gains. Similarly, negative economic shocks cause mental illness, and anti-
poverty programs, such as cash transfers, improve mental health. A crucial step toward the design
of effective policies is to better understand the mechanisms underlying these causal effects.


Matthew W. Ridley                               Frank Schilbach
MIT Department of Economics                     MIT Department of Economics
The Morris and Sophie Chang Building            The Morris and Sophie Chang Building
50 Memorial Drive Cambridge                     50 Memorial Drive, E52-560
Cambridge, MA 02142                             Cambridge, MA 02142
mridley@mit.edu                                 and NBER
                                                fschilb@mit.edu
Gautam Rao
Department of Economics                         Vikram H. Patel
Harvard University                              The Pershing Square Professor of Global Health
Littauer M-30                                   Department of Global Health and Social Medicine
Cambridge, MA 02138                             Harvard Medical School
and NBER                                        vikram_patel@hms.harvard.edu
grao@fas.harvard.edu
1     Introduction
     Depression and anxiety are the most common mental illnesses: 3 to 4% of the world's
population suffers from each at any given time, and they are together responsible for 8% of
years lived with disability globally (James et al., 2018). Contrary to widely-held preconcep-
tions from the 20th century, these are not `diseases of affluence' (Desjarlais, 1995; Murray
et al., 1996). Within a given location, those living in poverty are at least as likely to suffer
as the rich. By some measures the poor are substantially more likely to experience mental
ill-health than the affluent. Rates of depression, anxiety, and suicide correlate negatively with
income (Sareen et al., 2011; Lund et al., 2010; Iemmi et al., 2016; Banks et al., 2018) and
employment (Lund et al., 2010; Frasquilho et al., 2016). Those with the lowest incomes in a
community suffer 1.5 to 3 times more frequently from depression, anxiety and other common
mental illnesses than those with the highest incomes (Lund et al., 2010). For instance, in
India, 3.4% of those in the lowest income quintile have experienced depression in the past
two weeks, compared to 1.9% of those in the highest quintile (Figure 1).
                                4
                  Prevalence of depression (%)
                   1          2 0         3




                                                 Lowest   Second         Third         Fourth     Highest
                                                                     Income quintile

                                                              Current prevalence         ±1 SEM



Figure 1: Prevalence of depression by income quintile in India. The average percentage of people
in each income quintile in India who have had depression within the past two weeks (`current' prevalence).
Error bars show ±1 standard error of the mean (SEM). These numbers come from Arvind et al. (2019), an
analysis of the Indian National Mental Health Survey, 2015-16.



    In this review, we shall explore the evidence for the bi-directional causal relationship
between poverty and mental health, and its underlying mechanisms. Poverty is also correlated
with poor physical health (Cutler et al., 2008; Bleakley, 2010), but the relationship between
mental illness and poverty has been overlooked and is worth emphasizing. Mental health
has historically not been considered a priority by economists and policymakers, and until
recently mental healthcare had not been evaluated as an anti-poverty tool. Mental health
services are under-resourced relative to physical health systems. On average, countries spend

                                                                        2
1.7% of their health budgets on mental health, even though 14% of years lived with disability
globally are known to be caused by depression, anxiety and other mental illnesses (James
et al., 2018). Low- and middle-income countries spend an even smaller share of already
small health budgets on mental health (Figure 2). Despite the existence of cost-effective
treatments, such low investments in mental health have contributed to treatment gaps of
over 80% globally for common mental illnesses, much larger than for major physical health
conditions (Chisholm et al., 2016; Patel et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2007; Kohn et al., 2004).
Mental and physical health are tightly connected: when mental health problems co-exist
with physical health problems, health outcomes, disability and costs tend to be much worse
(Scott et al., 2016; Vamos et al., 2009; Shen et al., 2008). However, unlike most physical
health conditions, mental disorders may directly distort economic decision-making in ways
that perpetuate poverty, by directly affecting cognitive function, preferences, and beliefs.
            Mental health expenditure (% of total health expenditure)
            0            1            2             3           4




                                                                        Low   Lower middle   Upper middle   High
                                                                                   Income category


Figure 2: Mental health expenditure by country income category.                     The average per-
centage of overall health budgets spent on mental health across countries in each of the four in-
come categories used by the World Bank. Percent spent on mental health comes from the authors'
own calculations, using data on overall mental health spending from the WHO Mental Health At-
las 2017, accessible at https://www.who.int/mental_health/evidence/atlas/profiles-2017/en/, with data
on total overall health spending from the WHO's Global Health Expenditure Database, accessible at
https://apps.who.int/nha/database.



    What are the causal links between poverty and mental illness? Can economic poli-
cies improve psychological well-being? Can psychological interventions reduce poverty?
Any attempt to understand this relationship must acknowledge the complexity and multi-
dimensional nature of both mental health and poverty. Mental health in the broadest possible
sense has been defined as "a state of well-being in which the individual realizes his or her

                                                                                        3
own abilities, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully,
and is able to make a contribution to his or her community" (World Health Organization
and Others, 2005). This definition includes both happiness or life satisfaction, which also
correlate positively with income (Haushofer and Fehr, 2014), and symptoms associated with
anxiety and mood disorders, such as depression. The two are clearly related: depression and
anxiety are strong determinants of happiness (Layard et al., 2012), and ultimately mental
health and even mental illnesses such as depression and anxiety exist along a continuum.

    We focus on the causal evidence linking poverty with depressive and anxiety disorders, the
most common mental illnesses, which we refer to here using the more general terms `mental
health' and `mental illness'. Box 1 provides definitions of these illnesses and a brief primer
on their measurement. While other more serious mental illnesses, such as schizophrenia, are
also correlated with poverty and may have powerful effects on economic outcomes, we do not
discuss them here (Lund et al., 2014).

  Box 1: Definition and Measurement of Depression and Anxiety

  Depression, by which we refer here to Major Depressive Disorder, is a constellation of symptoms including changes in
  psychomotor function, weight loss, oversleeping or undersleeping, decreased appetite, fatigue, difficulty concentrating,
  extreme feelings of guilt or worthlessness, and suicidal thoughts. According to the American Psychiatric Association's
  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), diagnosis of depression requires a set of these symptoms
  to be present over a two-week period.

  Anxiety, by which we refer here to Generalized Anxiety Disorder, is characterized in the DSM-5 by long-lasting and
  excessive fear and worries over at least a six-month period, with three or more of the following symptoms: restlessness,
  fatigue, concentration problems, irritability, muscle tension and problems with sleep. Other definitions require the
  presence of at least one physical symptom such as heart palpitations, difficulty breathing, nausea or abdominal distress,
  dizziness and numbness.

  Measuring depression and anxiety in large population samples is feasible using non-specialist surveyors or even via
  self-administration of questionnaires. Reliable short-form diagnostic tools can predict professional diagnosis with rates
  of false positives and false negatives of 10 to 20%, and have been validated in low-income countries (Patel et al.,
  2008; Kroenke and Spitzer, 2002; Spitzer et al., 2006). Widely used tools include the Generalized Anxiety Disorder
  7-item (GAD-7) scale for anxiety or the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) for depression, or the Self-Reporting
  Questionnaire 20-Item (SRQ-20) scale for any common mental illness. These scales typically ask respondents how much
  they experienced symptoms of depression or anxiety (such as sadness, lack of concentration, or poor sleep) in the past
  few weeks. The PHQ-9 and GAD-7 ask one question for each of the symptoms which are used to define major depressive
  disorder and generalized anxiety disorder, respectively. In practice, depression and anxiety are correlated, as evidenced
  by the fact that they share some symptoms.

  The Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) is a popular measure among studies of the effect of
  economic interventions or shocks on mental health. Several studies also use custom indices of psychological well-being,
  typically an average of a life satisfaction scale, a `stress index', and some measure of worry or anxiety. In practice, such
  indices often measure several of the same symptoms as the PHQ-9 and GAD-7.

  Some national surveys already include short-form screening tools, such as the U.K. Longitudinal Household Panel Survey
  and the South Africa National Income Dynamics Study.



    Like mental health, poverty is multidimensional. We examine causal links between mental
illness and important economic dimensions of poverty, particularly income and unemploy-
ment. We also touch upon other dimensions of poverty, including a lack of capabilities
resulting from low education and physical health, as well as relative poverty and associated
low social status. Due to a relative scarcity of studies, we focus less on the relationship
between mental health and the consumption of goods and services, which is a more direct
economic measure of poverty. The existing evidence on this relationship is contentious,but

                                                               4
the cross-sectional correlation of mental illness with consumption appears to be weaker than
that between mental health and income (Tampubolon and Hanandita, 2014; Banks et al.,
2018; Das et al., 2009). Income is more volatile than consumption in the short run. The
stronger correlation of mental health with income suggests that mental health may be more
affected by short-run changes to economic status than long-run or permanent changes.

    We discuss evidence on poverty alleviation programs and mental health treatments ob-
tained from randomized-controlled trials (RCTs). These generate variation in individuals'
poverty and mental health status, respectively, that is entirely by chance and therefore un-
correlated with all other shared risk factors. Such studies allow us to isolate evidence of causal
relationships. We also discuss studies of `natural experiments' in which naturally-occurring
variation in economic circumstances or mental health is argued to be `as good as random'.
Examples range from financial windfalls, such as lottery wins -- where lottery winners may
be thought of as a treatment group and lottery losers as a control group -- to weather shocks
that affect some farmers' incomes more than others'.


2    The Causal Impact of Poverty on Mental Ill-Health
    Job loss and income declines are drivers of poverty, and often precede episodes of men-
tal illness (Olesen et al., 2013; Alloush, 2018). Evidence from natural experiments confirms
that this relationship is causal. For instance, reduced agricultural output and income due to
extreme rainfall caused increased rates of depression and suicide in rural parts of Indonesia
(Christian et al., 2019) (Box 2). Similarly, job losses due to plant closures in Austria were
associated with higher subsequent antidepressant use and mental health-related hospitaliza-
tion (Kuhn et al., 2009). Areas in the USA more exposed to trade liberalization with China
saw reduced income and employment for some groups of workers and increased mortality
through drug overdoses among those same groups (Pierce and Schott, 2016). Whether job
loss worsens mental health beyond the impacts of the associated loss of income is unclear,
but both mechanisms are argued to play a role in the phenomenon of `deaths of despair'
(Case and Deaton, 2020).

     Conversely, income or wealth increases can improve mental health. For example, Native
American tribes that opened casinos have seen substantial rises in income and reductions in
anxiety relative to those that did not (Wolfe et al., 2012). Some studies have shown that
lottery winners enjoy better mental health compared to those who win less or play but don't
win (Apouey and Clark, 2015). However, when fully controlling for the number and frequency
of lottery tickets bought, winnings have small or no impacts on mental health (Cesarini et
al., 2016; Lindqvist et al., 2018).


    The most compelling causal evidence that poverty causes mental illness comes from
randomized-controlled trials (RCTs) that evaluate anti -poverty programs. Several studies
evaluating cash transfer and broader anti-poverty programs have found significant positive
impacts on mental health, including over long time horizons, after the effects of any initial
celebratory reactions among recipients have worn off. Figure 4 reports a meta-analysis of

                                                5
  Box 2: Cash Transfers, Rainfall Shocks, and Suicides

  Christian, Hensel and Roth (2019) examined how income shocks affect suicide rates and depression in Indonesia. They
  use two natural experiments: the staggered roll-out across sub-districts of a conditional cash transfer program and annual
  and spatial variation in rainfall that affects farmers' incomes. They measure depression using a 10-question CES-D scale
  which is included in the Indonesian Family Life Survey. They also use the incidence of suicides, as measured by the
  reports of village leaders in census surveys.

  Sub-districts which received the cash transfer program in the first wave of roll-out saw an 18% drop in suicides
  (p < 0.01) relative to those that received it later, even though both sets of districts had similar trends in suicide before
  the program's start. Meanwhile, rural sub-districts that experienced excess rainfall that increased crop yields between
  census years saw decreases in depression and suicides relative to sub-districts experiencing drought. The cash transfer
  had its largest effects on suicide in districts undergoing droughts, suggesting that policy can play a role in mitigating the
  mental health effects of economic shocks (Figure 3).

  Since suicide was only measured at the sub-district level in this study, it is not possible to fully disentangle the
  direct effects of the cash transfers on recipients from spillover effects to others in the village. This highlights the need for
  better routine data collection on mental health outcomes alongside economic variables.



                                                                Reductions in suicide rates due to cash transfers
                                                                                                               ***
                                                            1




                                                                                                 |                            |
                          Reduction in suicides per 100,000
                            .2      .4      0.6      .8




                                                                   Average effect       Effect for districts         Effect for districts
                                                                   for all districts     not in drought                  in drought

                                                                                Treatment effect of cash transfers


  Figure 3: Cash transfers, suicide rates, and droughts. The estimated effect of the cash transfer roll-out on district
  suicide rates, for all districts and separately by whether or not they were experiencing a drought (bottom 20% of the
  rainfall distribution) when the cash transfers reached them. Error bars show ±1 SEM. Stars denote a significant difference
  between effects. ***: p < 0.01; **: p < 0.05; *: p < 0.1.




these studies. For instance, cash transfers to Kenyan households worth $400 to $1,500 at
purchasing power parity (i.e., about 3 to 12 months of household income) increased consump-
tion and happiness while reducing depression, stress, and worries (Haushofer and Shapiro,
2016, 2018). Scores on a depression scale were 0.12 standard deviations (SD, closely related
to Cohen's d) lower 4 months after completion and 0.16 SD lower after almost three years,
with larger transfers causing substantially larger effects.




                                                                                             6
              Study                                           Country          Outcome     Years elapsed since:        Intervention cost in:
                                                                                         Program Start   Program End    $ MER         $ PPP
              Multi-faceted anti-poverty programs
              Blattman et al. (2019)                           Ethiopia         PWB            5              4           450          1291

              Edmonds and Theoharides (2020)                  Philippines       PWB            3             0.75         184          518

              Green et al. (2016)                              Uganda          APAI-R         1.3             -           874          2150

              Janzen et al. (2018)                              Nepal           PWB           1.5             -           137          478

              Banerjee et al. (2015)                           Multiple         PWB            3              1          1467          3717

              Bandiera et al. (2017)                         Bangladesh         PWB            4             2.5          302          1120

              Ismayilova et al. (2018)                       Burkina Faso       CES-D          2              1           100          279

              Glass et al. (2017)                                DRC            HSCL          1.5             -           40            66

              Banerjee et al. (2016)                             India          PWB            7             5.5          357          1257

              Bedoya et al. (2019)                           Afghanistan        PWB            2              1          1688          6198

              Cash transfers
              Heath et al. (2020)                                Mali            PSS           3              -           649          1468

              Fernald and Hidrobo (2011)                       Ecuador          CES-D         1.4             -           255          676

              Hjelm et al. (2017a)                             Zambia            PSS           3              -           396          816

              Macours and Vakis (2009)                        Nicaragua         CES-D        0.75             -           260          758

              Kilburn et al. (2019)                          South Africa       CES-D          3              -           540          870

              Baird et al. (2019)                              Malawi          GHQ-12         4.3            2.3          180          440

              Blattman et al. (2017)                            Liberia        APAI-R          1             0.8          341          716

              Haushofer et al. (2020)                           Kenya           PWB            1              1           150          338

              Blattman, Fiala and Martinez (2019)              Uganda           PWB            9              9           382          1175

              Shapiro (2019)                                    Kenya           PWB          0.75            0.5          122          314

              Hjelm et al. (2017b)                             Zambia            PSS           3              -           432          891
7




              Egger et al. (2019)                               Kenya           PWB           1.5            1.5         1000          1871

              Baird et al. (2013)                              Malawi          GHQ-12         2.3            0.3          180          440

              Kilburn et al. (2016)                             Kenya           CES-D          4              -           960          2370

              Aguilar (2012)                                   Mexico           SWB            5              2           900          1651

              Haushofer and Shapiro (2018)                      Kenya           PWB           3.4             3           521          709

              Haushofer, Mudida and Shapiro (2020)              Kenya           PWB            1              1           534          1184

              Angeles et al. (2019)                            Malawi           CES-D          2              -           156          517

              Multi-faceted anti-poverty programs effect (average: 0.138 SD)
              Cash transfers effect (average: 0.067 SD)
              Overall effect (average: 0.094 SD)

                                                                                                                                               -0.2   -0.1   0     0.1   0.2    0.3    0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7
                                                                                                                                                Treatment Effect (in Standard Deviation Units)




    Figure 4: The impacts of anti-poverty programs on mental health. This figure plots the estimated treatment effects of RCTs evaluating anti-poverty programs in low-
    or middle-income countries on indices of mental health (see appendix for a list of the papers included in this meta-analysis). Positive treatment effects imply better mental health.
    `Cash Transfers' refers to studies of unconditional cash transfers to low-income households, with the exception of Baird et al. (2013) and Kilburn et al. (2019) who examined
    conditional cash transfer programs. `Multi-Faceted Anti-Poverty Programs' refers to interventions that aimed to lift people out of poverty by providing a range of elements,
    typically including asset transfers, skills training, cash support, and access to savings and healthcare opportunities. Treatment effects are expressed in standard deviation units
    (SD). If multiple follow-up measures were available, this figure shows the final measure. The outcomes vary across studies and include screening instruments to detect common
    mental illnesses (GHQ-12) and symptoms of depression (CES-D, APAI-R), indices of psychological well-being (PWB), and a perceived stress scale (PSS). `Intervention cost'
    refers to the total cost of implementing the intervention, when this is available. When implementation costs are unavailable (as with most of the cash transfer studies) it refers
    to the total undiscounted value of the transfer. `MER' stands for Market Exchange Rates and `PPP' stands for Purchasing Power Parity (which adjusts exchange rates to reflect
    the true cost of living). A missing value of years elapsed since program end means the transfer was still ongoing when outcomes were measured. A complete description of the
    methodology of this analysis and details on each of the studies is provided in the supplementary materials.
    Similarly, multi-faceted anti-poverty programs beyond cash transfers yield mental health
benefits. A recent large-scale randomized evaluation of a "graduation program" in six coun-
tries that provided extremely poor participants with a mix of assets, intensive training,
temporary cash support, savings incentives, and help to access healthcare, found increases in
consumption and assets three years later. The program also improved an index of psycho-
logical well-being by 0.1 SD, which was driven by an increase in happiness and a decrease in
mental distress (Banerjee et al., 2015). Programs in other settings with similar approaches
have found similar effects (Bandiera et al., 2017; Bedoya et al., 2019). Longer-run effects of
such programs, when measured, appear to be even larger for both economic outcomes and
mental health. In India, for example, an index of psychological well-being was 0.24 SD higher
in the treatment group seven years after the completion of a graduation program (Banerjee
et al., 2016).

    Hence, across a wide range of populations and study designs, positive economic shocks to
individuals are shown to improve mental health, whereas negative economic shocks undermine
mental health. This robust evidence, on the effects of changes in economic circumstances,
indicates that poverty does cause mental illness. However, with two exceptions (Lindqvist
et al., 2018; Banerjee et al., 2016), the above studies consider the consequences of changes
in economic status for a few years at most. An important question is whether these short-
run effects can persist or grow over time. For instance, some of the causal mechanisms we
discuss below could take decades to manifest. On the other hand, there may be a hedonic
adaptation effect in which mental health eventually adapts to the change in circumstances, so
that even permanent increases in one's income level have a limited long-run effect. Of course,
it could also be that the positive economic shocks are themselves undone by future negative
shocks, causing mental health to revert to initial levels or even worsening. Ongoing long-
run evaluations of cash-transfer programs are expected to provide evidence on this question
(Banerjee et al., 2019).

2.1    Mechanisms for Poverty Causing Mental Ill-Health
    How does poverty cause mental illness? We discuss several plausible causal mechanisms
and the limited evidence for each. The worries and uncertainty that come with living in
poverty seem to be an important driver of mental illness, as do the effects of poverty on
childhood development and one's living environment. We have more limited causal evidence
for other plausible channels, including worsening of physical health caused by poverty, in-
creased exposure to violence or crime, and the effects of low relative social status and social
isolation. Understanding which of these mechanisms are important may have implications
for policy choices. For instance, if worries and uncertainty play a major role, then providing
health and unemployment insurance may be crucial, while if early-life conditions are the key
drivers, then cash transfers to parents of young children could be the most appropriate policy
response.

   Worries and uncertainty. The anticipation of economic shocks, not just their occur-
rence, may cause mental illness. People living in poverty face substantial uncertainty and
income volatility, and juggle what are, in effect, complex financial portfolios, often without

                                              8
access to formal insurance (Collins et al., 2009). Sustained long-run exposure to stress from
managing this volatility may threaten mental health (Staufenbiel et al., 2013). Consistent
with this hypothesis, a large-scale randomized experiment among low-income individuals in
Oregon found that receiving largely free health insurance worth $550-$750 per year reduced
rates of depression by about a quarter within a few months (Finkelstein et al., 2012). This
effect did not appear to be explained by increased mental healthcare or changes in physical
health. While the increase in recipients' effective income may have played a role, it repre-
sented a much smaller relative increase than the cash transfer programs described above, and
yet generated a similar effect size on depression. Further suggestive evidence for uncertainty
as a mechanism comes from the small or zero effect of wealth shocks on mental health in
countries with generous and comprehensive systems of social insurance, such as Sweden (Ce-
sarini et al., 2016; Lindqvist et al., 2018).

    Environmental factors. Those living in poverty are generally more exposed to environ-
mental irritants such as pollution, temperature extremes, and challenging sleep environments
(Dean et al., 2018). Many of these factors have been linked directly to mental illness. Days
with extreme heat see worse self-reported mental health and increased rates of self-harm and
suicide (Ding et al., 2015; Williams et al., 2016). Similarly, sleep deprivation is widespread
among the urban poor in developing countries (Bessone et al., 2020), and sleep is thought to
be a mechanism affecting mental health (Harvey, 2011; Grubb and Lauritzen, 2019). Some
evidence exists that clinical interventions to improve sleep reduce depression (Bessone et al.,
2020; Manber et al., 2008). Exposure to air pollution is associated with living in poverty, and
may influence mental health through multiple channels, by restriction of physical activity or
directly due to neurotoxicity (Jia et al., 2018). Changes in air pollution in China have been
associated with changes in mental health (Xue et al., 2019). In the US, randomly selected
low-income households that were paid to move to more affluent neighborhoods saw reductions
in depression and anxiety despite little effect on income (Ludwig et al., 2012). However, it
is not clear whether environmental factors or other features of high-income neighborhoods
generated this effect.

    Physical health. Lower income is robustly associated with worse physical health (Cut-
ler et al., 2008). Poverty increases exposure to the environmental factors described above,
and often also implies lower access to health care, which increases the burden of acute and
chronic health conditions. Worse physical health may impact mental health through various
channels. Chronic pain, worries about health and mortality, the financial costs of illness,
and reduced physical activity may all worsen mental health. It is therefore unsurprising that
physical ill-health often co-occurs with depressive and anxiety disorders (Scott et al., 2016).
However, only limited causal evidence exists of poverty impacting mental health via changes
in physical health. Many of the randomized interventions described in the previous section
had no detectable effect on physical health even as they reduced mental illness (Haushofer
and Shapiro, 2016; Egger et al., 2019; Banerjee et al., 2015). However, changes in physical
well-being may manifest over a longer timeframe, which may not be captured by these short-
run studies.

   Early-life conditions. Exposure to poverty early in life can threaten mental health in

                                              9
later years. Such effects can be generated in utero, by exposing pregnant women to malnu-
trition or stress. For instance, the death of a mother's relative during pregnancy (compared
to after childbirth) predicts depression and anxiety among her grown children later in life
(Persson and Rossin-Slater, 2018). Poverty may also disproportionately expose children to
adverse shocks while their brains are highly plastic. Such shocks can profoundly impact
brain development, cognitive ability, and mental health in adolescence and adulthood (Noble
et al., 2015; Blair and Raver, 2016). Economic stresses around the time of birth also have
long-term mental health costs: in Ghana, a decrease in crop prices by 1 SD at an individual's
time of birth was found to increase incidence of anxiety or depression in adulthood by 50%,
associating with maternal nutrition, breastfeeding duration, vaccination rates and improved
adult health (Adhvaryu et al., 2019). These results imply that programs that provide finan-
cial support for households with pregnant women or young children may have high long-run
mental health and economic returns.

    Trauma, violence and crime. Living in poverty disproportionately exposes individ-
uals to crime, including violent offenses (Sharkey et al., 2016). People living in poverty are
also more likely to suffer traumatic events such as the early deaths of loved ones (Marmot,
2005). Likewise, within the household, women and children in poor households are dispro-
portionately affected by intimate partner violence (Cunradi et al., 2000). The relationship
between poverty and experiencing violence itself may be causal: cash transfers to households
reduce intimate partner violence (Haushofer et al., 2019). In turn, both exposure to violence
within the household and exposure to violent crime in general predict depression and other
mental illnesses (Goodman et al., 2009; Cornaglia et al., 2014). Causal evidence on the effect
of reductions in crime and violence on mental illness is needed to shed further light on this
mechanism.

    Social status, shame, and isolation. Relative poverty, i.e., consumption or income
relative to others in one's society, may play a role in the relationship between poverty and
mental illness through the resulting social status and interpersonal comparisons. In an inter-
esting natural experiment, Norwegian tax records were posted online in 2001, making citizens'
income easily searchable. Using survey data from 1985-2013, a study showed that the gap in
happiness and life-satisfaction between the rich and poor within Norway increased sharply
once relative income became easily visible (Perez-Truglia, 2019). While similar causal evi-
dence is lacking for mental illness, it is plausible that diminished social status resulting from
poverty causes or exacerbates depression and anxiety. Frequent marginalization of people
living in poverty may also result in social isolation and loneliness (Walker and Bantebya-
Kyomuhendo, 2014), which in turn are correlated with depression (Cacioppo et al., 2006).


3    The Causal Impact of Mental Ill-Health on Poverty
    Mental illness predicts worse labor market outcomes later in life. Following a diagnosis of
depression or anxiety, employment rates and incomes have been estimated to fall by as much
as half, relative to the non-depressed or non-anxious (Hakulinen et al., 2019; Mojtabai et al.,
2015). Beyond such comparisons, which may be driven in part by unknown factors such as


                                               10
physical health, there is little evidence from natural experiments linking depression or anxiety
to incomes. A study showed that the approval of lithium for treatment of bipolar disorder
reduced the earnings penalty associated with bipolar illness by a third in Denmark, from 38
to 26 percent, with larger effects in the lower half of the earnings distribution (Biasi et al.,
2019). Studying similar natural experiments for depression and anxiety would be valuable.


  Box 3: An Example of a Psychotherapy Intervention With Positive Economic Effects

  Patel et al. (2017) conducted an RCT of a brief behavioral activation therapy (BA) program, administered by
  non-specialist counsellors in a sample of 495 depressed adults in Goa, India. Compared to a control group which received
  enhanced usual care, treated patients were over 60% more likely to be in remission three months later (64% versus 39%),
  as measured by a PHQ-9 score (see Box 1) below 10, and maintained these gains after 12 months.

  Those patients also reported being able to work 2.3 more days per month on average (p=0.004) and reduced
  health costs, excluding intervention costs, of $20 per month (p=0.07)(Figure 5). For comparison, a month's wages
  for a low-skilled worker in the study context was around $415. Given an average intervention cost of $66 per patient,
  in economic terms the intervention was highly cost-effective and may have paid for itself within a few months. After
  12 months, the fall in treated patients' health costs alone had already significantly outpaced the cost of intervention,
  although the difference in days worked was no longer significant (Weobong et al., 2017).

  Other evaluations of inexpensive psychotherapies implemented by non-specialist counsellors in low-income set-
  tings have found similarly large effects on mental health (Singla et al., 2017). More evidence on the effect of such
  psychological interventions on broader economic outcomes would be highly valuable. For instance, future trials could be
  linked to administrative or standardized survey data on wages, earnings, and consumption.



                                     Depression (PHQ-9 score > 10)                           Days unable to work
                                                                                   10
                         1




                                              |      ***       |                                 |      ***       |
                         .8




                                                                                         8
                                                                            Days per month
                 Fraction
                      .6




                                                                                     6
                 .4




                                                                               4
                         .2




                                                                                   2
                         0




                                                                                   0




                                           Control         Treatment                          Control         Treatment


                                              Health costs
                          100




                                              |       *        |
                 20 40 60 80
                   $ over 3 months
                          0




                                           Control         Treatment



  Figure 5: Impacts of behavioral activation on depression, labor supply, and health costs. The mean values
  for the treatment and control groups of depression (measured by a PHQ-9 score greater than 10), days unable to work,
  and health costs (excluding the intervention cost) at 3 months. Error bars denote ±1 SEM. Stars above the bars denote
  a significant difference between treatment and control after adjusting for covariates. ***: p < 0.01; **: p < 0.05; *: p <
  0.1.




                                                                       11
    There is, however, a substantial body of experiments showing a causal effect of treating
mental illness on employment. A meta-analysis aggregating results across 31 RCTs in de-
veloping countries showed a positive average effect of various interventions to treat mental
illness on labor supply Lund et al. (2019). Among these interventions, pharmacological and
psychological treatments had similar positive effects on labor supply (0.1 to 0.15 SD), while
combining both types of treatments had even larger effects (0.34 SD). For instance, a cheap
and scalable cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) administered in India reduced depression by
25 percentage points compared to the control group, and in turn increased reported days of
work by 2.3 days per month (Box 3). While these studies do not directly show that treating
mental illness reduces poverty rates, higher labor supply and earnings naturally reduce the
likelihood of living in poverty. Whether treating mental illness has larger long-run effects on
consumption per unit cost than the cash transfers described above is unknown (Lund et al.,
2019).

3.1    Mechanisms for Mental Ill-Health Causing Poverty
     Cognitive function. Like any illness, depression and anxiety may have economic effects
because they directly reduce individuals' ability to work. Unlike most physical conditions,
however, depression and anxiety also directly affect the way people think. Poverty itself can
influence cognitive function by capturing attention and taxing mental bandwidth (Mani et
al., 2013; Kaur et al., 2019). Mental illness may have similar effects, by capturing attention,
causing excessive rumination, and distorting people's memories and beliefs about their abil-
ities (Gotlib and Joormann, 2010). Such cognitive impacts could alter a range of economic
decisions and outcomes, from finding jobs to saving to education, and by exacerbating `be-
havioral biases' that economists increasingly recognize as important (Kremer et al., 2019).
For instance, depressed individuals might avoid making active choices and may stick with
`default options', may have decreased sensitivity to incentives due to anhedonia or may have
difficulty choosing among several options. Understanding the importance of this mechanism
relative to more `direct' economic effects through disability or health expenditures is crucial
for correctly measuring the economic burden of mental illness and designing economic policy
for those whose mental health is compromised.

    Beliefs. Beliefs about one's own and others' abilities, circumstances, and actions are
central to economic decision-making. Mental illness may distort such beliefs in various ways.
Depression is associated with more negative beliefs about oneself and the external world
(Beck, 1967; de Quidt and Haushofer, 2016). Depressed individuals are more likely to re-
member negative stimuli and have trouble disengaging from negative information once it
grabs their attention (Gotlib and Joormann, 2010). As such, while healthy individuals tend
to protect overly optimistic beliefs about themselves by ignoring negative information (Eil
and Rao, 2011), correlational evidence suggests that the depressed update their beliefs more
pessimistically (Korn et al., 2014). Anxiety, meanwhile, is associated with greater selective
attention towards threatening stimuli (Armstrong and Olatunji, 2012), which could lead to
overestimation of risks and thus reduced risk-taking. Such evidence is consistent with mental
illness causing pessimistic beliefs, pessimistic beliefs causing mental illness, or both. Causal
evidence on how treating depression or anxiety affects beliefs would help disentangle these

                                              12
potential explanations.

    Preferences. Mental illness may affect economic preferences, such as the extent to which
people are willing to defer gratification (time preferences), tolerate risk for higher expected
rewards (risk preferences), or split rewards between themselves and others (social prefer-
ences). For instance, depression may diminish a person's patience and altruism. Similarly,
anxiety disorders may reduce people's willingness to take on even modest levels of poten-
tially profitable risk. Such impacts could in turn change a variety of economic behaviors,
such as labor supply decisions, savings and investment choices, consumption behavior, and
the take-up of social programs. The limited evidence on correlations between mental illness
and economic preferences is mixed (Bayer et al., 2018; Cobb-Clark et al., 2019).

    Labor supply and productivity. Depression and anxiety often affect individuals in
the prime of their economic lives, and can be highly recurrent (Kessler et al., 2007). The
depressed beliefs and distorted preferences described above may reduce motivation and la-
bor supply. In addition, depression can have a direct effect on productivity, e.g. through
increased fatigue and lack of concentration. Depressed individuals may therefore work fewer
and shorter days and produce less per hour (Mall et al., 2015). Depressed workers might
also be more easily discouraged during their job search, or when facing setbacks at work. As
described above, substantial causal evidence exists that treating mental illnesses increases
employment (Lund et al., 2019). However, there is little evidence on whether this happens
through higher at-work productivity, greater job search intensity, changed beliefs, or other
mechanisms.

    Stigma. Mentally ill individuals contend with substantial social stigma and negative
stereotyping (Pescosolido et al., 2013). This may result in discrimination in employment
(Sharac et al., 2010), which could lower wages and limit employment opportunities relative
to equally productive mentally-healthy workers. On top of this, those living with a mental
illness are excluded from disability benefit schemes in many low-income countries (Saxena
et al., 2006). More generally, others' reluctance to interact socially with mentally ill people
(Pescosolido et al., 2013) may exclude them from social networks which provide economic op-
portunities. Stigma may also affect the formation and dissolution of households in ways that
disadvantage the mentally ill (Lauber and Rössler, 2007). Depression and anxiety may come
with a `discount' on the marriage market, causing mentally ill individuals to form households
with less well-off partners, increasing the chances of living in poverty.

    Health expenditures. Mental illnesses may deepen poverty through its impacts on
health and health expenditures. Globally, people living in poverty usually pay most of their
health costs out of pocket (Duflo and Banerjee, 2007). 150 million people globally are esti-
mated to have catastrophic health expenditures each year, defined as health care payments
totaling over 40 percent of a household's non-subsistence expenditures (Xu et al., 2007).
Costs associated with treating mental illness rarely account for large shares of individuals'
budgets, as most affected individuals remain untreated. However, depression and anxiety
frequently co-occur with other health conditions (Scott et al., 2016), and such comorbidity
with depression is associated with substantially higher health expenditures for a range of

                                              13
health conditions (Vamos et al., 2009; Shen et al., 2008). Indeed, treating depression has
been found to reduce overall health care costs (Weobong et al., 2017).

    Women's empowerment. The burden of mental illness falls disproportionately on
women (James et al., 2018). A large-scale (N=903) RCT evaluating cognitive behavioral
therapy intervention for depressed pregnant women in Pakistan found a 17-percent reduction
in depression rates compared with a control group seven years after the intervention (Bara-
nov et al., 2017). Reduced depression among these women was accompanied by increased
economic empowerment by 0.29 SD as measured by increased control over household and
personal expenditures. Such impacts may have implications for women's consumption and
relative poverty within the household.

    Intergenerational effects. Improving a parent's mental health can benefit the next
generation. In the above study in Pakistan, women who had received the intervention sent
their children to better schools and had more learning materials in their homes. Similarly,
other RCTs found that treating mothers' depression improves their interaction with their
children, and their children's mental health (Cuijpers et al., 2015). While little direct evi-
dence shows that such interventions lead to improved educational outcomes or earnings, there
is reason to believe they may. A significant body of work from other contexts shows that
early-childhood investments have large effects on children's income as adults (Heckman and
Mosso, 2014).

     Human capital accumulation. The onset of common mental illnesses often coincides
with secondary and tertiary education and the early stages of an adult's work career (Kessler
et al., 2007). Mental illness may therefore cause long-run economic hardship by reducing
school and college completion rates, worsening early-career job placements, and hindering
skill acquisition (Patton et al., 2016). This suggests the possibility of particularly high
economic returns from improving mental health among adolescents and young adults. While
longitudinal studies show a substantial correlation between mental illness among students and
subsequent educational outcomes, there is little experimental evidence to date that treating
depression or anxiety among adolescents leads to improved educational outcomes (Prinz et
al., 2018).


4    Outlook
    Having discussed some of the mechanisms influencing the relationship between poverty
and mental health, we can speculate more broadly on how the relationship between poverty
and mental illness may evolve, what this means for policy, and what directions might be
fruitful for research.

    Aggregate economic conditions. Economic growth and other ongoing global trends
are unlikely to improve mental health by themselves. Higher income causes better mental
health at the individual level, yet on average the prevalence of mental illness is not lower
in rich countries. To the contrary, existing evidence shows a higher prevalence of common


                                             14
mental illness in richer countries (Figure 6) (Dückers et al., 2019). This cross-country differ-
ence cannot be interpreted causally, and concerns remain about differences in methodology,
diagnosis, or reporting across contexts (Brhlikova et al., 2011). However, one way to reconcile
the contrasting within-country and cross-country relationships is the possibility that relative,
rather than absolute, poverty is the more relevant cause of mental illness. Risk factors, in-
cluding inequality and relative poverty, or the stresses of urban environments, may deteriorate
rather than improve as whole economies expand. Within-country inequality has increased
in many countries in recent decades, despite significant reductions in extreme poverty and
global inequality (Milanovic, 2016). Complacency about mental health among the poor is
therefore not warranted even in the presence of aggregate economic growth. For instance, the
burden of disease due to mental and neurological disorders in India and China increased by
61 and 28 percent respectively between 1990 and 2013, despite impressive economic growth
(Charlson et al., 2016).


                                                        Depression                                                              Anxiety
                        8




                                                                                             8
                        6




                                                                                             6
              Point prevalence (%)




                                                                                   Point prevalence (%)
                       4




                                                                                            4
                        2




                                                                                             2
                        0




                                                                                             0




                                        1      2    4     8    16    32  64                                  1      2    4     8    16    32  64
                                             Log GDP per capita ($000s PPP)                                       Log GDP per capita ($000s PPP)
                                     Correlation coef. r = 0.573 (p = 0.00)                               Correlation coef. r = 0.583 (p = 0.00)




Figure 6: Prevalence of common mental illnesses by country. For each country, the percentage of the
population estimated to have a depressive disorder (left panel) or anxiety disorder (right panel) is shown at
a given point in time against that country's log GDP per capita. Each scatter point represents one country.
The line shown is an Ordinary Least Squares regression line of country prevalence rates on a constant and
log GDP per capita. Prevalence rate data come from the Global Burden of Disease Study, 2017, accessible
at: http://ghdx.healthdata.org/gbd-results-tool. GDP per capita data are for 2017, measured in constant
2011 international $, and come from the World Bank's World Development Indicators dataset, accessible at:
https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators/.


   Climate change. The more frequent occurrence of extreme heat due to climate change is
anticipated to exacerbate mental illness directly (Masson-Delmotte, 2018; Trang et al., 2016).
The increased frequency of weather-related disasters, such as floods and hurricanes, poses a

                                                                              15
threat to mental health through greater exposure to trauma (Berry et al., 2018). Climate
change also threatens mental health through its negative economic consequences, which are
likely to be more pronounced in low-income countries (Masson-Delmotte, 2018). Extreme
temperatures during the agricultural growing season that damage crops and thus economic
well-being have been reported to increase suicides in agricultural regions in India (Carleton,
2017). Predicted increases in water scarcity and droughts are also likely to worsen economic
and in turn psychological well-being. Climate change is also expected to lead to increased
violence and political conflict over the next century through increased pressure on resources,
such as productive land and, possibly, psychological effects of heat on aggression (Burke et
al., 2015). This combination of economic and political consequences of climate change may
increase the flow of refugees and economic migrants, with concomitant challenges to mental
health (McMichael et al., 2012).

    Technological change and globalization. For many of those living in poverty across
the world, technological change and globalization offer enormous economic opportunities;
however, both phenomena produce winners and losers. The costs to losers, especially low-
wage workers in high- and middle-income countries who lose jobs as a result of changes in
patterns of trade or automation, can be long-lasting and substantial (Autor et al., 2016), re-
sulting in significantly worse mental health (Kuhn et al., 2009; Pierce and Schott, 2016).While
most economic research on these topics focuses on rich countries, there is an urgent need to
understand the mental-health effects of these economic changes in poorer countries.

    Offering social insurance and welfare, skills training, and job transition programs, includ-
ing psychotherapies for workers exposed to the harmful effects of technological change and
globalization will be important to protect mental health. One example is the ongoing Build-
ing Bridges and Bonds evaluation, which provides a tailored cognitive behavioral therapy
intervention to unemployed (formerly incarcerated) men in the United States, in conjunction
with traditional job-seeking services, in an attempt to increase employment and wages.

    Pandemics. Public-health crises such as the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic tend to dis-
proportionately affect those living in poverty (Adams-Prassl et al., 2020). They may worsen
mental health on average, and particularly among the poor. First, income and employment
losses as a result of morbidity can be large, which in turn can reduce mental health through
the mechanisms described above. In addition, the exposure to trauma, increased worries and
uncertainty, and worse physical health will tend to impair mental health, in turn reducing
income and employment. On the other hand, ongoing progress in reducing the burden of
other diseases which disproportionately affect the poor, such as cholera and diarrhoeal in-
fections, tuberculosis, malaria and other insect-borne diseases, will provide a countervailing
force likely to improve mental health among the poor. The COVID-19 pandemic has the
potential to set back progress in reducing the enormous burden of these diseases.

    Social media. The spread of mobile phones and the internet opens up new opportunities
for poverty alleviation (Suri and Jack, 2016) and novel ways to deliver mental health care.
However, some of these technologies may pose new threats to mental health. While more
causal evidence is needed, some studies have found that depression is correlated with internet

                                              16
addiction and with the intensity of use of social media among young adults and adolescents
(Ha et al., 2007; Lin et al., 2016). Recent randomized interventions show that deactivating
social media accounts for four weeks led to 0.1 SD reductions in depression and anxiety
scores (Allcott et al., 2019; Mosquera et al., 2019). Increased access to the internet and
social media among the global poor, while presenting enormously valuable benefits, may
therefore also pose some threat to mental health among the poor (World Bank Group, 2016).

4.1    Implications for Research and Policy
    Since mental health and poverty are intimately linked, interdisciplinary collaborations
between mental-health researchers and social scientists studying poverty are essential (Box
4). Evaluations of economic interventions should carefully measure impacts on mental health,
and vice versa. An example of such work is Bhat et al. (2019), wherein a team of psychiatrists
and economists followed up on psychotherapy clinical trials in India and deployed the tools
of behavioral economics and psychiatry to study long-run effects of psychotherapy on mental
health, economic well-being, and decision-making.

     Policy tools. There is a strong economic case for investing in the mental health of
people in poverty. A recent meta-analysis showed that mental health interventions in low-
and middle-income countries, including psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy, had similar or
larger effects on employment than economic interventions such as cash transfers, job training
programs, and multi-faceted anti-poverty programs (Lund et al., 2011). Yet, they were an
order of magnitude less expensive to deliver. Such treatments could therefore be the most
cost-effective anti-poverty intervention, at least among the subset of people who are mentally
ill. However, we know little about how to optimally combine, dose, sequence, and target eco-
nomic and mental health interventions. For instance, combining psychological and economic
interventions might lead to treatment effects that are greater than the sum of their parts. In
particular, improved mental health could increase the economic returns of receiving cash or
asset transfers by improving decision-making and productivity.

    Recently, innovative studies have compared the effects of providing psychotherapy, cash
support, or both among low-income populations. An RCT measured the effect of eight weeks
of cognitive behavioral therapy and/or $200 in cash support to a thousand criminally-engaged
men in Liberia (Blattman et al., 2017). While the psychotherapy targeted antisocial behav-
ior rather than mental illness per se, the study found that the combination of cash transfer
and psychotherapy improved an index of self-regard and mental health by 0.2 SD a year
later (p=0.024), accompanied by a modest reduction in depression and psychological distress
(-0.11 SD, p=0.24). The combined treatment not only reduced antisocial behavior but also
increased patience and self-control, while neither cash nor therapy alone had detectable ef-
fects. However, none of the treatments apparently influenced consumption or income a year
later. More studies along these lines would be valuable.

    Treatment gaps. In poor countries, the fraction of individuals diagnosed with depres-
sion and anxiety who do not receive treatment often exceeds 90 percent (Chisholm et al.,
2016; Patel et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2007; Kohn et al., 2004). Such treatment gaps likely

                                             17
result from a combination of poor supply and low demand for mental health services.

     Increasing supply. Resources for mental health care are extremely limited in low-income
countries (Figure 7) and people living in poverty often lack access to basic mental health care
(Thirunavukarasu and Thirunavukarasu, 2010). For instance, some estimates suggest that
India has only 3,900 psychiatrists for over 1.3 billion people, while 13 psychiatrists serve
Zimbabwe's 14 million people (World Health Organization, 2018). However, cost-effective
and scalable strategies for treating mental illness in low-resource settings do exist. Evidence
from multiple countries shows that `psychosocial' treatments, such as manualized talk ther-
apies can be highly effective at low cost, even when delivered by non-specialist community
health workers (Singla et al., 2017; Patel et al., 2011). An even more pared-down--but
still effective--approach is the `friendship benches' of Zimbabwe, where non-specialist health
workers (popularly known as `community grandmothers') provide problem-solving therapy
with components of behavior activation to patients (Chibanda et al., 2016).

    Reliance on in-person training and supervision of the community health workers by ex-
perts is a major barrier to scaling these approaches. The EMPOWER initiative seeks to
address these structural barriers through the deployment of digital platforms to enable front-
line workers to learn, deliver, and master evidence-based brief psychological treatments for
mental health problems, using innovative practices such as coach-supported learning and
peer-supervised quality assurance, all delivered through digital tools (Waters, 2020). EM-
POWER will roll out the brief behavioral activation treatment developed and evaluated in
India and Nepal (Box 3) to community health workers in India and the US from 2021 onwards.

    Stimulating demand. Even in settings with affordable and effective mental health ser-
vices, many people do not seek or adhere to treatment (Patel et al., 2016). People often lack
mental health literacy and may not possess basic information about mental health conditions
and their risk factors, symptoms, and potential treatment options (Jorm, 2000). Stigma and
shame can further depress demand for mental health services. But there are examples of suc-
cessful community-based programs that increase mental-health literacy and boost the share
of mentally-ill individuals who seek treatment; for example, the VISHRAM initiative, rolled
out in 30 villages in rural India, deployed `change agents', typically persons already playing
leadership roles in the villages, to engage the community in conversations around mental
health and illness, using a range of contextually appropriate strategies such as group discus-
sions; the program led to a six-fold increase in help-seeking by persons with depression in
just 18 months (Shidhaye et al., 2017). A priority for future work should be the evaluation of
such programs at scale, as well as testing approaches that bundle mental health treatments
with other unstigmatized services, subsidizing or even rewarding the take-up of treatment, or
using remote technologies such as app-based therapy that are less likely to expose individuals
to stigma.

    Poverty traps. A classic idea in development economics is the existence of a `poverty
trap' (Dasgupta and Ray, 1986). This is the idea that, below a certain threshold level of
wealth, people are not able to earn and save their way out of poverty. They remain trapped
in poverty precisely due to the deprivations associated with poverty, and not because of any

                                              18
intrinsic lack of ability. Such poverty traps could exist for many reasons. For instance, the
very poor may not be able to afford enough food to be productive at work. Recent evalua-
tions of multi-faceted anti-poverty programs have provided some evidence for the existence
of such poverty traps (Bandiera et al., 2017; Banerjee et al., 2016). However, the under-
lying mechanisms are unclear. The evidence of a bi-directional causal relationship between
poverty and mental health presented in this review suggests that mental health could be a
key mechanism: there could be psychological poverty traps. Some of those living in poverty
may be ensnared in a vicious cycle of poverty and mental illness (Lund et al., 2010). If this
is the case, a one-time economic or psychological intervention of sufficient magnitude might
`push' people into a state of sustainably higher income and better mental health.

    Conclusion. The causal relationship between poverty and mental health we have de-
scribed could not be more pertinent than in the ongoing pandemic, which has already ad-
versely affected both these outcomes. Given the surge of `deaths of despair' in the United
States in the wake of the Great Recession of 2008 (Case and Deaton, 2020), we have grave
concerns about the mental-health implications of the economic recession confronting the
world. The pandemic has disproportionately affected the poor and may have lasting adverse
impacts on their economic and mental well-being. A massive investment in mental health
was long overdue even before the pandemic, and has become critically urgent now. Beyond
more money, this is also an important opportunity to invest wisely in lower-cost innovations
which provide quality care to low-income and disadvantaged communities, and to integrate
economic interventions with mental health care to reduce historic disparities in both wealth
and mental health.




                                             19
                             40
            Number per 100,000 inhabitants
              10        20   0    30




                                             Low           Lower middle     Upper middle                  High
                                                                   Income category
                                                   Psychiatrists           Mental health social workers
                                                   Psychologists           Mental health nurses



Figure 7: Availability of Mental Health Workers across Countries. The mean numbers
of psychiatrists, social workers, psychologists and nurses working in the mental health sector (per
100,000 people) are shown for countries in each of the four income categories used by the World
Bank. Data on mental health workers comes from the WHO's Global Health Observatory, accessible at
http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.MHHR?lang=en, and is for the most recent year available (which
ranges from 2013-2017).




                                                                      20
Box 4: Priorities for Future Research on Poverty and Common Mental Illnesses


   1. Measurement of mental health in economic surveys to estimate:
          · The comparative impacts of diverse economic interventions, such as insurance, social safety, and employ-
            ment support, relative to cash transfers
          · The longer-run effects of anti-poverty programs
          · The effects of absolute versus relative poverty
          · The effect of technological change and globalization on high and low-wage workers
          · The impact of the looming global economic recession resulting from Covid-19

   2. Measurement of economic outcomes in intervention studies for depression and anxiety, including:
          · Income, labor supply, productivity and profits from self-employment
          · Economic preferences and beliefs; investment and savings behaviors
          · Household expenditures and consumption, including within-household allocation of resources

   3. Evaluations of interventions to reduce stigma and to boost demand for mental health care, including:
          · Diverse mental health literacy approaches, from mass-media campaigns to grass-root awareness building
          · Subsidies and incentives for seeking and engaging with mental health care
          · The effects of interventions on marginalized and under-served communities

   4. Evaluating technologies to increase the coverage of effective psychotherapies, including:
          · Text, phone or video-delivery
          · Digital approaches to training, supervision, and quality assurance for front-line
            providers
          · AI bot-based and other guided self-help approaches, adapted to different languages and cultural contexts

   5. Evaluating interventions to interrupt the intergenerational transmission of poverty and mental illness, for example
      through:
          · School mental health promotion programs, measuring effects also on educational attainment, labor supply,
            productivity, and earnings
          · Treating parental mental illness, measuring effects on children's cognitive and educational outcomes




                                                          21
References
Adams-Prassl, Abi, Teodora Boneva, Marta Golin, and Christopher Rauh, "In-
 equality in the Impact of the Coronavirus Shock: Evidence from Real Time Surveys,"
 2020.

Adhvaryu, Achyuta, James Fenske, and Anant Nyshadham, "Early Life Circum-
 stance and Adult Mental Health," J. Polit. Econ., August 2019, 127 (4), 1516­1549.

Aguilar, Arturo, "Cash and conditionalities' effects on early childhood: medium-term ef-
 fects on physical and cognitive development," 2012.

Allcott, Hunt, Luca Braghieri, Sarah Eichmeyer, and Matthew Gentzkow, "The
 Welfare Effects of Social Media," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research,
 Cambridge, MA January 2019.

Alloush, Mohamad, "Income, psychological well-being, and the dynamics of poverty: Evi-
 dence from South Africa," 2018.

Angeles, Gustavo, Jacobus de Hoop, Sudhanshu Handa, Kelly Kilburn, Anna-
 maria Milazzo, and Amber Peterman, "Government of Malawi's unconditional cash
 transfer improves youth mental health," Soc. Sci. Med., 2019, 225 (C), 108­119.

Apouey, Benedicte and Andrew E Clark, "Winning Big but Feeling no Better? The
 Effect of Lottery Prizes on Physical and Mental Health," Health Econ., May 2015, 24 (5),
 516­538.

Armstrong, Thomas and Bunmi O Olatunji, "Eye tracking of attention in the affective
 disorders: A meta-analytic review and synthesis," Clin. Psychol. Rev., December 2012, 32
 (8), 704­723.

Arvind, Banavaram Anniappan, Gopalkrishna Gururaj, Santosh Loganathan,
 Senthil Amudhan, Mathew Varghese, Vivek Benegal, Girish N Rao, Arun Ma-
 hadeo Kokane, B S Chavan, P K Dalal, Daya Ram, Kangkan Pathak, Lenin
 Singh R K, Lokesh Kumar Singh, Pradeep Sharma, Pradeep Kumar Saha,
 C Ramasubramanian, Ritambhara Y Mehta, and T M Shibukumar, "Prevalence
 and socioeconomic impact of depressive disorders in India: multisite population-based
 cross-sectional study," BMJ Open, June 2019, 9 (6), e027250.

Autor, David H, David Dorn, and Gordon H Hanson, "The China Shock: Learning
 from Labor-Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade," Annu. Rev. Econom., October
 2016, 8 (1), 205­240.

Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntosh, and Berk Özler, "When the Money Runs Out: Do Cash
 Transfers Have Sustained Effects on Human Capital Accumulation?," 2019.

  , Jacobus de Hoop, and Berk Özler, "Income Shocks and Adolescent Mental Health,"
  J. Hum. Resour., March 2013, 48 (2), 370­403.


                                           22
Bandiera, Oriana, Robin Burgess, Narayan Das, Selim Gulesci, Imran Rasul, and
 Munshi Sulaiman, "Labor Markets and Poverty in Village Economies," Q. J. Econ., May
 2017, 132 (2), 811­870.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Nathanael Goldberg, Dean Karlan, Robert Osei,
 William Parienté, Jeremy Shapiro, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry,
 "A multifaceted program causes lasting progress for the very poor: Evidence from six
 countries," Science, May 2015, 348 (6236).

  , , Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, and Jeremy Shapiro, "The long term impacts of
  a "Graduation" program: Evidence from West Bengal," Unpublished paper, Massachusetts
  Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 2016.

  , Paul Niehaus, and Tavneet Suri, "Universal Basic Income in the Developing World,"
  Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA February 2019.

Banks, Lena Morgon, Hannah Kuper, and Sarah Polack, "Correction: Poverty and
 disability in low- and middle-income countries: A systematic review," September 2018.

Baranov, Victoria, Sonia R Bhalotra, Pietro Biroli, and Joanna Maselko, "Mater-
 nal Depression,Women's Empowerment, and Parental Investment: Evidence from a Large
 Randomized Control Trial," December 2017.

Bastagli, Francesca, Jessica Hagen-Zanker, Luke Harman, Valentina Barca,
 Georgina Sturge, Tanja Schmidt, and Luca Pellerano, "Cash transfers: what does
 the evidence say," A rigorous review of programme impact and the role of design and im-
 plementation features. London: ODI, 2016.

Bayer, Ya'akov M, Ze'ev Shtudiner, Oxsana Suhorukov, and Nimrod Grisaru,
 "Time and Risk Preferences, and Consumption Decisions of Patients with Clinical Depres-
 sion," July 2018.

Beck, Aaron T, Depression, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1967.

Bedoya, Guadalupe, Aidan Coville, Johannes Haushofer, Mohammad Razaq
 Isaqzadeh, and Jeremy Shapiro, "No Household Left Behind: Afghanistan Target-
 ing the Ultra Poor Impact Evaluation," June 2019.

Berry, Helen L, Thomas D Waite, Keith B G Dear, Anthony G Capon, and Vir-
 ginia Murray, "The case for systems thinking about climate change and mental health,"
 Nat. Clim. Chang., April 2018, 8 (4), 282­290.

Bessone, Pedro, Gautam Rao, Frank Schilbach, Heather Schofield, and Mattie
 Toma, "The Economic Consequences of Increasing Sleep Among the Urban Poor," Febru-
 ary 2020.

Bhat, Bhargav, Johannes Haushofer, Jonathan de Quidt, Vikram Patel, Frank
 Schilbach, Gautam Rao, and Pierre-Luc Vautrey, "The Economics Consequences of
 Depression: Evidence from Goa. AEA RCT Registry," January 2019.

                                          23
Biasi, Barbara, Michael S Dahl, and Petra Moser, "Career Effects of Mental Health,"
  October 2019.

Blair, Clancy and C Cybele Raver, "Poverty, Stress, and Brain Development: New
  Directions for Prevention and Intervention," Acad. Pediatr., April 2016, 16 (3), S30­S36.

Blattman, Chris, Simon Franklin, and Stefan Dercon, "Impacts of industrial and
  entrepreneurial jobs on youth: 5-year experimental evidence on factory job offers and cash
  grants in Ethiopia," April 2019.

Blattman, Christopher, Eric P Green, Julian C Jamison, M Christian Lehmann,
  and Jeannie Annan, "The Returns to Microenterprise Support Among the Ultra-Poor:
  A Field Experiment in Post-War Uganda," June 2015.

  , Julian C Jamison, and Margaret Sheridan, "Reducing Crime and Violence: Exper-
  imental Evidence from Cognitive Behavioral Therapy in Liberia," Am. Econ. Rev., April
  2017, 107 (4), 1165­1206.

  , Nathan Fiala, and Sebastian Martinez, "The Long Term Impacts of Grants on
  Poverty: 9-Year Evidence from Uganda's Youth Opportunities Program," April 2019.

Bleakley, Hoyt, "Health, Human Capital, and Development," Annu. Rev. Econom., Septem-
  ber 2010, 2 (1), 283­310.

Brhlikova, Petra, Allyson M Pollock, and Rachel Manners, "Global Burden of Disease
 estimates of depression ­ how reliable is the epidemiological evidence?," J. R. Soc. Med.,
 January 2011, 104 (1), 25­34.

Burke, Marshall, Solomon M Hsiang, and Edward Miguel, "Climate and Conflict,"
 Annu. Rev. Econom., August 2015, 7 (1), 577­617.

Cacioppo, John T, Mary Elizabeth Hughes, Linda J Waite, Louise C Hawkley,
 and Ronald A Thisted, "Loneliness as a specific risk factor for depressive symptoms:
 Cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses," Psychol. Aging, March 2006, 21 (1), 140­151.

Carleton, Tamma A, "Crop-damaging temperatures increase suicide rates in India," Proc.
 Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., August 2017, 114 (33), 8746­8751.

Case, Anne and Angus Deaton, "Deaths of Despair and the Future of Capitalism," 2020.

Cesarini, David, Erik Lindqvist, Robert Östling, and Björn Wallace, "Wealth,
 Health, and Child Development: Evidence from Administrative Data on Swedish Lottery
 Players," Q. J. Econ., May 2016, 131 (2), 687­738.

Charlson, Fiona J, Amanda J Baxter, Hui G Cheng, Rahul Shidhaye, and Har-
 vey A Whiteford, "The burden of mental, neurological, and substance use disorders
 in China and India: a systematic analysis of community representative epidemiological
 studies," Lancet, July 2016, 388 (10042), 376­389.


                                            24
Chibanda, Dixon, Helen A Weiss, Ruth Verhey, Victoria Simms, Ronald
 Munjoma, Simbarashe Rusakaniko, Alfred Chingono, Epiphania Munetsi, Tari-
 sai Bere, Ethel Manda, Melanie Abas, and Ricardo Araya, "Effect of a Primary
 Care­Based Psychological Intervention on Symptoms of Common Mental Disorders in
 Zimbabwe: A Randomized Clinical Trial," JAMA, December 2016, 316 (24), 2618­2626.

Chisholm, Dan, Kim Sweeny, Peter Sheehan, Bruce Rasmussen, Filip Smit, Pim
 Cuijpers, and Shekhar Saxena, "Scaling-up treatment of depression and anxiety: a
 global return on investment analysis," The Lancet Psychiatry, May 2016, 3 (5), 415­424.

Christian, Cornelius, Lukas Hensel, and Christopher Roth, "Income Shocks and
 Suicides: Causal Evidence From Indonesia," Rev. Econ. Stat., December 2019, 101 (5),
 905­920.

Cobb-Clark, Deborah A, Sarah Dahmann, and Nathan Kettlewell, "Depression,
 risk preferences and risk-taking behavior," Technical Report 12285, Institute for the Study
 of Labor (IZA) May 2019.

Collins, Daryl, Jonathan Morduch, Stuart Rutherford, and Orlanda Ruthven,
 Portfolios of the Poor: How the World's Poor Live on $2 a Day, Princeton University
 Press, 2009.

Cornaglia, Francesca, Naomi E Feldman, and Andrew Leigh, "Crime and Mental
 Well-Being," J. Hum. Resour., January 2014, 49 (1), 110­140.

Cuijpers, Pim, Erica Weitz, Eirini Karyotaki, Judy Garber, and Gerhard An-
 dersson, "The effects of psychological treatment of maternal depression on children and
 parental functioning: a meta-analysis," Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry, February 2015, 24
 (2), 237­245.

Cunradi, Carol B, Raul Caetano, Catherine Clark, and John Schafer, "Neigh-
 borhood Poverty as a Predictor of Intimate Partner Violence Among White, Black, and
 Hispanic Couples in the United States: A Multilevel Analysis," Ann. Epidemiol., July
 2000, 10 (5), 297­308.

Cutler, David M, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Tom Vogl, "Socioeconomic Status and
 Health: Dimensions and Mechanisms," September 2008.

Das, Jishnu, Quy-Toan Do, Jed Friedman, and David McKenzie, "Mental Health
 Patterns and Consequences: Results from Survey Data in Five Developing Countries,"
 World Bank Econ. Rev., January 2009, 23 (1), 31­55.

Dasgupta, Partha and Debraj Ray, "Inequality as a Determinant of Malnutrition and
 Unemployment: Theory," 1986.

de Quidt, Jonathan and Johannes Haushofer, "Depression for Economists," Technical
  Report, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA December 2016.



                                            25
Dean, Emma Boswell, Frank Schilbach, and Heather Schofield, "Poverty and cogni-
 tive function," The economics of poverty traps, 2018, pp. 57­118.

Desjarlais, Robert, World Mental Health: Problems and Priorities in Low-income Coun-
 tries, Oxford University Press, 1995.

Ding, N, H Berry, and L O'Brien, "The Effect of Extreme Heat on Mental Health ­
 Evidence from Australia," Int. J. Epidemiol., October 2015, 44 (suppl_1), i64­i64.

Dückers, Michel L A, Lennart Reifels, Derek P De Beurs, and Chris R Brewin,
 "The vulnerability paradox in global mental health and its applicability to suicide," Br. J.
 Psychiatry, October 2019, 215 (4), 588­593.

Duflo, Esther and Abhijit Banerjee, "The economic lives of the poor," J. Econ. Perspect.,
 2007, 21 (1), 141­167.

Edmonds, Eric and Caroline Theoharides, "The short term impact of a productive asset
 transfer in families with child labor: Experimental evidence from the Philippines," J. Dev.
 Econ., September 2020, 146, 102486.

Egger, Dennis, Johannes Haushofer, Edward Miguel, Paul Niehaus, and
 Michael W Walker, "General Equilibrium Effects of Cash Transfers: Experimental Evi-
 dence from Kenya," December 2019.

Eil, David and Justin M Rao, "The Good News-Bad News Effect: Asymmetric Processing
  of Objective Information about Yourself," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics,
  May 2011, 3 (2), 114­138.

Evans, David K and Anna Popova, Cash Transfers and Temptation Goods: A Review
 of Global Evidence Policy Research Working Papers, The World Bank, May 2014.

Fernald, Lia C H and Melissa Hidrobo, "Effect of Ecuador's cash transfer program
  (Bono de Desarrollo Humano) on child development in infants and toddlers: a randomized
  effectiveness trial," Soc. Sci. Med., May 2011, 72 (9), 1437­1446.

Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gru-
  ber, Joseph P Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and Oregon Health
  Study Group, "The Oregon health insurance experiment: Evidence from the first year,"
  Q. J. Econ., August 2012, 127 (3), 1057­1106.

Frasquilho, Diana, Margarida Gaspar Matos, Ferdinand Salonna, Diogo Guer-
  reiro, Cláudia C Storti, Tânia Gaspar, and José M Caldas de Almeida, "Mental
  health outcomes in times of economic recession: a systematic literature review," BMC
  Public Health, February 2016, 16 (1), 115.

Glass, Nancy, Nancy A Perrin, Anjalee Kohli, Jacquelyn Campbell, and
 Mitima Mpanano Remy, "Randomised controlled trial of a livestock productive asset
 transfer programme to improve economic and health outcomes and reduce intimate partner
 violence in a postconflict setting," BMJ Glob Health, February 2017, 2 (1), e000165.

                                             26
Goodman, Lisa A, Katya Fels Smyth, Angela M Borges, and Rachel Singer, "When
 Crises Collide: How Intimate Partner Violence and Poverty Intersect to Shape Women's
 Mental Health and Coping?," Trauma Violence Abuse, October 2009, 10 (4), 306­329.

Gotlib, Ian H and Jutta Joormann, "Cognition and Depression: Current Status and
 Future Directions," March 2010.

Green, E P, C Blattman, J Jamison, and J Annan, "Does poverty alleviation decrease
 depression symptoms in post-conflict settings? A cluster-randomized trial of microenter-
 prise assistance in Northern Uganda," Global Mental Health, 2016, 3.

Grubb, Søren and Martin Lauritzen, "Deep sleep drives brain fluid oscillations," Science,
 2019, 366 (6465), 572­573.

Ha, J H, S Y Kim, S C Bae, S Bae, H Kim, M Sim, I K Lyoo, and S C Cho,
 "Depression and Internet Addiction in Adolescents," Psychopathology, 2007, 40 (6), 424­
 430.

Hakulinen, C, M Elovainio, M Arffman, S Lumme, S Pirkola, I Keskimäki,
 K Manderbacka, and P Böckerman, "Mental disorders and long-term labour mar-
 ket outcomes: nationwide cohort study of 2 055 720 individuals," Acta Psychiatr. Scand.,
 October 2019, 140 (4), 371­381.

Harvey, Allison G, "Sleep and Circadian Functioning: Critical Mechanisms in the Mood
 Disorders?," March 2011.

Hashemi, Syed M and Aude De Montesquiou, "Reaching the poorest: Lessons from
 the graduation model," Focus Note, 2011, 69 (1), 1­15.

Haushofer, Johannes and Ernst Fehr, "On the psychology of poverty," 2014.

   and Jeremy Shapiro, "The Short-term Impact of Unconditional Cash Transfers to the
  Poor: Experimental Evidence from Kenya*," Q. J. Econ., November 2016, 131 (4), 1973­
  2042.

   and , "The long-term impact of unconditional cash transfers: experimental evidence
  from Kenya," Busara Center for Behavioral Economics, Nairobi, Kenya, 2018.

  , Charlotte Ringdal, Jeremy P Shapiro, and Xiao Yu Wang, "Income Changes
  and Intimate Partner Violence: Evidence from Unconditional Cash Transfers in Kenya,"
  March 2019.

  , Robert Mudida, and Jeremy Shapiro, "The Comparative Impact of Cash Transfers
  and Psychotherapy on Psychological and Economic Well-being," 2020.

Heath, Rachel, Melissa Hidrobo, and Shalini Roy, "Cash transfers, polygamy, and
 intimate partner violence: Experimental evidence from Mali," J. Dev. Econ., March 2020,
 143, 102410.


                                           27
Heckman, James J and Stefano Mosso, "The Economics of Human Development and
 Social Mobility," Annu. Rev. Econom., August 2014, 6 (1), 689­733.

Hjelm, Lisa, Sudhanshu Handa, Jacobus de Hoop, and Tia Palermo, "Poverty and
 perceived stress: Evidence from two unconditional cash transfer programs in Zambia," Soc.
 Sci. Med., March 2017, 177, 110­117.

Iemmi, Valentina, Jason Bantjes, Ernestina Coast, Kerrie Channer, Tiziana
  Leone, David McDaid, Alexis Palfreyman, Bevan Stephens, and Crick Lund,
  "Suicide and poverty in low-income and middle-income countries: a systematic review,"
  The Lancet Psychiatry, August 2016, 3 (8), 774­783.

Ismayilova, Leyla, Leyla Karimli, Jo Sanson, Eleni Gaveras, Rachel Nanema,
  Alexice Tô-Camier, and Josh Chaffin, "Improving mental health among ultra-poor
  children: Two-year outcomes of a cluster-randomized trial in Burkina Faso," Soc. Sci. Med.,
  July 2018, 208, 180­189.

James, Spencer L, Degu Abate, Kalkidan Hassen Abate, Solomon M Abay, Cris-
  tiana Abbafati, Nooshin Abbasi, Hedayat Abbastabar, Foad Abd-Allah, Jemal
  Abdela, Ahmed Abdelalim, and Others, "Global, regional, and national incidence,
  prevalence, and years lived with disability for 354 diseases and injuries for 195 countries
  and territories, 1990­2017: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study
  2017," Lancet, 2018, 392 (10159), 1789­1858.

Janzen, Sarah, Nicholas Magnan, Sudhindra Sharma, and William Thompson,
  "Short-Term Impacts of a Pay-It-Forward Livestock Transfer and Training Program in
  Nepal," AEA Papers and Proceedings, May 2018, 108, 422­425.

Jia, Zhen, Yongjie Wei, Xiaoqian Li, Lixin Yang, Huijie Liu, Chen Guo, Lulu
  Zhang, Nannan Li, Shaojuan Guo, Yan Qian, and Zhigang Li, "Exposure to
  Ambient Air Particles Increases the Risk of Mental Disorder: Findings from a Natural
  Experiment in Beijing," Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, January 2018, 15 (1), 160.

Jorm, A F, "Mental health literacy: Public knowledge and beliefs about mental disorders,"
  Br. J. Psychiatry, November 2000, 177 (5), 396­401.

Kaur, Supreet, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Frank Schilbach, "Does Financial Strain
 Lower Productivity?," 2019.

Kessler, Ronald, G Amminger, Sergio Aguilar-Gaxiola, Jordi Alonso, Sing Lee,
 and T Ü, "Age of onset of mental disorders: a review of recent literature," Curr. Opin.
 Psychiatry, July 2007, 20 (4), 359­364.

Kilburn, Kelly, Harsha Thirumurthy, Carolyn Tucker Halpern, Audrey Pettifor,
 and Sudhanshu Handa, "Effects of a Large-Scale Unconditional Cash Transfer Program
 on Mental Health Outcomes of Young People in Kenya," J. Adolesc. Health Care, February
 2016, 58 (2), 223­229.



                                             28
  , James P Hughes, Catherine MacPhail, Ryan G Wagner, F Xavier Gómez-
  Olivé, Kathleen Kahn, and Audrey Pettifor, "Cash Transfers, Young Women's Eco-
  nomic Well-Being, and HIV Risk: Evidence from HPTN 068," AIDS Behav., May 2019,
  23 (5), 1178­1194.

  , Sudhanshu Handa, Gustavo Angeles, Peter Mvula, and Maxton Tsoka, "Short-
  term Impacts of an Unconditional Cash Transfer Program on Child Schooling: Experimen-
  tal Evidence from Malawi," Econ. Educ. Rev., August 2017, 59, 63­80.

Kohn, Robert, Shekhar Saxena, Itzhak Levav, and Benedetto Saraceno, "The
 treatment gap in mental health care," Bull. World Health Organ., November 2004, 82,
 858­866.

Korn, C W, T Sharot, H Walter, H R Heekeren, and R J Dolan, "Depression is
 related to an absence of optimistically biased belief updating about future life events,"
 Psychol. Med., February 2014, 44 (3), 579­592.

Kremer, Michael, Gautam Rao, and Frank Schilbach, "Chapter 5 - Behavioral de-
 velopment economics," in B Douglas Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson,
 eds., Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Applications and Foundations 1, Vol. 2, North-
 Holland, January 2019, pp. 345­458.

Kroenke, Kurt and Robert L Spitzer, "The PHQ-9: a new depression diagnostic and
 severity measure," Psychiatr. Ann., 2002, 32 (9), 509­515.

Kuhn, Andreas, Rafael Lalive, and Josef Zweimüller, "The public health costs of job
 loss," J. Health Econ., December 2009, 28 (6), 1099­1115.

Lauber, Christoph and Wulf Rössler, "Stigma towards people with mental illness in
  developing countries in Asia," Int. Rev. Psychiatry, January 2007, 19 (2), 157­178.

Layard, Richard, John F Helliwell, and Jeffrey D Sachs, "World Happiness Report
  2012," Technical Report, Earth Institute, Columbia University 2012.

Lindqvist, Erik, Robert Östling, and David Cesarini, "Long-run Effects of Lottery
  Wealth on Psychological Well-being," May 2018.

Ludwig, Jens, Greg J Duncan, Lisa A Gennetian, Lawrence F Katz, Ronald C
 Kessler, Jeffrey R Kling, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu, "Neighborhood Effects on the
 Long-Term Well-Being of Low-Income Adults," Science, September 2012, 337 (6101), 1505­
 1510.

Lund, Crick, Alison Breen, Alan J Flisher, Ritsuko Kakuma, Joanne Corrigall,
 John A Joska, Leslie Swartz, and Vikram Patel, "Poverty and common mental
 disorders in low and middle income countries: A systematic review," Soc. Sci. Med., August
 2010, 71 (3), 517­528.




                                            29
  , Kate Orkin, Marc Witte, Thandi Davies, Johannes Haushofer, Judy Bass,
  Paul Bolton, Sarah Murray, Laura Murray, Wietse Tol, Graham Thornicroft,
  and Vikram Patel, "The economic effects of mental health interventions in low and
  middle-income countries," Technical Report, Working Paper 2019.

  , Mary De Silva, Sophie Plagerson, Sara Cooper, Dan Chisholm, Jishnu Das,
  Martin Knapp, and Vikram Patel, "Poverty and mental disorders: breaking the cycle
  in low-income and middle-income countries," Lancet, October 2011, 378 (9801), 1502­1514.

  , Stephen Stansfeld, and Mary De Silva, "Social determinants of mental health,"
  Global mental health: Principles and practice, 2014, pp. 116­136.

Macours, Karen and Renos Vakis, Changing households' investments and aspirations
 through social interactions: evidence from a randomized transfer program, The World Bank,
 2009.

Mall, Sumaya, Crick Lund, Gemma Vilagut, Jordi Alonso, David R Williams,
 and Dan J Stein, "Days out of role due to mental and physical illness in the South
 African stress and health study," Soc. Psychiatry Psychiatr. Epidemiol., March 2015, 50
 (3), 461­468.

Manber, Rachel, Jack D Edinger, Jenna L Gress, Melanie G San Pedro-Salcedo,
 Tracy F Kuo, and Tasha Kalista, "Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia En-
 hances Depression Outcome in Patients with Comorbid Major Depressive Disorder and
 Insomnia," Sleep, April 2008, 31 (4), 489­495.

Mani, Anandi, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Jiaying Zhao, "Poverty
 Impedes Cognitive Function," Science, August 2013, 341 (6149), 976­980.

Marmot, Michael, "Social determinants of health inequalities," Lancet, March 2005, 365
 (9464), 1099­1104.

Masson-Delmotte, Valérie, Global Warming of 1.5 OC: An IPCC Special Report on the
 Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5 C Above Pre-industrial Levels and Related Global Green-
 house Gas Emission Pathways, in the Context of Strengthening the Global Response to the
 Threat of Climate Change, Sustainable Development, and Efforts to Eradicate Poverty,
 World Meteorological Organization, 2018.

McMichael, Celia, Jon Barnett, and Anthony J McMichael, "An Ill Wind? Climate
 Change, Migration, and Health," Environ. Health Perspect., May 2012, 120 (5), 646­654.

Milanovic, Branko, Global Inequality: A New Approach for the Age of Globalization, Har-
 vard University Press, April 2016.

Mojtabai, Ramin, Elizabeth A Stuart, Irving Hwang, Ryoko Susukida,
 William W Eaton, Nancy Sampson, and Ronald C Kessler, "Long-term effects
 of mental disorders on employment in the National Comorbidity Survey ten-year follow-
 up," Soc. Psychiatry Psychiatr. Epidemiol., 2015, 50 (11), 1657­1668.


                                           30
Mosquera, Roberto, Mofioluwasademi Odunowo, Trent McNamara, Xiongfei
 Guo, and Ragan Petrie, "The economic effects of Facebook," Exp. Econ., 2019, pp. 1­28.

Murray, Christopher J L, Alan D Lopez, World Health Organization, and Others,
 "The global burden of disease: a comprehensive assessment of mortality and disability from
 diseases, injuries, and risk factors in 1990 and projected to 2020: summary," Technical
 Report, World Health Organization 1996.

Noble, Kimberly G, Suzanne M Houston, Natalie H Brito, Hauke Bartsch, Eric
 Kan, Joshua M Kuperman, Natacha Akshoomoff, David G Amaral, Cinna-
 mon S Bloss, Ondrej Libiger, Nicholas J Schork, Sarah S Murray, B J Casey,
 Linda Chang, Thomas M Ernst, Jean A Frazier, Jeffrey R Gruen, David N
 Kennedy, Peter Van Zijl, Stewart Mostofsky, Walter E Kaufmann, Tal Kenet,
 Anders M Dale, Terry L Jernigan, and Elizabeth R Sowell, "Family income,
 parental education and brain structure in children and adolescents," Nat. Neurosci., May
 2015, 18 (5), 773­778.

Olesen, Sarah C, Peter Butterworth, Liana S Leach, Margaret Kelaher, and Jane
 Pirkis, "Mental health affects future employment as job loss affects mental health: findings
 from a longitudinal population study," BMC Psychiatry, May 2013, 13 (1), 144.

Patel, V, R Araya, N Chowdhary, M King, B Kirkwood, S Nayak, G Simon, and
 H A Weiss, "Detecting common mental disorders in primary care in India: a comparison
 of five screening questionnaires," Psychol. Med., February 2008, 38 (2), 221­228.

Patel, Vikram, Benedict Weobong, Helen A Weiss, Arpita Anand, Bhargav Bhat,
 Basavraj Katti, Sona Dimidjian, Ricardo Araya, Steve D Hollon, Michael King,
 Lakshmi Vijayakumar, A-La Park, David McDaid, Terry Wilson, Richard
 Velleman, Betty R Kirkwood, and Christopher G Fairburn, "The Healthy Ac-
 tivity Program (HAP), a lay counsellor-delivered brief psychological treatment for severe
 depression, in primary care in India: a randomised controlled trial," Lancet, January 2017,
 389 (10065), 176­185.

  , Gregory Simon, Neerja Chowdhary, Sylvia Kaaya, and Ricardo Araya, "Pack-
  ages of Care for Depression in Low- and Middle-Income Countries," PLoS Med., 2009, 6
  (10), e1000159.

  , Neerja Chowdhary, Atif Rahman, and Helen Verdeli, "Improving access to psy-
  chological treatments: Lessons from developing countries," Behav. Res. Ther., September
  2011, 49 (9), 523­528.

  , Shuiyuan Xiao, Hanhui Chen, Fahmy Hanna, A T Jotheeswaran, Dan Luo,
  Rachana Parikh, Eesha Sharma, Shamaila Usmani, Yu Yu, Benjamin G Druss,
  and Shekhar Saxena, "The magnitude of and health system responses to the mental
  health treatment gap in adults in India and China," Lancet, December 2016, 388 (10063),
  3074­3084.



                                             31
Patton, George C, Susan M Sawyer, John S Santelli, David A Ross, Rima
 Afifi, Nicholas B Allen, Monika Arora, Peter Azzopardi, Wendy Baldwin,
 Christopher Bonell, Ritsuko Kakuma, Elissa Kennedy, Jaqueline Mahon, Terry
 McGovern, Ali H Mokdad, Vikram Patel, Suzanne Petroni, Nicola Reavley,
 Kikelomo Taiwo, Jane Waldfogel, Dakshitha Wickremarathne, Carmen Bar-
 roso, Zulfiqar Bhutta, Adesegun O Fatusi, Amitabh Mattoo, Judith Diers,
 Jing Fang, Jane Ferguson, Frederick Ssewamala, and Russell M Viner, "Our
 future: a Lancet commission on adolescent health and wellbeing," Lancet, June 2016, 387
 (10036), 2423­2478.

Paxson, Christina and Norbert Schady, "Does Money Matter? The Effects of Cash
 Transfers on Child Development in Rural Ecuador," Econ. Dev. Cult. Change, 2010, 59
 (1), 187­229.

Perez-Truglia, Ricardo, "The Effects of Income Transparency on Well-Being: Evidence
 from a Natural Experiment," February 2019.

Persson, Petra and Maya Rossin-Slater, "Family Ruptures, Stress, and the Mental
 Health of the Next Generation," Am. Econ. Rev., 2018, 108 (4-5), 1214­1252.

Pescosolido, Bernice A, Tait R Medina, Jack K Martin, and J Scott Long, "The
 "Backbone" of Stigma: Identifying the Global Core of Public Prejudice Associated With
 Mental Illness," Am. J. Public Health, May 2013, 103 (5), 853­860.

Pierce, Justin R and Peter K Schott, "Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence
  from U.S. Counties," November 2016.

Prinz, Daniel, Michael Chernew, David Cutler, and Austin Frakt, "Health and
 Economic Activity Over the Lifecycle: Literature Review," Technical Report, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA July 2018.

Roelen, Keetie, Micah Sherer, and Carmen-Leon Himmelstine, "The role of gradua-
 tion programming in promoting early childhood development: an overview of the evidence,"
 2020.

Rubin, Donald B, "Estimation in Parallel Randomized Experiments," J. Educ. Behav.
 Stat., December 1981, 6 (4), 377­401.

Sareen, Jitender, Tracie O Afifi, Katherine A McMillan, and Gordon J G As-
  mundson, "Relationship Between Household Income and Mental Disorders: Findings
  From a Population-Based Longitudinal Study," Arch. Gen. Psychiatry, April 2011, 68
  (4), 419­427.

Saxena, Shekhar, Pratap Sharan, Marco Garrido, and Benedetto Saraceno, "World
  Health Organization's Mental Health Atlas 2005:implications for policy development,"
  World Psychiatry, October 2006, 5 (3), 179­184.




                                           32
Scott, Kate M, Carmen Lim, Ali Al-Hamzawi, Jordi Alonso, Ronny Bruffaerts,
  José Miguel Caldas de Almeida, Silvia Florescu, Giovanni de Girolamo, Chiyi
  Hu, Peter de Jonge, Norito Kawakami, Maria Elena Medina-Mora, Jacek
  Moskalewicz, Fernando Navarro-Mateu, Siobhan O'Neill, Marina Piazza, José
  Posada-Villa, Yolanda Torres, and Ronald C Kessler, "Association of Mental Dis-
  orders With Subsequent Chronic Physical Conditions: World Mental Health Surveys From
  17 Countries," JAMA Psychiatry, February 2016, 73 (2), 150­158.

Shapiro, Jeremy, "The impact of recipient choice on aid effectiveness," World Dev., April
  2019, 116, 137­149.

Sharac, Jessica, Paul Mccrone, Sarah Clement, and Graham Thornicroft, "The
  economic impact of mental health stigma and discrimination: A systematic review," Epi-
  demiol. Psychiatr. Sci., September 2010, 19 (3), 223­232.

Sharkey, Patrick, Max Besbris, and Michael Friedson, "Poverty and Crime," in David
  Brady And Linda, ed., The Oxford Handbook of the Social Science of Poverty, Oxford
  University Press, May 2016.

Shen, Chan, Usha Sambamoorthi, and George Rust, "Co-occurring Mental Illness and
  Health Care Utilization and Expenditures in Adults with Obesity and Chronic Physical
  Illness," Dis. Manag., June 2008, 11 (3), 153­160.

Shidhaye, Rahul, Vaibhav Murhar, Siddharth Gangale, Luke Aldridge, Rahul
  Shastri, Rachana Parikh, Ritu Shrivastava, Suvarna Damle, Tasneem Raja, Ab-
  hijit Nadkarni, and Vikram Patel, "The effect of VISHRAM, a grass-roots community-
  based mental health programme, on the treatment gap for depression in rural communities
  in India: a population-based study," 2017.

Singla, Daisy R, Brandon A Kohrt, Laura K Murray, Arpita Anand, Bruce F
  Chorpita, and Vikram Patel, "Psychological Treatments for the World: Lessons from
  Low- and Middle-Income Countries," May 2017.

Spitzer, Robert L, Kurt Kroenke, Janet B W Williams, and Bernd Löwe, "A Brief
  Measure for Assessing Generalized Anxiety Disorder: The GAD-7," Arch. Intern. Med.,
  May 2006, 166 (10), 1092­1097.

Staufenbiel, Sabine M, Brenda W J H Penninx, Anne T Spijker, Bernet M
  Elzinga, and Elisabeth F C van Rossum, "Hair cortisol, stress exposure, and mental
  health in humans: A systematic review," Psychoneuroendocrinology, August 2013, 38 (8),
  1220­1235.

Sulaiman, Munshi, Nathanael Goldberg, Dean Karlan, and Aude de Mon-
  tesquiou, "Eliminating extreme poverty: Comparing the cost-effectiveness of livelihood,
  cash transfer, and graduation approaches," in "Forum. Washington, DC: CGAP. C" 2016.

Suri, Tavneet and William Jack, "The long-run poverty and gender impacts of mobile
  money," Science, December 2016, 354 (6317), 1288­1292.

                                           33
Tampubolon, Gindo and Wulung Hanandita, "Poverty and mental health in Indonesia,"
  Soc. Sci. Med., April 2014, 106, 20­27.
Thirunavukarasu, M and P Thirunavukarasu, "Training and National deficit of psy-
 chiatrists in India - A critical analysis," Indian J. Psychiatry, January 2010, 52 (7), 83.
Trang, Phan Minh, Joacim Rocklöv, Kim Bao Giang, Gunnar Kullgren, and
  Maria Nilsson, "Heatwaves and Hospital Admissions for Mental Disorders in Northern
  Vietnam," PLoS One, 2016, 11 (5), e0155609.
Vamos, Eszter Panna, Istvan Mucsi, Andras Keszei, Maria S Kopp, and Marta
 Novak, "Comorbid Depression Is Associated With Increased Healthcare Utilization and
 Lost Productivity in Persons With Diabetes: A Large Nationally Representative Hungarian
 Population Survey," Psychosom. Med., June 2009, 71 (5), 501.
Walker, Robert and Grace Bantebya-Kyomuhendo, The Shame of Poverty, Oxford
 University Press, 2014.
Wang, Philip S, Sergio Aguilar-Gaxiola, Jordi Alonso, Matthias C Angermeyer,
 Guilherme Borges, Evelyn J Bromet, Ronny Bruffaerts, Giovanni de Girolamo,
 Ron de Graaf, Oye Gureje, Josep Maria Haro, Elie G Karam, Ronald C Kessler,
 Viviane Kovess, Michael C Lane, Sing Lee, Daphna Levinson, Yutaka Ono,
 Maria Petukhova, José Posada-Villa, Soraya Seedat, and J Elisabeth Wells,
 "Use of mental health services for anxiety, mood, and substance disorders in 17 countries
 in the WHO world mental health surveys," Lancet, September 2007, 370 (9590), 841­850.
Waters, Rob, "Community Workers Lend Human Connection To COVID-19 Response,"
 Health Aff., July 2020, 39 (7), 1112­1117.
Weobong, Benedict, Helen A Weiss, David McDaid, Daisy R Singla, Steven D
 Hollon, Abhijit Nadkarni, A-La Park, Bhargav Bhat, Basavraj Katti, Arpita
 Anand, and Others, "Sustained effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of the Healthy Activ-
 ity Programme, a brief psychological treatment for depression delivered by lay counsellors
 in primary care: 12-month follow-up of a randomised controlled trial," PLoS Med., 2017,
 14 (9).
Williams, Matt N, Stephen R Hill, and John Spicer, "Do hotter temperatures increase
 the incidence of self-harm hospitalisations?," Psychol. Health Med., February 2016, 21 (2),
 226­235.
Wolfe, Barbara, Jessica Jakubowski, Robert Haveman, and Marissa Courey, "The
 Income and Health Effects of Tribal Casino Gaming on American Indians," Demography,
 May 2012, 49 (2), 499­524.
World Bank Group, World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends, World Bank
 Publications, January 2016.
World Health Organization, "Mental health atlas 2017," Technical Report, World Health
 Organization, Geneva 2018.

                                            34
   and Others, "Promoting mental health: concepts, emerging evidence, practice: a report
  of the World Health Organization, Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse,"
  Technical Report, WHO/Victorian Health Promotion Foundation/University of Melbourne
  2005.

Xu, Ke, David B Evans, Guido Carrin, Ana Mylena Aguilar-Rivera, Philip Mus-
 grove, and Timothy Evans, "Protecting Households From Catastrophic Health Spend-
 ing," Health Aff., July 2007, 26 (4), 972­983.

Xue, Tao, Tong Zhu, Yixuan Zheng, and Qiang Zhang, "Author Correction: Declines
 in mental health associated with air pollution and temperature variability in China," Nat.
 Commun., December 2019, 10 (1).

yi Lin, Liu, Jaime E Sidani, Ariel Shensa, Ana Radovic, Elizabeth Miller, Ja-
  son B Colditz, Beth L Hoffman, Leila M Giles, and Brian A Primack, "ASSOCI-
  ATION BETWEEN SOCIAL MEDIA USE AND DEPRESSION AMONG U.S. YOUNG
  ADULTS: Research Article: Social Media and Depression," Depress. Anxiety, April 2016,
  33 (4), 323­331.




                                            35
A     Meta-Analysis of the impact of poverty alleviation pro-
      grams on mental health
    We focused our review on experimental studies that examined the impact of two types of
poverty alleviation programs across low- or middle-income countries and measured a mental
health outcome. Specifically, we identified RCTs that studied the impact of unconditional
cash transfers or multi-faceted anti-poverty programs on mental health outcomes: depres-
sion, anxiety, stress, a mental health index, and/or a psychological well-being index. We em-
ployed JSTOR, Google, and Google Scholar and used combinations of the keywords: "cash
transfer", "poverty alleviation", "anti-poverty programs", and "graduation programs", with
"mental health", "depression", "anxiety", "psychological well-being", "stress", "randomized",
and "RCTs". We reviewed the literature cited in each of the studies that met our criteria to
identify additional studies. We also reviewed the studies cited in various review papers and
reports (Evans and Popova, 2014; Sulaiman et al., 2016; Roelen et al., 2020; Bastagli et al.,
2016; Hashemi and De Montesquiou, 2011; Sulaiman et al., 2016). We identified 30 studies
that met our criteria. We briefly describe each of these below.

    We conducted a meta-analysis using a Bayesian random effects model that was imple-
mented using R's baggr Rubin (1981) model with normal priors (0,0.1) on the hyper-standard
deviation. The bottom panel of Figure 4 in the main text shows the estimated posterior treat-
ment effects using this model, separately by type of transfer and overall. Where multiple
studies evaluated the same intervention, or a study featured multiple follow-up surveys, to
avoid double-counting we included only the treatment effect which was measured most re-
cently (i.e., the longest-run effect). The overall impact of anti-poverty programs was 0.094
SD (95% CI: 0.040, 0.147). An Egger test of funnel plot symmetry (162) failed to reject the
null hypothesis of no publication bias (p = 0.96).

    Figure A1 below reproduces Figure 4 but with all available follow-up measures from
all studies included (thus double-counting some interventions). The overall impact of anti-
poverty programs when measured this way was 0.109 SD (95% CI: 0.065, 0.153).




                                             36
                 Study                                           Country          Outcome      Years elapsed since:     Intervention cost in:
                                                                                            Program Start Program End     $ MER        $ PPP
                 Multi-faceted anti-poverty programs
                 Banerjee et al. (2016), Endline 2                  India          PWB           4            2.5          357         1257
                 Blattman et al. (2019), Endline 2                Ethiopia         PWB           5             4           450         1291
                 Edmonds and Theoharides (2020)                  Philippines       PWB           3            0.75         184          518
                 Green et al. (2016)                              Uganda          APAI-R        1.3            -           874         2150
                 Janzen et al. (2018)                              Nepal           PWB          1.5            -           137          478
                 Banerjee et al. (2015), Endline 2                Multiple         PWB           3             1          1467         3717
                 Bandiera et al. (2017)                         Bangladesh         PWB           4            2.5          302         1120
                 Banerjee et al. (2015), Endline 1                Multiple         PWB          2.3            -          1467         3717
                 Ismayilova et al. (2018), Endline 2            Burkina Faso       CES-D         2             1           100          279
                 Glass et al. (2017)                                DRC            HSCL         1.5            -           40           66
                 Banerjee et al. (2016), Endline 1                  India          PWB           3            1.5          357         1257
                 Ismayilova et al. (2018), Endline 1            Burkina Faso       CES-D         1             -           100          279
                 Blattman et al. (2019), Endline 1                Ethiopia         PWB          12             -           450         1291
                 Banerjee et al. (2016), Endline 3                  India          PWB           7            5.5          357         1257
                 Bedoya et al. (2019)                           Afghanistan        PWB           2             1          1688         6198
                 Cash transfers
                 Heath et al. (2020)                                Mali            PSS          3             -           649         1468
                 Fernald and Hidrobo (2011)                       Ecuador          CES-D        1.4            -           255          676
                 Hjelm et al. (2017), CGP                         Zambia            PSS          3             -           396          816
                 Macours and Vakis (2009)                        Nicaragua         CES-D        0.75           -           260          758
                 Kilburn et al. (2019)                          South Africa       CES-D         3             -           540          870
                 Baird et al. (2019)                              Malawi          GHQ-12        4.3           2.3          180          440
                 Blattman et al. (2017), Endline 2                 Liberia        APAI-R         1            0.8          341          716
                 Haushofer et al. (2020)                           Kenya           PWB           1             1           150          338
                 Blattman, Fiala and Martinez (2018)              Uganda           PWB           9             9           382         1175
37




                 Shapiro (2019)                                    Kenya           PWB          0.75          0.5          122          314
                 Blattman et al. (2017), Endline 1                 Liberia        APAI-R        0.2            -           341          716
                 Hjelm et al. (2017), MCP                         Zambia            PSS          3             -           432          891
                 Egger et al. (2019)                               Kenya           PWB          1.5           1.5         1000         1871
                 Paxson and Schady (2010)                         Ecuador          CES-D        1.4            -           179          474
                 Baird et al. (2013), Endline 2                   Malawi          GHQ-12        2.3           0.3          180          440
                 Kilburn et al. (2016)                             Kenya           CES-D         4             -           960         2370
                 Aguilar (2012)                                   Mexico           SWB           5             2           900         1651
                 Haushofer and Shapiro (2018)                      Kenya           PWB          3.4            3           521          709
                 Haushofer, Mudida and Shapiro (2020)              Kenya           PWB           1             1           534         1184
                 Haushofer and Shapiro (2016)                      Kenya           PWB          0.75          0.3          521          709
                 Baird et al. (2013), Endline 1                   Malawi          GHQ-12         1             -           180          440
                 Angeles et al. (2019)                            Malawi           CES-D         2             -           156          517
                 Kilburn et al. (2017)                            Malawi            PSS          1             -           78           258
                 Multi-faceted anti-poverty programs effect (average: 0.129 SD)
                 Cash transfers effect (average: 0.094 SD)
                 Overall effect (average: 0.109 SD)

                                                                                                                                                -0.3   -0.2   -0.1   0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4    0.5
                                                                                                                                                        Treatment Effect (in Standard Deviation Units)




     Figure A1: The impacts of anti-poverty programs on mental health. This is an augmented version of Figure 4 which reports results from
     all follow-up surveys (endlines) and all studies that fit our criteria, rather than reporting only the longest-run treatment effect per intervention as in
     Figure 4 (Haushofer and Shapiro, 2016; Paxson and Schady, 2010; Haushofer et al., 2020). All terms and abbreviations, etc., used in this figure are
     the same as in Figure 4.
              Study                                                   Country        Outcome      Years elapsed since:     Intervention cost in:
                                                                                               Program Start Program End     $ MER        $ PPP
              Multi-faceted anti-poverty programs
              Banerjee et al. (2016), Endline 2                         India         PWB           4            2.5          357         1257
              Blattman et al. (2019), Endline 2                       Ethiopia        PWB           5             4           450         1291
              Edmonds and Theoharides (2020)                         Philippines      PWB           3            0.75         184          518
              Green et al. (2016)                                     Uganda         APAI-R        1.3            -           874         2150
              Janzen et al. (2018)                                     Nepal          PWB          1.5            -           137          478
              Banerjee et al. (2015), Endline 2                       Multiple        PWB           3             1          1467         3717
              Bandiera et al. (2017)                                 Bangladesh       PWB           4            2.5          302         1120
              Banerjee et al. (2015), Endline 1                       Multiple        PWB          2.3            -          1467         3717
              Ismayilova et al. (2018), Endline 2                   Burkina Faso      CES-D         2             1           100          279
              Glass et al. (2017)                                       DRC           HSCL         1.5            -           40           66
              Banerjee et al. (2016), Endline 1                         India         PWB           3            1.5          357         1257
              Ismayilova et al. (2018), Endline 1                   Burkina Faso      CES-D         1             -           100          279
              Blattman et al. (2019), Endline 1                       Ethiopia        PWB          12             -           450         1291
              Banerjee et al. (2016), Endline 3                         India         PWB           7            5.5          357         1257
              Bedoya et al. (2019)                                   Afghanistan      PWB           2             1          1688         6198
              Cash transfers
              Heath et al. (2020)                                       Mali           PSS          3             -           649         1468
              Fernald and Hidrobo (2011)                              Ecuador         CES-D        1.4            -           255          676
              Hjelm et al. (2017), CGP                                 Zambia          PSS          3             -           396          816
              Macours and Vakis (2009)                               Nicaragua        CES-D        0.75           -           260          758
              Kilburn et al. (2019)                                 South Africa      CES-D         3             -           540          870
              Baird et al. (2019)                                      Malawi        GHQ-12        4.3           2.3          180          440
              Blattman et al. (2017), Endline 2                        Liberia       APAI-R         1            0.8          341          716
38




              Haushofer et al. (2020)                                  Kenya          PWB           1             1           150          338
              Blattman, Fiala and Martinez (2018)                     Uganda          PWB           9             9           382         1175
              Shapiro (2019)                                           Kenya          PWB          0.75          0.5          122          314
              Blattman et al. (2017), Endline 1                        Liberia       APAI-R        0.2            -           341          716
              Hjelm et al. (2017), MCP                                 Zambia          PSS          3             -           432          891
              Egger et al. (2019)                                      Kenya          PWB          1.5           1.5         1000         1871
              Paxson and Schady (2010)                                Ecuador         CES-D        1.4            -           179          474
              Baird et al. (2013), Endline 2                           Malawi        GHQ-12        2.3           0.3          180          440
              Kilburn et al. (2016)                                    Kenya          CES-D         4             -           960         2370
              Aguilar (2012)                                           Mexico         SWB           5             2           900         1651
              Haushofer and Shapiro (2018)                             Kenya          PWB          3.4            3           521          709
              Haushofer, Mudida and Shapiro (2020)                     Kenya          PWB           1             1           534         1184
              Haushofer and Shapiro (2016)                             Kenya          PWB          0.75          0.3          521          709
              Baird et al. (2013), Endline 1                           Malawi        GHQ-12         1             -           180          440
              Angeles et al. (2019)                                    Malawi         CES-D         2             -           156          517
              Kilburn et al. (2017)                                    Malawi          PSS          1             -           78           258
              Multi-faceted anti-poverty programs effect (average: 0.460 SD/$1000)
              Cash transfers effect (average: 0.227 SD/$1000)
              Overall effect (average: 0.336 SD/$1000)

                                                                                                                                                      -1   0     1    2     3    4    5     6
                                                                                                                                                   Treatment Effect (in Standard Deviation Units per $1000 MER)




     Figure A2: The impacts of anti-poverty programs on mental health, per dollar spent (at market exchange rates). This is the same
     as Figure A1 except that the treatment effects are divided by the intervention cost at market exchange rates (MER).
               Study                                                   Country        Outcome      Years elapsed since:     Intervention cost in:
                                                                                                Program Start Program End     $ MER        $ PPP
               Multi-faceted anti-poverty programs
               Banerjee et al. (2016), Endline 2                         India         PWB           4            2.5          357         1257
               Blattman et al. (2019), Endline 2                       Ethiopia        PWB           5             4           450         1291
               Edmonds and Theoharides (2020)                         Philippines      PWB           3            0.75         184          518
               Green et al. (2016)                                     Uganda         APAI-R        1.3            -           874         2150
               Janzen et al. (2018)                                     Nepal          PWB          1.5            -           137          478
               Banerjee et al. (2015), Endline 2                       Multiple        PWB           3             1          1467         3717
               Bandiera et al. (2017)                                 Bangladesh       PWB           4            2.5          302         1120
               Banerjee et al. (2015), Endline 1                       Multiple        PWB          2.3            -          1467         3717
               Ismayilova et al. (2018), Endline 2                   Burkina Faso      CES-D         2             1           100          279
               Glass et al. (2017)                                       DRC           HSCL         1.5            -           40           66
               Banerjee et al. (2016), Endline 1                         India         PWB           3            1.5          357         1257
               Ismayilova et al. (2018), Endline 1                   Burkina Faso      CES-D         1             -           100          279
               Blattman et al. (2019), Endline 1                       Ethiopia        PWB          12             -           450         1291
               Banerjee et al. (2016), Endline 3                         India         PWB           7            5.5          357         1257
               Bedoya et al. (2019)                                   Afghanistan      PWB           2             1          1688         6198
               Cash transfers
               Heath et al. (2020)                                       Mali           PSS          3             -           649         1468
               Fernald and Hidrobo (2011)                              Ecuador         CES-D        1.4            -           255          676
               Hjelm et al. (2017), CGP                                 Zambia          PSS          3             -           396          816
               Macours and Vakis (2009)                               Nicaragua        CES-D        0.75           -           260          758
               Kilburn et al. (2019)                                 South Africa      CES-D         3             -           540          870
               Baird et al. (2019)                                      Malawi        GHQ-12        4.3           2.3          180          440
               Blattman et al. (2017), Endline 2                        Liberia       APAI-R         1            0.8          341          716
39




               Haushofer et al. (2020)                                  Kenya          PWB           1             1           150          338
               Blattman, Fiala and Martinez (2018)                     Uganda          PWB           9             9           382         1175
               Shapiro (2019)                                           Kenya          PWB          0.75          0.5          122          314
               Blattman et al. (2017), Endline 1                        Liberia       APAI-R        0.2            -           341          716
               Hjelm et al. (2017), MCP                                 Zambia          PSS          3             -           432          891
               Egger et al. (2019)                                      Kenya          PWB          1.5           1.5         1000         1871
               Paxson and Schady (2010)                                Ecuador         CES-D        1.4            -           179          474
               Baird et al. (2013), Endline 2                           Malawi        GHQ-12        2.3           0.3          180          440
               Kilburn et al. (2016)                                    Kenya          CES-D         4             -           960         2370
               Aguilar (2012)                                           Mexico         SWB           5             2           900         1651
               Haushofer and Shapiro (2018)                             Kenya          PWB          3.4            3           521          709
               Haushofer, Mudida and Shapiro (2020)                     Kenya          PWB           1             1           534         1184
               Haushofer and Shapiro (2016)                             Kenya          PWB          0.75          0.3          521          709
               Baird et al. (2013), Endline 1                           Malawi        GHQ-12         1             -           180          440
               Angeles et al. (2019)                                    Malawi         CES-D         2             -           156          517
               Kilburn et al. (2017)                                    Malawi          PSS          1             -           78           258
               Multi-faceted anti-poverty programs effect (average: 0.203 SD/$1000)
               Cash transfers effect (average: 0.120 SD/$1000)
               Overall effect (average: 0.156 SD/$1000)

                                                                                                                                                         -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
                                                                                                                                                    Treatment Effect (in Standard Deviation Units per $1000 PPP)




     Figure A3: The impacts of anti-poverty programs on mental health, per dollar spent (at purchasing power parity). This is the same
     as Figure A1 except that the treatment effects are divided by the intervention cost at purchasing power parity (PPP).
A.1     Multi-Faceted Anti-Poverty Programs

 1. Blattman et al. (2019a). This study compared the impact of an industrial job
    offer to young, mostly female job seekers in Ethiopia with the impact of a package
    consisting of a cash grant (worth about $300) and five days of microenterprise training.
    The number reported in this meta-analysis is the effect of the cash grant and training
    package on a mental health and subjective well-being index, which includes measures
    of depression and generalized anxiety symptoms.
      The total operating cost of the cash grant and training package was $450 MER.
 2. Green et al. (2016). This study examines the impact of a poverty alleviation pro-
    gram, Women's Income Generating Support (WINGS), on economic security and symp-
    toms of depression of vulnerable women in Northern Uganda. The program consisted
    of: (i) business skills training, (ii) an individual start-up grant worth $150, and (iii)
    home visits to provide advice and encouragement to use the grant. The follow-up sur-
    vey was conducted 1.3 years after the intervention was rolled out. They used APAI-R,
    a locally developed short survey instrument to measure symptoms of depression.
      The average cost of the program per household was $2,150 PPP Blattman et al. (2015),
      and includes individual start-up grant, targeting and disbursement, supervisory visits,
      training (business and group dynamics), and other costs.
 3. Banerjee et al. (2015). This study examines the results from six RCTs that study the
    impact of a transfer package including: a productive asset (one time transfer), consump-
    tion support, technical skills training, high-frequency home visits, savings, and some
    health education. This was conducted across six different countries: Ethiopia, Ghana,
    Honduras, India, Pakistan, and Peru. The key outcome measures include consumption,
    assets, food security, finance, time use, income, physical health, mental health, political
    involvement, and women's decision-making. Two follow-up surveys were conducted: 2
    years after the intervention (endline 1), and 3 years after the intervention (endline 2).
    The psychological well-being index was measured as an average of self-reported happi-
    ness, a stress index, and an indicator for having experienced anxiety lasting more than
    30 days in the past year.
      The average cost of the program per household, across the six programs, was $3,717
      PPP (Table 4), and includes direct transfer costs (asset cost and food stipend), super-
      vision costs, and indirect costs.
 4. Bandiera et al. (2017). This study evaluates an anti-poverty program in Bangladesh
    that transferred a productive asset (livestock) and skills training to poor women, who
    mostly engage in seasonal casual labor. The intervention was randomized across 21,000
    households (6,700 ultra-poor) in 1,309 villages. The key outcome measures include
    labor supply and earnings of women, consumption, household, financial assets, and
    mental health. The follow-up survey was conducted 4 years after the intervention was
    started. The psychological well-being index was measured as an average of self-reported
    happiness and an indicator for having experienced anxiety lasting more than 30 days
    in the past year.

                                             40
   The average cost of the program per household was $1,120 PPP (Table 9 in Bandiera
   et al. (2017)).

5. Banerjee et al. (2016).This study examines the long-run impact of an anti-poverty
   program, Bandhan's "Targeting the Hard Core Poor program" , in West Bengal, In-
   dia. The beneficiaries of the program receive a productive asset, consumption support,
   technical skills training, general life skills coaching, savings, and some health education.
   The follow-up surveys were conducted at various stages: 1.5 years after the intervention
   (endline 1), 3 years after the intervention (endline 2), and 7 years after the interven-
   tion (endline 3). The psychological well-being index was measured as an average of
   self-reported happiness, stress index, and an indicator for having experienced anxiety
   lasting more than 30 days in the past year.
   The average cost of the program per household was $1,257 PPP, and includes direct
   transfer costs (asset cost and food stipend), supervision costs, and indirect costs. This
   was estimated from Table 4 in Banerjee et al. (2015).

6. Bedoya et al. (2019). This study examines the impact of a graduation program (TUP
   package) -- consisting of a transfer of a productive asset, monthly cash transfer, basic
   training, health subsidy, and mentoring visits -- in the Balkh region in Afghanistan.
   They conducted a household-level randomization of 1,219 households in 80 villages,
   where 491 households received the TUP package. The key outcome measures include
   consumption, assets, financial inclusion index, psychological well-being index, women's
   empowerment index, and time spent working. The program lasted for 12 months and
   the follow-up surveys were conducted 1 year after the program was completed. The
   psychological well-being index was measured as a weighted average of scores on the
   CES-D, the happiness and life satisfaction questions from the World Values Survey
   (WVS), Cohen's stress scale, and the log cortisol levels obtained from saliva samples.
   The average cost of the program per household was $6,198 PPP (Table 9 in Bedoya
   et al. (2019)), and includes direct transfer costs (asset cost, food stipend, and health
   voucher), supervision costs, and indirect costs.

7. Janzen et al. (2018). This study examines the short-run impact of an anti-poverty
   program, Heifer International's (HI) Smallholders in Livestock Value Chain program
   in Nepal. The beneficiaries of this program receive a package that includes: group
   formation, livestock, technical skills training, and value-based training. The follow-up
   survey was conducted 1.5 years after the intervention. The psychological well-being
   index includes measures for depression, life satisfaction, self-esteem, and worry.
   The average cost of the program per household was $137 MER, and includes direct
   transfer costs and indirect costs.

8. Ismayilova et al. (2018). This study examines the impact of a graduation program
   (TUP package) -- consisting of savings group formation and training, livelihood train-
   ing and planning, seed capital grants and one-on-one mentoring, and family counseling
   on child's mental health -- in Burkina Faso. The follow-up surveys were conducted at



                                            41
      various stages: 1 year after the intervention (endline 1), and 2 years after the interven-
      tion (endline 2). CES-D was used to measure psychological well-being.
      The average cost of the program per household was $279 PPP.

  9. Edmonds and Theoharides (2020). This study examines the impact of an anti-
     poverty program, KASAMA in the Philippines, on child labor elimination. The ben-
     eficiaries of the program receive a productive asset, and training related to operating
     a business and child labor. The follow-up survey was conducted 3 years after the in-
     tervention was rolled out. The child well-being index includes depression, child life
     satisfaction, enumerator assessment of social behavior, and caregiver assessment of
     child's strengths and difficulties.
      The average cost of the program per household was $518 PPP.

 10. Glass et al. (2017). This study examines the impact of a livestock transfer program,
     PFP, on economic, health, and women's empowerment in the Democratic Republic
     of Congo. The beneficiaries of the program receive a livestock productive asset. The
     follow-up survey was conducted 1.5 years after the intervention. They measured de-
     pression and anxiety using the Hopkins Symptoms Checklist (HSCL).
      Implementation cost data was not available for this program; instead, we use the es-
      timated average value of livestock transferred per participant, calculated from table 2
      ($66 PPP).

A.2     Cash Transfers
  1. Hjelm et al. (2017). This study uses secondary data to examine the impact of two
     unconditional cash transfer programs: (i) Zambia Child Grant Program (CGP) that
     targets households with a child under the age of five, and (ii) Zambia Multiple Category
     Cash Transfer Program (MCP) that targets households under different categories.
      In the figures, Hjelm et al. (2017a) is the estimated treatment effect of CGP, and Hjelm
      et al. (2017b) is the effect of MCP.
      These programs were conducted by the Zambian Government. CGP was randomized
      across 90 communities and across households within treated communities, for a total
      sample size of 2,515 households. MCP was randomized across 92 communities and
      across households within treated communities, for a total sample size of 3,078 house-
      holds. Follow-up surveys were conducted 3 years after the intervention was rolled
      out. The key outcome measures include stress, consumption, food security, and non-
      productive assets. Stress was measured using the negatively worded items from Cohen's
      perceived stress scale (PSS); in brief, this asks respondents how often they have felt
      upset, stressed, or that difficulties were out of control in the past 4 weeks.
      Households included in the CGP and MCP programs received $11 and $12 per month
      respectively for 36 months. The average cash transfer per household under the CGP
      and MCP program was $396 MER and $432 respectively. Cost of implementation data
      was not available.


                                              42
2. Blattman et al. (2017). This study examined the effects of a cognitive behavioral
   therapy (CBT) program cross-randomized with an unconditional cash grant of around
   $200. Participants were randomized into four groups, receiving either (i) both the CBT
   and then the cash grant, (ii) only the CBT, (iii) only the cash grant, or (iv) neither. Key
   outcome measures included antisocial behavior such as crime and economic performance
   and preferences. In our meta-analysis we include the effects of the cash grant for those
   who did not receive the CBT intervention (i.e., the comparison between (iii) and (iv))
   on an index of depression and mental distress, which asked about depressive symptoms,
   bad thoughts or feelings, and worry.
   The authors report the average size of the cash grant as $216 and the registration and
   administration costs for both programs as $125, at market exchange rates. We conserva-
   tively assume that all of the latter costs are fixed and thus estimate the implementation
   cost of the cash transfer program as $216 + $125 = $341 MER.

3. Haushofer et al. (2019). This study examines the impact of cash transfers and health
   insurance on 789 informal Kenyan workers. The workers were randomized into three
   groups: the first received a free health insurance policy, the second an unconditional
   cash transfer (worth the price of the policy), and the third received no intervention.
   The key outcome measures include insurance ownership, assets, willingness to pay for
   insurance, labor mobility, labor productivity, job risk, psychological well-being index,
   and log cortisol levels. The coverage was for 1 year and follow-up surveys were con-
   ducted a year after the completion of the program. The psychological well-being index
   was measured as self-reported well-being (stress and depression) and log cortisol levels.
   The average cash transfer per household was $338 PPP.

4. Blattman et al. (2019b). This study revisited a randomized cash grant program, the
   Youth Opportunities Program (YOP) in Uganda to examine its long-term effects. While
   applicants had to apply in small groups and submit a business proposal, the grants
   were unconditional once awarded. About half of 535 eligible groups were randomized
   to receive the money, which for most was between $200-$600 per person. Key outcomes
   included employment, earnings, and consumption.
   Implementation cost data was not available for this program; instead, we use the average
   grant per participant ($382 MER)..

5. Egger et al. (2019). This study examines the impact of the GiveDirectly Cash
   Transfer Program in Kenya, across 653 villages using a two-level randomization. All
   households in the treatment villages received a one-time cash transfer ($1000 MER).
   The key outcome measures include economic activities, asset ownership, psychological
   well-being, health and nutrition. The follow-up survey was conducted 1.5 years after
   the intervention was rolled out. The psychological well-being index was measured using
   depression, happiness, life satisfaction, and stress scales.
   The households received transfers in three payments: $151 PPP for completion of
   enrollment, and $860 PPP each in two installments. The average cash transfer per
   household was $1871 PPP.


                                            43
6. Paxson and Schady (2010). This study examines the effect of an Ecuadorian cash
   transfer program, the Bono de Desarrollo Humano (BDH), which provided uncondi-
   tional cash transfers averaging $10.51 per month to eligible mothers. The program
   was randomized across 77 rural and 41 urban parishes, though the authors only report
   results from rural parishes. Key outcome measures are cognitive, behavioral, and phys-
   ical outcomes for children. The paper also reports effects of BDH on mothers' mental
   health as measured by the CES-D depression scale.
   As implementation costs were not available, we report a rough estimate of average
   transfer value: $10.51/month x 17 months = $179 MER on average from start to
   endline.
   This study evaluates the same intervention as Fernald and Hidrobo (2011). Both studies
   evaluated the same intervention at the same follow-up date; we exclude Paxson and
   Schady from the main meta-analysis in Figure 4 because they report results from a
   smaller subsample (rural parishes only). (This also explains why the average transfer
   value is different between these two studies).

7. Baird et al. (2013). This study examines the effects of a cash transfer program
   -- unconditional and conditional cash transfers -- in Malawi on mental health among
   adolescent girls. The key outcome measures include psychological well-being and school
   attendance. Randomization was conducted at enumerator-area level, and a sample of
   3,796 young women was stratified into two groups: baseline school dropouts and base-
   line schoolgirls. Two follow-up surveys were conducted: 1 year after the intervention
   was rolled out (endline 1), and 2 years after the intervention was rolled out (endline
   2). In both the follow-up surveys, the GHQ-12 instrument was used to measure psy-
   chological well-being; in endline 2, MHI-5 (Mental Health Inventory-5) was also used.
   The monthly transfer amount varied according to the enumeration area ($4 to $10) and
   the school-age ($1 to $5). They also covered the school fees for the girls in secondary
   school, which amounted to $60. This program was for a year. The average transfer
   amount per household was $180 MER.

8. Kilburn et al. (2016). This study examines the effects of Kenya's Cash Transfer
   Program for Orphans and Vulnerable Children. The program was randomized across
   28 locations, covering 1960 households. Treated households received monthly transfers
   of $20. The key outcome measure is an indicator of depressive symptoms using the 10-
   question CES-D scale. The treatment effect we report in our meta-analysis is derived
   from the unadjusted means in the treatment and control groups reported in Table 2 of
   Kilburn et al. (2016). (Note standard errors are not adjusted for clustering).
   Implementation cost data was not available; thus, we use the total undiscounted value
   of the transfer: $20/month x 48 months = $960 MER.

9. Haushofer and Shapiro (2016). This study examines the short-term effects of
   an unconditional transfer program from GiveDirectly in Kenya on poor households.
   Randomization was conducted at both household and village level, and the authors
   randomized gender of recipient, timing of transfer, and size of transfer. The key outcome


                                           44
    measures include consumption, assets, financial inclusion index, and psychological well-
    being index. Follow-up surveys were conducted 9 months after the intervention was
    rolled out. The psychological well-being index was measured as a weighted average of
    scores on the CES-D, WVS, Cohen's stress scale, and the log cortisol levels obtained
    from saliva samples.
    The households received transfers in varied magnitudes: $404 PPP and $1,525 PPP.
    The average transfer amount was $709 PPP.

10. Haushofer and Shapiro (2018). This is a follow-up study to Haushofer and Shapiro
    (2016), and examines the long-term impacts of transfers on economic and psychological
    outcomes 3 years after the program by GiveDirectly in Kenya.

11. Haushofer et al. (2020). This study looks at the effects of an unconditional cash
    transfer program cross-randomized with five weeks of psychotherapy among 5,756 peo-
    ple in rural Kenya. Key outcome measures include consumption, assets and psycholog-
    ical well-being. Their psychological well-being index consists of the GHQ-12, Cohen's
    perceived stress scale, and the happiness and life satisfaction questions from the WVS.
    The value of the transfer was $1,076 PPP ($485 MER). The authors conservatively
    assume a cost of delivery of 10% of the transfer value (section 4.4), reasonably given
    that the transfers are delivered by mobile money, implying a total implementation cost
    of $1,184 PPP ($534 MER).

12. Angeles et al. (2019). This study examines the impact of the Malawi Government's
    Social Cash Transfer Program (SCTP) on youth mental health, with 2782 households
    across 29 villages. 1678 households across 14 villages received unconditional cash trans-
    fers and the recipients were encouraged to invest the money in the human capital of
    their children and basic needs of the households. The program spanned 2 years and
    included bi-monthly payments. The follow-up surveys were conducted 2 years after
    the program was rolled out with the youth of the households (aged 15 to 22 years old
    during follow-up). CES-D was used to measure psychological well-being.
    The monthly cash transfer value varied with household size ($3 to $7) and composition
    ($1 and $2 per primary and secondary school aged child). The program spanned two
    years. The average transfer amount per household was $156 MER. This study evaluates
    the same intervention as Kilburn et al. (2017).

13. Kilburn et al. (2019). This study examines the impact of HIV Prevention Trials
    Network (HPTN) 068, a conditional cash transfer program in South Africa, on young
    women's health and behavior. This program was targeted at young women attending
    high school in rural areas of South Africa. The young girls and their parents received
    monthly cash transfers conditional on continued school attendance. 2,537 participants
    were recruited for the study. The follow-up surveys were conducted in various stages
    until the participant had graduated from school: 1 year after the intervention, 2 years
    after the intervention, and 3 year after the intervention. The psychological well-being
    index was measured using CES-D, Hope Scale, and SRPS.



                                            45
    The monthly cash transfer varied with the recipient: $10 for the young girls and $20 for
    the parent or guardian. The average transfer amount per household was $540 MER.

14. Heath et al. (2020). This study examines the impact of Mali's National Cash Trans-
    fer Program on intimate partner violence (IPV) targeting household heads (mostly
    men) in both polygamous and monogamous households. The cash transfers were ac-
    companied with other health measures, and preventive nutrition packages for children
    (below 5 years of age) and pregnant women. The key outcomes include IPV and stress
    levels for men. The stress levels for men were measured using PSS, a standardized
    stress scale, and Rosenberg's self-esteem instrument.
    As implementation costs were not available, we report a rough estimate of average
    transfer value: $18.02/month x 36 months = $649 MER on average from start to
    endline.

15. Baird et al. (2019). This is a follow-up study to Baird et al. (2013), and examines
    the long-term impacts of a cash transfer program -- unconditional and conditional cash
    transfers -- on economic and psychological outcomes 4 years after the intervention was
    rolled out in Malawi.

16. Aguilar (2012). This study examines the medium-term impact of Progresa, Mexico's
    conditional cash transfer program, on the physical and cognitive development of chil-
    dren. The study uses the outcome from a follow-up survey conducted in 2003 with
    2,049 households, conducted 5 years after the intervention was rolled out. An index of
    depressive symptoms was used to measure psychological well-being.
    As implementation costs were not available, we report a rough estimate of average
    transfer value: $900 MER on average from start to endline.

17. Kilburn et al. (2017). This study examines the impact of the Malawi Government's
    Social Cash Transfer Program (SCTP) on child schooling outcomes with 2,782 house-
    holds across 29 villages. 1,678 households across 14 villages received unconditional cash
    transfers and the recipients were encouraged to invest the money in the human capital
    of their children and basic needs of the households. The program spanned for 2 years
    and included bi-monthly payments. This study uses the first follow-up survey con-
    ducted 1 year after the program was rolled out. PSS was used to measure psychological
    well-being.
    The monthly cash transfer value varied with household size ($3 - $7) and composition
    ($1 and $2 per primary and secondary school aged child). The program spanned two
    years, however this study considers the follow-up survey which was conducted a year
    after the program started. The average transfer amount per household was $78 MER.
    This study evaluates the same intervention as Angeles et al. (2019).

18. Shapiro (2019). This study examines the impact of cash transfers and development
    programs (agricultural extension, subsidized agricultural inputs, and poultry transfers).
    1,471 out of 3,008 low-income Kenyans were randomized to receive cash transfers equiv-
    alent to the value of the development programs. Their psychological well-being index


                                            46
    consists of the CES-D, GHQ-12, and the happiness and life satisfaction questions from
    the WVS.
    As implementation costs were not available, we report a rough estimate of average
    transfer value: $122 MER on average from start to endline.

19. Macours and Vakis (2009). This study examines the effect of an Ecuadorian cash
    transfer program, the Atención a Crisis, which provided cash transfers conditional
    on children's primary school and health service attendance during the program. The
    program was randomized across six municipalities with 3000 households. CES-D was
    used to measure psychological well-being.
    As implementation costs were not available, we report a rough estimate of average
    transfer value: $260 MER on average from start to endline.

20. Fernald and Hidrobo (2011). This study examines the effect of a Nicaraguan cash
    transfer program, the Bono de Desarrollo Humano (BDH), which provided uncondi-
    tional cash transfers averaging $15 per month to eligible mothers. The program was
    randomized across 77 rural and 41 urban parishes (small administrative units), and the
    authors report results for both rural and urban parishes. The paper also reports effects
    of BDH on mothers' mental health as measured by the CES-D depression scale.
    As implementation costs were not available, we report a rough estimate of average
    transfer value: $15/month x 17 months = $255 MER on average from start to endline.
    This study evaluates the same intervention as Paxson and Schady (2010). Both studies
    evaluated the same intervention at the same date; we exclude Paxson and Schady from
    the main meta-analysis in Figure 4 because they report results from a smaller subsample
    (rural parishes only).




                                           47
