                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE WINNERS AND LOSERS OF IMMIGRATION:
                      EVIDENCE FROM LINKED HISTORICAL DATA

                                          Joseph Price
                                       Christian vom Lehn
                                          Riley Wilson

                                      Working Paper 27156
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27156


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We are grateful to Jacob Van Leeuwen for excellent research assistance with this project. We
thank Leah Boustan, Michael Clemens, Jeff Denning, Brigham Frandsen, Jongkwan Lee, Dave
Sims, Marco Tabellini, and Abigail Wozniak for useful comments and feedback. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joseph Price, Christian vom Lehn, and Riley Wilson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Winners and Losers of Immigration: Evidence from Linked Historical Data
Joseph Price, Christian vom Lehn, and Riley Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 27156
May 2020
JEL No. J21,J31,J61,J62,N32

                                         ABSTRACT

Using recent innovations in linking historical U.S. Census data, we study the economic impacts
of immigration on natives, including their geographic migration response. We find that the arrival
of foreign immigrants significantly increases both native out-migration and in-migration.
Accounting for this selective geographic migration, we find smaller economic impacts of
immigration for native workers than previous work, including no positive impact on worker
incomes. We present evidence of significant "losers" from increased immigration, namely
workers who appear to be displaced by immigrant labor and move out of their local labor market,
whereas the workers who remain see significant benefits. We also find that younger and
lowerskilled workers are "losers" from increased immigration, whereas older and higher-skilled
workers are "winners."

Joseph Price                                    Riley Wilson
Department of Economics                         435 CTB
Brigham Young University                        Department of Economics
162 FOB                                         Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602                                 Provo, Utah 84602
and NBER                                        riley_wilson@byu.edu
joseph_price@byu.edu

Christian vom Lehn
Brigham Young University
435 Crabtree Building
Provo, UT 84602
cvomlehn@byu.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27156
1 Introduction
         In spite of a large amount of research on the topic, there yet remains substantial debate
about the economic impact of immigration on natives. 1 Many papers study the impact of
immigration on natives at the local labor market level, contrasting average labor market
outcomes in areas exposed to higher levels of immigration with those with less immigration.
Several recent papers use this approach with historical U.S. data from the early 20th century,
when changes in global conditions and U.S. immigration policy generated substantial changes in
immigrant inflows to the United States (Sequeira et al. (2019), Ager and Hansen (2017),
Tabellini (2020), and Abramitzky et al. (2019)). These papers find substantial (and in some
cases, surprising) economic benefits to natives from immigration. However, there are two key
limitations to this approach. First, local labor market analysis is best at identifying average
treatment effects, but is less powerful for understanding heterogeneity in individual level
impacts. Second, local labor market estimates of the economic impacts of immigration will only
accurately identify the average treatment effect for the original native population if there is not
selective migration in response to changes in immigration. 2 Given the high native migration
rates of U.S. natives in the early 20th century and the fact that local labor market comparisons are
made across decades, this suggests caution in making this assumption.
         In this paper, we study the economic impacts of immigration on natives, including the
native migration response, using a newly constructed panel of linked census records in the
United States from 1910-1930. We use recent linking innovations from Price et al. (2019), which
combine a rich genealogical database and machine learning to link Census records across time.
This allows us to follow over 4 million men matched between 1910 and 1920 or 1920 and 1930
(approximately 40 percent of the target population). With the panel structure of the data, we are
able to uncover more precisely the economic impacts of immigration for outcomes such as
internal migration, income, employment, and occupational mobility, while accounting for
selective migration by natives. We are also able to estimate the heterogeneous treatment effects
across individuals differentiated by age and skill to determine who are the relative "winners" and
the "losers" from immigration.

1
  For partial summaries of this large literature, see Borjas (1999), Card (2005), Card (2009), Kerr and Kerr (2011),
Lewis and Peri (2015), Peri (2016) and Dustmann, Schoenberg, and Stuhler (2016).
2
  This point was given substantial attention in earlier work in the literature on immigration, such as Borjas, Freeman
and Katz (1996, 1997), Card and DiNardo (2000), Card (2001), and Borjas (2006).

                                                          1
       To estimate the impact of immigration on economic outcomes, we draw upon the
estimation framework of Tabellini (2020), who studies the local labor market impacts of
immigration using a panel of large U.S. cities over this same time period. As in Tabellini (2020),
we focus on the city-level fraction of the population that recently immigrated to the United
States. This fraction is likely to be correlated with economic outcomes for a variety reasons,
such as immigrants choosing to settle in more prosperous regions of the country. To generate
exogenous variation in the fraction of the population who are immigrants, as in Tabellini (2020),
we leverage the pre-existing relationship between immigrant settlement patterns across cities, as
it is well established that immigrants tend to settle in areas where there are many former
immigrants of the same nationality (for example, see Card (2001)). Similar to Tabellini (2020),
we find that our results are also robust to using variation in immigration generated by U.S.
immigration quotas in the 1920s and the immigration restrictions of World War I.
       Using our individual panel data, we find, similar to the existing literature, that increases
in immigration increased labor force participation and native incomes when averaged up to the
local labor market level. However, at the individual level, accounting for the fact that native
workers may have moved away in response to immigration, we find different results. Workers
who initially lived in cities where immigration flows did see increases in labor force
participation, but no income gains. We also show that there is an "insurance effect" from
increased immigration, as workers in cities with increased immigration were less likely to make
an occupational switch to a lower-paying occupation. The key reason for the difference in our
findings is that we observe that increased immigration generates substantial out-migration by
natives and these out-migrants tend to see worse outcomes.
       While our findings for the average impact of immigration suggests weakly positive
results for the original residents of local labor markets, we find substantial heterogeneity in how
workers of different age and skill levels are impacted by increased immigration. In response to
increased immigration, younger workers move away at higher rates, are more likely to enter the
labor force and more likely to experience income losses. Indeed, we show that increases in labor
force participation are exclusively concentrated on young workers under the age of 24, likely
accelerating their entry into the labor market, and that there is no significant impact for prime-
aged workers. We also find that lower skilled workers are similarly more likely to move out and
observe income losses in response to increases in immigration. In contrast, older and higher-

                                                  2
skilled workers are less likely to move and more likely to see income gains from immigration.
Thus, we conclude that younger and lower skilled workers are the relative "losers" from
immigration and older and higher skilled workers are the relative "winners." 3
        We further show that economic losses from immigration are larger for those workers who
move away from their original local labor market in response to increased immigration.
Although we cannot attach a causal interpretation to these effects, as migration is an endogenous
response to immigration, we view this as evidence of a significant displacement effect for certain
workers. 4 We provide supporting evidence for this argument along two dimensions. First, we
show that workers initially in occupations that immigrants in this time period were commonly
employed in were much more likely to move out of their cities in response to increases in
immigration. Second, an alternative story to the displacement argument we present is that some
workers may move away for taste-based responses to immigration, such as prejudice. However,
we show that workers who moved away from cities experiencing increased immigration did not
move to areas with lower levels of immigrants, suggesting that these workers' relocation
decisions does not reflect an aversion to living in areas with high immigrant populations.
        Finally, we show that in addition to a substantial out-migration of native workers in
response to increased immigration, there was also a substantial in-migration of native workers.
These move-ins are negatively selected, with lower income and skill levels relative to the rest of
population, including workers moving out. However, workers who move in see substantial
income gains with migration. This suggests that the difference in local labor market and
individual results is not driven by large changes in the composition of workers over initial
observable characteristics, though are in part driven by selection on potential losses/gains from
migration. These income gains and losses for move-ins and move-outs (respectively), along with
income gains for workers who stayed, can account for the positive income gains observed at the
local labor market level.


Related Literature

3
  In Online Appendix C, we also show that workers with parents born in the U.S. fare worse in terms of labor force
participation than workers with at least one parent who is an immigrant and that black men face much worse labor
market outcomes from immigration as well (similar to findings in Ager and Hansen (2017)). Thus, these two groups
are also among the particular "losers" of increased immigration.
4
  We argue in Section 4.5 that these losses might be a lower bound since workers who move are often positively
selected (Borjas et al. (1992), Dahl (2002)).

                                                        3
       Our paper naturally relates to the vast literature on the economic impacts of immigration,
especially those papers assessing the internal migration response of natives to changes in
immigrant flows. Early work such as Card and DiNardo (2000), Card (2001), and Borjas (2006)
debated whether or not there was a "skating rink" effect of immigration, with new immigrants
pushing out natives, "knocking them off the ice." While the presence of such an effect was
debated in these papers and subsequent work by Peri (2011) and Peri and Sparber (2011), these
studies are all limited by their inability to directly observe individuals over time, and thus are
limited to studying net flows of individuals by skill group. In contrast, we are able to assess the
gross flows of migration in response to immigration and estimate the effects of immigration for
those individuals who actually migrate away. With this data, we find the presence of a
significant "skating rink" effect for young and low-skilled workers in cities with increased
immigration in the early 20th century.
       The most closely related papers to our work are several recent papers studying the impact
of immigration on native workers in the late 19th and early 20th century United States (Sequeira
et al. (2019), Ager and Hansen (2017), Tabellini (2020), Abramitzky et al. (2019)). A common
thread in these papers is that they generally find modest to substantially positive impacts of
increased immigration at the local labor market level, a finding we reproduce when we aggregate
our individual level data to the local labor market level. Our findings are also consistent with
those of Abramitzky et al. (2019), who show a positive relationship between worker incomes and
immigration in a linked sample of workers. The sample considered by Abramitzky et al. (2019)
is of the original residents who stayed and the new move-ins to the region and combines both the
changes in incomes for these workers as well as the changes in selection of these workers. We
show that our findings for stayers are consistent with their findings, and that once we account for
selection, our findings for new move-ins are also consistent. The key difference between our
results is that we include workers who move away from their original labor market in our
estimates, and these workers observe substantial income losses with increased immigration.
       Our paper also relates to two studies on immigration using linked panel data in Europe,
Cattaneo et al. (2015) and Foged and Peri (2016). Foged and Peri (2016) use linked panel data
from Denmark to estimate the dynamic impacts of immigration; however, unlike the US, internal
migration in Denmark is extremely low and thus plays virtually no role in the economic response
to immigration. Cattaneo et al. (2015) also consider a panel of European workers, but do not

                                                  4
study the geographic mobility of these workers in response to immigration. They do, however,
find evidence that increases in immigration lead to upward occupational mobility, with natives
switching to occupations with higher pay, and some evidence that the incidence of downward
occupational switching declined. We find evidence of the latter effect, a reduction in downward
occupational switching, but we find no evidence for increased upward occupational mobility on
average, though we do find evidence of this for higher skilled workers. In contrast, we find that
upward occupational mobility was reduced for young and low-skilled workers, and that workers
moving out saw reduced upward occupational mobility and no change in the probability of
downward occupational mobility
       We interpret the average reduced incidence of downward occupational switching as an
insurance effect, reducing labor market risk for native workers. This finding has some
similarities with recent findings from Cadena and Kovak (2016). They find immigration by low-
skilled Mexican immigrants during the Great Recession was highly sensitive to local labor
demand conditions, and thus equilibrated employment risk for native workers across local labor
markets. While their work focuses on the migration patterns of immigrants in generating reduced
risk, our finding of reduced downward occupational switches similarly represents some
stabilization of local economic conditions for natives. The fact that this insurance effect is not
observed for workers who move away from the local labor market further supports the idea that
the effect operates through the channel of local demand shocks.
       Recently, Lee et al. (2019) use linked U.S. data from 1930-1940 to study the impact of
Mexican repatriation between 1929-1934 and also find that selective out-migration and in-
migration can lead to substantial differences in labor market outcomes observed at the individual
and local labor market levels. Like Lee et al. (2019), we also find that there is attenuation of
results at the individual level compared to the local labor market level, particularly in changes in
income, and our findings are consistent with their finding that reductions in immigration led to
increased occupational downgrading and declines in employment. In contrast, we find that the
differences in local labor market and individual results are primarily driven by differential effects
for movers and stayers and not changes in composition. Relative to their work, we also consider
how these effects vary across age and skill.
       Also related to our paper is work by Boustan et al. (2010), who study the causal impact of
migration on local labor markets during the Great Depression. Their focus is not specifically on

                                                  5
immigration, but on cross-city native migration and how this impacted local labor markets. They
find, similar to us, that increased migration had little impact on incomes for existing residents,
but did generate substantial out-migration of original residents. An important difference between
our study and theirs is that they measure cross-city migration using information reported
retrospectively in 1940 about an individual's prior residence and do not have information on
individual characteristics prior to the move. With our linked panel data, we are uniquely able to
identify both individual changes over time in response to immigration (occupation, employment,
income) and which populations were more affected by changes in immigration.
        We recognize that our findings regarding which workers are winners and losers of
immigration may depend on the particular waves of immigration that took place during this
period. For example, using aggregated data from the American Community Survey, Wozniak
and Murray (2012) provide evidence that local labor market immigration flows from 2000-2010
impacted year to year population flows and employment rates of high-skilled workers more than
low-skilled workers. By focusing on individual outcomes, our work sheds light on
heterogeneous individual outcomes that are not observable in aggregated data. As a result, our
findings highlight the importance of using individual data to understand the full distributional
economic impacts of immigration.


2 Data
        Our analysis uses full count U.S. Census data from the years 1910, 1920 and 1930,
originally obtained from the genealogical website FamilySearch and then merged to the data
produced by the genealogical website Ancestry and IPUMS (Ruggles et al. (2019)). 5 We
primarily focus on males ages 15-65 for our analysis, as men younger than 15 and older than 65
have very low rates of labor force participation. 6 We omit women from our baseline results
because female labor force participation rates are generally very low during this period and
because linking Census records across time for women often results in much lower match rates.




5
  As described below, obtaining the full count data from FamilySearch initially allows us improved ability to link
individual records across time. When linking this data to the full count data that Ancestry and IPUMS jointly
produce, we observe match rates of 98%, so there is very little loss of data from this procedure.
6
  Further, the universe of labor market survey questions for Census the years 1910-1930 omits individuals under the
age of 16, so we cannot observe the labor market patterns for these individuals.

                                                         6
However, the linking algorithms we use give us a substantial sample of women over this time
period, and in Online Appendix C, we do report results for women ages 15-65. 7
         To relate to existing work showing the economic impacts of immigration, we restrict our
sample to focus on residents of U.S. cities which had a population of at least 30,000 in each of
the years 1910, 1920 and 1930 and which had at least some European immigrants, consistent
with Tabellini (2020). 8 The requirement that cities have at least some European immigrants is
consistent with the observation that a large fraction of the changes in immigration over this time
period were driven by changes in immigrants coming from Europe. Though we do not need to
restrict our attention to the same set of cities as Tabellini (2020), since we ultimately focus on a
smaller linked sample of the population and include in our study the distribution of treatment
effects across age and skill, focusing on cities with these large populations ensures that we have
sufficient power to estimate the impacts of immigration for the populations we study. There are
180 cities that satisfy these criteria, however for consistency with Tabellini (2020), we omit the
cities New Bedford, MA and Sacramento, CA. We show, however, in Online Appendix B that
our results are robust to including these cities. 9 We provide a list of the 180 cities we study in
Online Appendix A.
         Central to our analysis is our ability to follow individual workers over time across census
waves. To observe changes in individual-level outcomes, including native migration, we link
individuals across census waves using the methods developed by Abramitzky et al. (2014) and
Price et al. (2019). This process combines both rule-based methods and links based on a machine
learning algorithm. The key innovation of this process is that it employs a massive training set
that is drawn from user-generated links of the genealogical platform at familysearch.org. These
links are generally very accurate because users on this platform work on their ancestors'
genealogy and frequently have access to large amounts of information when linking ancestors to
census records. Price et al. (2019) utilize this large user created dataset to create training data
with a large ground truth set. The key observable characteristics used to link individuals in this



7
  The linking methodology we use, taken from Price et al. (2019), actually generates higher match rates for women
than many common linking algorithms, and thus we are ultimately able to generate a sufficiently high match rate to
obtain meaningful results just for women.
8
  Tabellini (2020) imposes these restrictions on city size because much of his analysis also considers the political
impacts of immigration, and these are only observable for cities of sufficient size.
9
  Tabellini (2020) omits these cities because they have missing employment data for the year 1920 in his data.

                                                          7
machine learning algorithm are race, gender, birth year, name, family structure, birthplace and
place of residence. 10
         As our study uses historical Census data, it is worth commenting on how we measure key
labor market outcomes such as labor force participation and workers' income. In our data, labor
force participation is measured differently than current standard practices, implemented since the
1940 Census. A worker is considered in the labor force if they report a "gainful occupation." As
a result, though we will study workers' labor force participation as one of our outcomes,
measures of labor force participation in our data are more likely to correspond to what we would
now consider employment instead of labor force participation. 11
         Prior to the 1940 Census, there were no direct measures of a worker's income, so we
follow existing literature and use imputed measures of income based on their occupation, called
an "occupation score." In our data, we are able to observe occupation codes for each worker,
assigned by IPUMS on the basis of the 1950 occupation coding system. Workers' income is
then imputed using the median income in 1950 paid to that occupation, and is measured in
hundreds of 1950 dollars.
         While using occupation scores is a common approach to measuring income in historical
Census data, it is naturally subject to limitations. A key limitation is that a workers' income can
only change when they experience an occupational switch, and thus income changes in our data
will be intrinsically tied to occupational switching. Another limitation of this approach to
measuring income is that it requires that the workers' contemporary occupation be successfully
mapped into a corresponding occupation measured in the year 1950. In our data, most workers'
occupations have been easily mapped to 1950 occupation codes. However, there are a number of
observations in the historical Census data for which IPUMS has not yet successfully assigned a
corresponding 1950-based occupation. In our baseline specifications, we drop these "not yet
classified" observations from our sample, however we show in Online Appendix B that our non-




10
   Our algorithm does not restrict matching on the basis of original location of residence, though uses this as a
feature to improve matching. As a result, however, our algorithm is likely to understate the overall move rate for
workers, which we report to be fairly high in Table 2.
11
   It is not immediately evident, however, as to whether workers who report a gainful occupation need be employed.
To the extent that part of a worker's identity is their occupation, they may report an occupation even if they are not
presently employed. A more standard measure of employment is available in 1910 and 1930 but not in 1920.

                                                          8
income results are robust to including them, as are our results for income using alternative
imputation approaches.
         We also rely on occupation data both in studying occupational mobility of workers and
how workers are impacted differently with changes in immigration. We use a worker's initial
occupation as a proxy for "skill" as there are no measures of educational attainment in our data.
For parsimony, when using occupation as a proxy for worker skill, we focus on a narrow set of
nine one-digit occupations, such as farmer, salesman, manager, and professional workers, ranked
by their average occupation score. We also use these one digit occupations when assessing the
probability that a worker switched to reduce the incidence of spurious occupational switching
because of small differences in coding of worker responses regarding their occupations. We
provide a list of the detailed occupation codes corresponding to each one digit code in Online
Appendix A, along with their average occupation score.
         We present summary statistics for our final estimation sample, split by Census waves, in
Table 1 and along with a comparable sample from the raw, unlinked Census data. Using the
linking methodology of Price et al. (2019) for the sample of men between the ages of 15-65
residing at any point in any of the 178 cities we study who never report a "not yet classified"
occupation, we are able to link roughly 1.8 million records between 1910 and 1920 and 2.4
million records between 1920 and 1930, giving us a total sample of roughly 4.2 million linked
pairs. Using these same sample criteria without any linking would imply 4.7 million observations
in 1910 and 5.8 million observations in 1920. This implies a match rate of 38-41% of all eligible
individuals originally observed in either the 1910 or 1920 Census. 12
         Comparing the average characteristics of the full sample and the linked sample, we find
that our linked sample compares favorably with the full sample. 13 Perhaps the most notable
differences between the full sample and our linked sample is that men in our linked data are
more likely to be white and more likely to be married. These differences are perhaps
unsurprising given a well-known difficulty in linking black men in this period of time and given

12
   This match rate is slightly lower than those reported in Price et al. (2019) for two main reasons. First, Price et al.
(2019) report match rates on the basis of potential matches, adjusted for factors such as under-enumeration in the
Census. Second, part of the high match rates observed in Price et al. (2019) come from the use of place of residence
information to link individuals over time. However, this added information is less valuable for large cities, as we
study in our sample, since there are many more records for each city.
13
   We do not report t-tests for the differences of means for the linked and full samples, mainly because given our
large sample size, even very small differences in means are statistically significant, even if not economically
significant.

                                                            9
that our linking procedure uses family structure as an input to the machine learning algorithm; as
a result, married men are easier to link and thus slightly overrepresented in our sample.
         With our linked sample, we are able to compute individual 10 year out-migration rates,
for which we report averages in Table 2. We also report out-migration rates by 10 year age
groups and for 1 digit occupation groups, in ascending order of skill (as measured by average
occupation scores). Importantly, we observe that between 1910-1920 and 1920-1930, out-
migration rates are particularly high, at least 30%. 14 Perhaps unsurprisingly, we also observe
that out-migration rates are higher for younger and lower skilled workers. These high rates of
native mobility suggest that migration flows are large enough over this time period to potentially
confound local labor market estimates of the worker-level impacts of immigration if there is a
selective migration response.


3 Empirical Approach
         We consider both local labor market level specifications and individual specifications in
our analysis. We consider results from local labor market specifications to show that our data
produce comparable results to existing literature when aggregated up to the local labor market
level. An important characteristic of our local labor market regressions is that treatment is
assigned to individuals on the basis of their current residence. As a result, differences in local
labor market outcomes over time represent both changes for individuals who originally resided
in that labor market and a change in the set of individuals residing in that labor market.


3.1 Estimating Equations
         For local labor market specifications, we consider a first-differences baseline
specification, given by:
                                    = 1  +  +                                                                     (1)
where  is the change in the labor market outcome of interest for city  in state  between 
and  - 10 (where  is either 1920 or 1930), the key independent variable is the change in the
percent of the population who are immigrants in that city and time period ( ), and


14
   It is quite possible that these estimates of move rates are a lower bound. The linking algorithm taken from Price et
al. (2019) uses place of residence as an input to the machine learning algorithm, and thus will tend to be more
successful matching individuals who didn't move residence compared to those who did.

                                                          10
 represents state by year fixed effects. As in Tabellini (2020), changes in the fraction of city
residents who are European immigrants who arrived in the last decade is our measure of changes
in immigration over time. 15 We also consider a version of equation (1) estimated in levels,
where we additionally include city fixed effects. These local labor market specifications closely
align to those used in Ager and Hansen (2017) and Tabellini (2020).
         At the local labor market level, our primary outcomes of interest are changes in the labor
force participation rate and log changes in the average occupation score, our proxy for income
growth. By controlling for state by year fixed effects, our estimates of the effects of immigration
compare cities within the same state with differential changes in the fraction of city population
who are immigrants. In all local labor market specifications, we cluster standard errors at the
MSA level and each city is given equal weight.
         In contrast to results obtained from local labor market specifications, we also consider
individual specifications, where treatment is assigned on the basis of the labor market in which
the individual originally resided. For our results using worker-level data, our baseline
specification is given by:
                              = 1  +  +  +                                                                        (2)
where  represents the change in the labor market outcome  for person  between  - 10 and
 and  represents the change in the fraction of the city population who are recent
European immigrants between  - 10 and  for the city  in which the individual resided in time
period  - 10. At the individual level, we also include age fixed effects,  , to control for
changes in labor market outcomes that may naturally vary with an individual worker's life cycle.
         At the individual level, we again study changes in labor force participation and income,
proxied by the log occupation score of the worker's occupation. However, with our linked data,
we also consider the labor market outcomes of moving out of the city, switching occupations,
and whether or not there was an occupation switch to a higher or lower paying occupation.
Again, controlling for state by year fixed effects, our estimates of the effects of immigration at
the individual level compare individuals in different cities within the same state where the two
cities faced differential changes in the fraction of city residents who are immigrants. In all



15
  Tabellini (2020) also shows, however, that results are robust to considering all immigrants, not just recent ones
and not just ones of European origin.

                                                         11
individual specifications, we cluster errors at the MSA level and each person is given equal
weight.
          The most important distinction between the individual level specification and the local
labor market specification is that treatment in the individual specification is assigned to the
individual on the basis of the original labor market the person resided in. Thus, the estimates of
the impacts of immigration on labor market outcomes in our specifications reflect the impacts for
the original residents of the city, including those who moved away and excluding those who
moved in. In this way, our individual level specifications are able to account for the selective
migration response to changes in immigration. Alternatively, we can re-aggregate our linked
data to construct local labor market estimates for the original residents of each city to address
selective migration. We consider such results in Section 4 and find them to be similar to our
individual level regressions.
          In addition to accounting for migration, there are three additional important distinctions
between our approach for studying individual labor market outcomes and local labor market
outcomes. First, by focusing on individual labor market outcomes, changes in labor force
participation and income will in part be driven by natural life cycle patterns. For example, in
Figure 1, we show the average labor force participation rate and average occupation score
(conditional on working) at each age, averaged across the years 1910-1930. There are large
increases in labor force participation and income in early years of life and significant decreases,
particularly in labor force participation, for older workers. As a result, if there are differences in
the initial age distribution of workers that are correlated with changes in immigration, these life
cycle patterns could confound our estimates of the effects of immigration on native labor market
outcomes. To account for this, in our worker-level specifications, we control for age fixed
effects. However, in Online Appendix C, we also report our baseline individual results where we
do not include age fixed effects for comparison. We observe that these results for labor force
participation and income are even more different from our findings at the local labor market
level than our baseline.
          A second important distinction between our individual level and local labor market
results is that to study differences in labor market outcomes, we focus only on those individuals
who were originally in the labor market in the initial year considered. Given that we restrict the
labor market population in the initial year to be between the ages of 15-65, this first of all implies

                                                   12
that we are excluding young new entrants to the labor market who are aged 15-24 in the second
year of the difference, as they were, by construction, outside the labor force in the initial year.
We consider in more detail the impacts of immigration on these young workers entering the
labor market in Section 5. Because we also include workers ages 56-65 in the original year, this
means we additionally are studying the labor market impacts for older workers, aged 66-75 in the
later year, who are not present in local labor market estimates. However, we consider the
heterogeneous impacts of immigration across age groups, allowing us to see how this could
impact our results, and though unreported, if we omit this group, this does not meaningfully
impact our average results at the individual level.
       Finally, our local labor market specifications place equal weight on each city, whereas
our individual results place equal weight on each individual. Thus, our individual level
regressions will place greater weight on cities with larger populations. However, in Online
Appendix B, we show that when we reweight each individual observation to be one divided by
the population of the city they originally resided in, our individual-level results are generally
consistent with our primary findings.


3.2 Instrumental Variables Approach and Identification
       A natural concern with identifying the labor market impacts of immigration off of
changes in the fraction of the city population who are immigrants is that immigrants are not
randomly assigned to cities, but may selectively choose cities they settle in. If this selection is
on the basis of trends in labor market outcomes or other city features correlated with those
outcomes, this will bias our estimates of the impacts of immigration. As a result, we follow the
identification strategy of Tabellini (2020) and do not directly estimate the specifications in (1)
and (2), but use these equations in a two stage least squares setting, where we instrument for
changes in the fraction of immigrants in city populations using a shift-share instrument (as in
Card (2001)).
       Our instrument, taken directly from Tabellini (2020), constructs predicted changes in the
share of immigrants in each city using the year 1900 settlement patterns of immigrants by their
region of origin and the total in-flows of immigrants from each region from 1910-1930.




                                                  13
Formally, we construct the predicted change in the share of the population who are immigrants
for each city  in each time period   {1920,1930},  , as:

                                                      1
                          =                              ,,1900 ,-,                                          (3)
                                                      ,
                                                      
                                                            

where , is the predicted population of city  in the time period  (based on average urban

growth rates to avoid any direct impact of immigration on city population), ,,1900 is the
fraction of all immigrants of region of origin  who reside in city  in the year 1900, and
,-, is the total immigrants in-flows to the United States from region  between time
periods  - 10 and , omitting the inflows that ultimately resided in city  . 16 Summary statistics
for the instrument are visible in Table 1 and additional details of how this instrument is
constructed are available in Online Appendix A.
        As discussed in Tabellini (2020), the key identifying assumption when using this
instrument is that the variation in immigrant settlement patterns in 1900 is unrelated to
subsequent changes in labor market outcomes (see also Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2018)).
Tabellini (2020) shows that this instrument for predicted immigration is uncorrelated with past
trends in labor market outcomes from 1900-1910, that results with this instrument are robust to
controlling for time trends in certain city characteristics, and that results are robust to controlling
for initial city and immigrant populations. As we use the same instrument and start from the
same labor market outcomes as in his work, our local labor market results share these robustness
characteristics. However, we show explicitly that robustness to these features continues to hold
in our individual specifications in Online Appendix B.
        We also consider additional sources of variation in immigration across cities, using
plausibly exogenous variation in immigration driven by the Immigration Acts of the 1920s and
World War I, as in Ager and Hansen (2017), Abramitzky et al. (2019), and Tabellini (2020).
Immigration policy between 1910 and 1930 heavily restricted immigrant in-flows from certain
European nations, initially due to WWI (restricting in-flows from non-Allied nations), and then
later due to the Immigration Acts of 1921 and 1924, which imposed region-specific immigration
quotas. As argued in both Abramitzky et al. (2019) and Tabellini (2020), this source of variation


16
  By using the predicted population in the denominator for our instrument, our variation will not conflate
endogenous changes in the native population associated with immigration with actual changes in immigrant flows, a
concern raised in Card and Peri (2016).

                                                       14
substantially reduced the serial correlation in immigrant inflows over time, and thus is unlikely
to conflate the short run and long run responses of the economy to immigration, a concern raised
in Jaeger et al. (2018). 17 Our results using these alternate sources of variation are described in
more detail in Online Appendix B. We find very similar results as in our baseline.
         We note, however, that our results remain of interest even in the case where the
identifying assumption is not satisfied. Given that we are starting from the same populations and
same instruments for changes in immigration as existing literature, to the extent that we find
differences in results observed at the individual and local labor market levels, this suggests that
selective migration is important to consider in evaluating the impacts of immigration in this
historical context.
         A concern specific to our empirical strategy is that if the rate at which we match workers
across time is correlated with the treatment, then our estimates of the impacts of immigration
may be biased. We show in Online Appendix B that the likelihood of being matched across time
is uncorrelated with the increase in the fraction of immigrants in the population of original city of
residence. 18 This mitigates concerns about selective matching that is correlated with the
treatment.


4 Economic Impacts of Immigration for Original Residents
We begin our analysis of the economic impacts of immigration by considering local labor market
outcomes and show that we find comparable results to those in the literature. We then analyze
the individual level outcomes for workers, assigning treatment status on the basis of the city the
worker was originally in.


4.1 Average Local Labor Market Level Impacts of Immigration
         We start by verifying that our linked sample of Census records produces comparable
results to current work analyzing the impacts of immigration on natives' economic outcomes
over this same time period. We aggregate our final linked individual Census data to the city

17
   Prior to using the WWI and quota instrument directly, we find that a correlation across decades in changes in
predicted immigration, our original shift-share instrument, of 0.64. While this correlation is non-negligible, it is on
its own sufficiently low to mitigate concerns about conflating short-run and long-run impacts of immigration, as
discussed in Jaeger et al. (2019).
18
   We also show that the likelihood of having an occupation that is "not yet classified" is uncorrelated with changes
in the fraction of the population who are immigrants.

                                                          15
level and then estimate the impact of the fraction immigrants on workers being in the labor force
and the log of their average occupation score, estimating both in levels and in first differences.
         Table 3 presents our shift-share IV estimates of these local labor market level impacts.
For comparison, we also present in columns (1) and (3) a replication of the results in Tabellini
(2020). 19 Columns (2) and (4) report our results for our final linked sample of individuals,
aggregated up to the city level. In our level specifications (columns (1)-(2)), city and state by
year fixed effects are included; in our first difference specifications (columns (3)-(4)), state by
year fixed effects are included. We do not report the first stage estimates of the impact of our
instrument on actual changes in the fraction of immigrants in each city, but show in Online
Appendix C that our instrument strongly predicts changes in immigration in the direction we
would expect.
         Our point estimates line up nicely with the findings in Tabellini (2020), suggesting our
linked sample is representative of the average effects. 20 We estimate similar impacts of
immigration on labor market outcomes, with higher fractions of immigrants and increases in
immigration generating increases in labor force participation and incomes. 21 Our level estimates
imply that a five percentage point increase in the fraction of immigrants in a city raises labor
force participation by nearly a full percentage point and incomes by roughly 0.5%. 22 These
findings are also consistent with the findings of Ager and Hansen (2017) and Abramitzky et al.
(2019), who look at similar estimates at the county-level.
         Before analyzing individual level outcomes, we first consider how these findings at the
local labor market level are impacted when we account for the migration patterns in and out of
each city. We do this by using our linked data to construct a counterfactual version of each city
comprised of all the individuals who originally resided in the city. For example, to analyze
changes in employment and income between 1920 and 1930 in Baltimore, MD, we start with the
employment and incomes of the original population residing in Baltimore in 1920. We then


19
   For this replication, we use the data and code provided in the replication files for his paper, adjusted to match the
specifications we consider.
20
   Relative to the original results reported in Tabellini (2020), we omit the two cities, New Bedford, MA and
Sacramento, CA for all years in the data; Tabellini (2020) only omits these for the year 1920. This accounts for
differences in point estimates in our replication of his work relative to the published version.
21
   While we do not report it, we find that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that our point estimates are the same
as those obtained in Tabellini (2020).
22
   We follow Tabellini (2020) and discuss our results for a five percentage point change in the fraction of
immigrants, as this is roughly the average change in this fraction between 1910 and 1920; see Table 1.

                                                           16
construct a counterfactual Baltimore for the year 1930, comprised of only those individuals
residing in Baltimore in 1920, including those who moved out between 1920-1930 and omitting
those who moved in over that same time period. In this way, we account for any possible
migration response to changes in the fraction of immigrants in the local labor market. Because
we focus on changes in the population in each city, we only present results in first differences
and not in levels.
       Table 4 presents the results of this counterfactual exercise focusing solely on the original
residents of the local labor market. We continue to find that there is a significant positive effect
of immigration on labor force participation for these original natives. However, when we focus
purely on the original residents of each city, we find that no statistically significant impact on
incomes as a result of changes in immigration. Further, given the size of our standard errors, we
cannot rule out large negative effects on income. We observe that the magnitude of our negative
point estimate for immigration is comparable in absolute value to the statistically significant
positive effect obtained in Table 3 and the differences in these two coefficients are statistically
significantly. Thus, before even considering individual-level regressions, these findings suggest
that local labor market estimates of the impacts of immigration, such as those in Table 3, may be
misleading.


4.2 Average Worker-Level Impacts of Immigration
       To understand better the migration response to changes in immigration, as well as which
types of workers are impacted by changes in immigration, we now consider results estimated at
the individual level. To focus on the original residents of a given labor market, similar to our
above counterfactual construction of local labor markets, we estimate differences in labor market
outcomes at the individual level, assigning the treatment of changes in the fraction of immigrants
on the basis of the city there individual lived in in the initial period. For all our estimates, we
restrict attention to males in who were between the ages 15-65 in the first decade they are
observed that can be linked across two Census waves and who were residing in one of the 178
cities we study in the initial period. We again include state by year fixed effects in all
specifications and cluster standard errors at the MSA level.
       Table 5 presents our results at the worker level, reporting results for whether or not
workers moved out (column 1), changes in labor force participation (column 2), log differences


                                                  17
in occupation scores (conditional on being initially in the labor force) (column 5), and whether or
not the worker switched (one-digit) occupations (conditional on being initially in the labor force)
(column 5). 23 Because labor force participation changes can occur through either entering or
exiting the labor force, we also report labor force entry and exit outcomes separately (columns 3
and 4). 24 Further, because our measures of income are defined at the occupation level, changes
in income must come through changing occupations. As a result, we also report results for
whether or not there was an upward or a downward occupational switch (i.e. an increase or
decrease in log occupation scores, measured at the three digit level) (columns 7 and 8).
         At the individual level, we find that increases in immigration lead to increases in labor
force participation, and of roughly the same magnitude as observed as the local labor market
level. This comes both through increased entry to the labor force, as well as a decrease in exit
from the labor force. However, in contrast to the local labor market findings in Table 3, we find
no impact of immigration on incomes, though we cannot rule out moderately negative effects. A
key reason for the difference in these outcomes is that increases in immigration led to increased
out-migration by the original residents of the city. Our estimates imply that a five percentage
point increase in the fraction of immigrants increasing the probability of moving out by 2.85
percentage points or by 9.5%. This selective migration response is key to understanding the
economic impacts of immigration on natives and something we explore further in analyzing
which types of workers are moving out in response to increased immigration.
         Notably, we find that workers in areas with increased numbers of immigrants were less
likely to change occupations. A five percentage point increase in the fraction of immigrants in
the city reduces occupational switching by 1.5 percentage points, or 3%. 25 The economic
interpretation of this finding is, on its own, ambiguous. Lower occupational switching could
represent more stability in the local labor market and be a positive outcome, especially if it


23
   Though unreported, we find that if we use the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation instead of logs to compute
income growth, and include those initially outside the labor force, our results are very similar to those reported here.
24
   These outcomes are defined as the incidence of making a transition from out of the labor force to in the labor force
(entry) or the incidence of making a transition from in the labor force to out of the labor force (exit). As these
outcomes can be potentially influenced by the initial distribution of workers across labor force states, we report
results in Online Appendix C where we interact changes in the fraction of immigrants with workers' initial labor
force status.
25
   The baseline rate of occupational switching of 50% at the one digit level over a ten year span may seem high.
There is likely a nontrivial amount of spurious occupational switching in the data due to how interviewers coded
worker responses and how these were mapped to occupations; this problem persists even in current labor market
data (see, for example, vom Lehn et al. (2019)).

                                                          18
means that natives are less likely to make a downward occupational switch. On the other hand,
reduced switching could mean that workers have a hard time making career advancements, and
get stuck in their current occupations, unable to advance to higher-paying work. Looking at the
probability of making an upward or downward switch, we see that increased immigration has no
significant impact on upward occupational switching. However, increases in immigration
substantially reduce the probability of making a downward occupational switch. We interpret
this findings as suggesting that increased immigration may provide some labor market insurance
for natives, reducing the incidence of negative labor market shocks which would cause a career
regression.
         Prima facie, it may seem hard to square the fact that increased immigration has no impact
on occupation scores with the finding that workers are both less likely to make a downward
occupational switch and no less likely to make an upward occupational switch. To reconcile
these findings, in Table 6, we present results for the probability of observing a log occupation
score change of different amounts, breaking income changes into increments of 0.25, or 25 log
points. This allows us to trace out the distribution of income changes through occupational
switching and how that changes in response to increased immigration.
         We observe in Table 6 that workers are indeed more likely to observe no occupational
income score change as a result of immigration, remaining in their current occupation.
Considering the probability of making a downward occupational switch, we see that the
likelihood of making a switch to an occupation that pays up to 25 log points less than the current
occupation is substantially reduced, and that there is also a reduction in slightly larger decreases,
between 50 and 75 log points. This is the key source of the insurance effect we have observed.
However, we also observe that the probability of switching occupations and losing 75 log points
or more of one's current income increases when there are increases in immigration, albeit by a
smaller amount than the reductions in the likelihood of making a smaller downward occupational
switch. 26 Thus, although the overall incidence of downward occupational switching is reduced,
conditional on making a downward switch, the risk of large income losses has increased. This
reconciles the lack of any average income change with the increased insurance against small


26
  We note that these losses are still conditional on participation in the labor force, and not losses due to leaving
one's job entirely. These type of large career regressions are low probability events on average, occurring to only
3% of workers. We also note that since we measure median income of the occupation, a sizable portion of these
losses may come by moving to occupations where a larger fraction of workers are not working full-time hours.

                                                          19
amounts of labor market risk. We interpret these findings as implying that while increases in
immigration provide some insurance against small labor market shocks, they are unable to fully
mitigate larger labor market risk associated with a large displacement from one's occupation.
       For upward occupational switching, we observe that for most types of upward switches,
the probability of moving up the career ladder is unaffected by changes in immigration. For
upward switches raising income between 50-75 log points, there is some reduction, however,
with increases in immigration. But overall for the average worker, movements up the career
ladder through upward occupational switching are largely unaffected by increased immigration.
Thus, we find no evidence that increases immigration impede occupational upskilling, but no
evidence that they generate it either.


4.3 Variation in Worker-Level Impacts by Age
       To summarize, we find on average that increased immigration leads to higher labor force
participation for natives and no impact on average incomes, but increased outmigration and
decreased occupational switching, primarily a decrease in downward occupational switching.
We now turn to the question of who are the workers experiencing these changes and explore
heterogeneity in worker level responses to changes in immigration. That is, we are interested in
now understanding who are the "winners" and the "losers" of increased immigration.
       We first consider how the impact of immigration varies across workers of different ages.
Table 7 shows our findings where we interact the treatment of changes in the fraction of
immigrants with being in different 10 year age bins (15-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54,55-65), defined
by the worker's age in the initial year he is observed. We report the interaction term for each age
group, omitting a direct effect instead of a reference age group. Thus, our results can be
interpreted as the average effect for workers in each age group. We again consider the same set
of labor market outcomes as in Table 5.
       In general, we find substantial heterogeneity in the impacts of immigration across
workers of different ages for many of our labor market outcomes. For example, there is a strong
age gradient in the out-migration response to increased immigration, with workers under the age
of 35 much more likely to move out and older workers, especially those over the age of 55, much
more likely to stay. As seen in Table 2, young workers are already more likely to move out in
general, however, the age gradient in our estimated results is much steeper than in average

                                                20
migration rates. For example, a five percentage point increase in the fraction of immigrants
generates a nearly five percentage point increase in the likelihood of moving for 15-24 year olds,
or a nearly 15% increase in the likelihood of moving out (using the Table 2 data as a baseline).
However, the rate at which workers age 45-54 move out increases by roughly 1.3 percentage
points, or a 5% increase in moving out, with a five percentage point increase in immigration. For
workers over the age of 55, our point estimates, though noisy, imply no out-migration in
response to increased immigration, even though on average, nearly 30% of these workers move
out of their original city of residence.
        We also observe that gains in labor force participation are also concentrated among
young workers. As seen in column (2), workers ages 15-24 are the only workers to experience
an increase in labor force participation as a result of increased immigration. Prime-aged workers
see no significant change in labor force participation due to immigration, and old workers see
large reductions in labor force participation as a result of increases in immigration. The increase
in labor force participation for young workers is largely accomplished through increased entry to
the labor market. Given the high rates of labor force participation for men over this time period
(see Figure 1 and Table 1), we interpret this large increase as immigration accelerating labor
force entry for younger workers and not increasing labor force participation from workers who
would otherwise not participate.
        In contrast to the results for labor force entry, we see that for workers under age 55, there
was a relatively symmetric impact of immigration on labor force exit across age groups, with
these workers slightly less likely to exit the labor force as a result of increased immigration. The
exception here is workers over the age of 55, who saw a much higher likelihood of exiting the
labor force as a result of increased immigration. This substantial increase in exiting the labor
force, coupled with the substantial reduction in labor entry is what accounts for the substantial
reduction in labor force participation for older workers with increased immigration.
        It is not obvious how to interpret these results in terms of welfare for younger or older
workers. It may be that increased labor market entry by young workers is because the returns to
work have risen substantially, raising the opportunity cost of non-employment, or it may be
driven by economic necessity in their households. 27 Similarly, it may be that older workers


27
  In Table C.15 of Online Appendix C, we consider how labor force participation changes differed based on initial
labor force status. We see that the increase in labor force participation is primarily concentrated among workers

                                                       21
exiting the labor force represents an ability to retire early and is a positive sign for welfare or it
may be that older workers experience a displacement effect and involuntarily exit the labor force.
Regardless of the interpretation, the key finding we emphasize is that the labor force
participation changes induced by increased immigration are concentrated on the young and the
old and increases in labor force participation are observed solely for young workers and not for
prime-age nonparticipants.
         We also observe significant differences in how incomes were impacted by immigration
across age groups. Younger workers experienced modest income losses as a result of increased
immigration, whereas older workers saw no significant impact, though for the oldest workers, we
cannot rule out meaningful income gains. This heterogeneity in income changes is driven by
heterogeneity in occupational switching patterns. Workers of all ages experience some form of
the insurance effect, with the likelihood of making a downward occupational switch decreased
with increased immigration. However, workers under the age of 25 also see an equivalently
sized decrease in the likelihood of making an upward occupational switch, whereas older
workers do not. Similar to our results in Table 6, we examine age heterogeneity in how the
distribution of income/occupation changes responds to increased immigration in Online
Appendix C, and find results very similar to those seen in Table 6, with the age gradients we find
in Table 7.
         Given these findings, in spite of some ambiguity of how to interpret our findings for labor
force participation, we argue that young workers are losers from increased immigration ­ they
move away at a higher rate, see modest income losses, and are less likely to make career
advancements. In contrast, older workers seem to fare better, as they are less likely to move, and
may experience some income gains.


4.4 Variation in Worker-Level Impacts by Worker Skill




who were not initially in the labor force and not in school. While there is an effect for workers initially in school, it
is much smaller. In Tables C.12 and C.13, we also observe that there is no significant average labor force effect for
workers whose parents were both U.S. natives, driven by a much lower labor force response by the young. Overall,
since the fraction of workers in not in school and not in the labor force are primarily young workers (74 percent are
under the age of 25) and measured labor force participation rates are so high for prime-aged workers (nearly 95%, as
seen in Figure 1), we interpret this increase in labor force participation as primarily accelerating entry for younger
workers who were not originally in school.

                                                           22
       Immigration may also have heterogeneous impacts across worker skill levels. In our
data, we do not directly observe education and so we are unable to use education as a measure of
skill. Instead, we proxy for skill by looking at how outcomes vary based on a worker's initial
one-digit occupation, where we rank occupations by their average occupation score to denote the
level of skill (reported in Online Appendix A). Again, we control for age fixed effects in these
specifications, so we account for the fact that older workers are more likely to be in certain
occupations as part of their life cycle career progression. We also control for one-digit
occupation, so the effects of increased of immigration for workers in each occupation are
estimated relative to other non-exposed workers in that same occupation.
       In Table 8, we present results of the impacts of increased immigration for workers of
different skill levels, separately estimating outcomes for workers based on their initial one digit
occupation (or non-participation in the labor market). We list one-digit occupations in ascending
order of average occupation score, with labor market nonparticipants first, followed by
farmers/farm laborers, which has the lowest average occupation score, all the way up to
professional/technical occupations, which has the highest average occupation score. As before,
we do not omit any of the one digit occupations in this specification and so the coefficient for
each interacted independent variable represents the total effect for workers in that skill group.
       We observe significant differences in the impacts of immigration on individual workers
based on their initial level of skill. Workers who are low skilled are much more likely to move
out in response to immigration, whereas high skilled workers are more likely to remain in the
original labor market. These effects are quite large, with the increased out-migration effect for
the lowest skilled workers in laborer work, either in farm work or more generally, implying that
for every percentage point increase in the fraction immigrants in a city, these workers' out-
migration rate increases by a percentage point or more. Further, this out-migration response is
roughly five times larger than for high skilled workers in managerial or professional occupations.
       We also find that low skilled workers are much more likely to see a decline in their
occupational incomes, in particular, farmers and farm laborers, whereas higher-skilled workers
see an increase in their incomes. Again, these effects are large. A five percentage point increase
in the fraction of immigrants in the city is estimated to reduce incomes of laborers and farm
laborers by 5-10%. These income losses are largely driven by a substantially decreased
likelihood of making an upward occupational switch, though for non-farm laborers, there is also

                                                 23
an increased likelihood of making a downward occupation switch. In contrast, higher-skilled
workers' likelihood of making an upward occupational switch increases in response to
immigration. In Online Appendix C, we present results for changes in different parts of the
distribution of occupation switches for workers differentiated by initial occupation. We observe
that lower skilled workers, while still receiving some insurance against small declines in
occupational income, also faced increased risk of larger income declines than higher skilled
workers. The overall implication of this is that low skill workers face much worse labor market
outcomes than high skill workers in response to immigration.
       Notably, we observe little skill heterogeneity in labor force participation, with most
workers experiencing a small, if any, increase in the likelihood of participating in the labor force.
Since having an occupation requires workers to already be in the labor force in the initial period,
this estimate purely represents reduced labor market exit for these workers. The largest increase
in labor force participation is observed for workers originally outside the labor force; as
previously shown in Table 7, this is exclusively driven by young non-participants.
       In summary, we see that low skill workers are clear "losers" of increased immigration, as
they are more likely to move out and experience income losses. In contrast, higher skilled
workers are clear "winners" of increased immigration, as they are less likely to move and more
likely to see income increases. Thus, among this population of the original natives residing in a
city, increased immigration exacerbates income inequality.


4.5 Outcomes for Movers vs. Stayers and Evidence of Displacement
       We conclude our analysis of the impacts of immigration on the natives originally residing
in local labor markets by examining evidence on how the effects of immigration vary for movers
and stayers. Because native out-migration is an outcome of changes in immigration, and is an
endogenous choice made by individuals, we cannot interpret differences in outcomes between
movers and stayers as causal. However, given what we observe for these differences, we present
a few pieces of supporting evidence for a causal story that workers who leave the local labor
market due to immigration are experiencing some form of displacement. Table 9 shows our
results split out by movers and stayers, while controlling for the average effects for movers.
       When we look at how moving interacts with increases in immigration, we observe that
the outcomes for movers are significantly different than both other movers and workers who

                                                 24
stay. On the one hand, workers moving away from areas experiencing increased immigration are
more likely to be in the labor force 10 years later than either stayers or the average mover.
However, these workers see larger income losses than stayers or movers from cities not
experiencing immigration increases. A mover from a city where there is no change in the
immigration sees a 11% reduction in incomes with the move, largely because the probability of
making a downward switch is higher than stayers (though the probability of an upward switch is
slightly higher as well). However, if a worker moves away from a city experiencing a five
percentage point increase in the fraction of immigrants in their original city, their income falls by
an additional 1.7%. This is because workers moving away from cities with increases in
immigration are much less likely to make an upward occupational switch. They also show no
signs of receiving insurance against downward occupational switches. This is consistent with the
idea that the insurance provided by increased immigration operates through the local labor
market, as in Cadena and Kovak (2016), and thus workers who move away lose this benefit.
         In contrast, the effects of increased immigration for those workers who choose to stay in
their original city of residence are largely positive. There are also increased effects on labor
force participation, but also a moderate increase in earnings, on par with the average increase
observed in our local labor market analyses in Table 3. This comes from the insurance effect of
a reduced likelihood of making a downward occupational switch, and though unreported,
conditional on a downward switch, we observe no increase in larger switches and losses for these
workers.
         With the available data we have, we cannot directly assess the causal motives for why
some workers move out of a city when there is increased immigration and some don't. However,
we argue that our findings of different outcomes for movers and stayers, though not causal, is
supportive of a displacement effect for workers who end up leaving the local labor market. We
see some evidence of this in Figure 2, where we plot the coefficient on the out-migration effect
from Table 8 for each one digit occupation opposite the national fraction of immigrants observed
in 1920 or 1930 who arrived in the last ten years and who are working in that occupation. We
observe a substantial positive correlation between the jobs in which immigrants work in and the
jobs whose workers move out of the cities they originally resided in. 28 This is supportive of the


28
  While the positive correlation is quite strong, we do note a couple of outliers that move in a different direction in
farmers/farm laborers and craftsmen, as migration rates for farmers (craftsmen) is higher (lower) than we would

                                                          25
idea that immigrants enter cities and seek work in certain occupations, increasing the local labor
supply and driving away natives because of either lower wages or higher non-employment for
workers specializing in those jobs. With this perspective, we would consider that these displaced
workers who move away from their original labor market as "losers" of immigration, whereas
those who stay are "winners."
         We further note that these estimated losses for workers who move out of these areas may
well be a lower bound for the losses experienced by workers exposed to immigrant competition.
Workers who move in response to economic shocks may be positively selected on the gains they
receive from moving (Borjas et al. (1992), Dahl (2002)) and thus these workers moving away
from cities may fare much better than workers who face greater barriers to geographic mobility.
For example, in Online Appendix C, we show that for black workers, who may have faced
greater barriers to mobility, increased immigration lowered labor force participation, lowered
earnings, lowered the likelihood of making an upward occupational switch and provided no
insurance against downward occupational switches. Thus, those who lost from immigrant
competition and were unable to move in response to that shock may have fared worse than what
we observe for movers.
         An alternative explanation to displacement from immigrant competition is that some
workers have preferences over living in cities with fewer immigrants (for example, due to
prejudice), and are willing to experience worse outcomes to avoid living in a city with more
immigrants. To assess this alternative story, we consider where workers move to, and whether or
not these locations have lower levels of immigrants. If workers are leaving to avoid immigrant
populations, we would expect that they would migrate to cities where there are fewer
immigrants.
         We consider this possibility in Table 10, where we consider the outcomes of moving out
to a location whose fraction of recent immigrants in the population is in the first, second, third or
fourth quartile. For workers who move to one of the cities in our sample, we use the observed



predict from other occupations. An important limitation of this simple correlation and the interpretation we apply is
that we presumes that workers in the same one digit occupation are equally substitutable, which would generate a
displacement effect. For these two occupations, we note that among farm laborers (which are most of these workers,
since we have an urban sample), the substitutability of native and immigrant labor is likely high, whereas the degree
of substitutability of craftsmen between native and immigrant labor is likely much lower. Further study of the
substitutability of workers within these occupations would be needed to obtain a more precise estimate of a
displacement effect.

                                                         26
fraction of immigrants for that city; for workers who move to smaller city or more rural area, we
use the state fraction of immigrants net of the cities in our sample. We observe no evidence that
move-out rates to low immigrant cities, in the first or second quartile, increased in response to
increased immigration. Instead, native migration flows primarily increase to cities whose
fraction immigrants is in the 3rd quartile. Thus, we do not see strong evidence of out-migrants
avoiding immigrants in their decisions of where to move to. 29


4.6 Relation to Abramitzky et al. (2019)
At first glance, our findings that changes in immigration have no impact on native worker log
occupation scores appears to differ from the recent findings of Abramitzky et al. (2019), who
show that declines in immigration associated with increased immigration quotas in the 1920s are
also associated with declines in income (also measured by occupation scores) for native workers.
They identify this as a "puzzle," given that we might expect a reduction in local labor supply
should raise earnings for native workers. Abramitzky et al. (2019) also show in their Table 1
that these results persist for a sample of linked male workers between the ages of 16-55, both for
movers and stayers, even when restricting to urban areas.
        However, our results are consistent with their findings once we account for two key
differences between our approaches. First, in the linked sample used in Abramitzky et al.
(2019), the immigration treatment is assigned based on the latter year of the two years over
which differences are taken. As a result, the effects on income are estimated for the original
population that stayed and the new move-ins to the region, excluding the workers who move
away from the area. As we have shown in Table 9, these workers who moved away from areas
with increased immigration experience wage losses, and thus their exclusion from the results in
Abramitzky et al. (2019) raises the estimated impact of immigration on natives. Second, when
separately considering the effects for movers and stayers, Abramitzky et al. (2019) constructs the
local labor market total of all recent stayers or new move-ins and looks at the level of their
incomes. This construction implicitly mixes the changes in income associated with changes in
immigration as well as changes in selection in terms of who moved in and who stayed. Our


29
  One potential concern is that if natives are not moving to areas without lower levels of immigration, they may not
be moving to avoid immigrant competition in the first place. However, we note that the evidence in Table 9
suggests that movers were more likely to switch occupations than stayers, and thus they may have switched into jobs
exposed to different levels of immigrant competition than they faced in their original job.

                                                        27
findings for stayers (Table 9) are consistent with their findings, as our estimates show that
stayers experience income gains from increased immigration. In the following section, we
consider who the new move-ins are and what happens to them. While we find income gains for
these new native move-ins, we also observe that increased immigration worsens the selection of
these new move-ins. Thus, the findings of Abramitzky et al. (2019) that new move-ins have
lower incomes when there are increases in immigration can be accounted for by the worsening
selection of these move-ins, documented in the following section. 30
         As a result, we argue that our findings are consistent with the findings of Abramitzky et
al. (2019) that immigration declines generate declines in the income of workers who are
ultimately in the local labor markets where immigration slowed down. However, given our
findings on the effects of out-migration for natives originally in treated cities, we would argue
that the puzzle described in Abramitzky et al. (2019) is further complicated because it misses an
important subset of workers displaced by immigration, for whom reductions in immigration
associated with U.S. immigration policy changes would have resulted in better labor market
outcomes.


4.7 Additional Outcomes and Robustness Exercises
         We present a variety of additional results in Online Appendices B and C. In Online
Appendix C, we present additional results showing the impacts of changes in immigration on
family formation outcomes ­ the probability of individuals being married, single, widowed, or
divorced. Consistent with the results in Carlana and Tabellini (2020), we find that local labor
market analysis finds that increased immigration is associated with more marriages, but we show
that this effect disappears for linked individuals in our sample. This difference in results is not
driven by selective migration, but by the fact that the only impact on marriage is observed for


30
   Another notable difference between our empirical strategy and that of Abramitzky et al. (2019) is that their
exercises are implemented in a difference-in-differences framework using measures of immigration quotas directly
and location fixed effects. They also utilize data from the year 1900. To implement the equivalent of their
specification in our shift-share approach at the individual level would require a consistent panel of individuals from
1900 to 1930, and have a very different interpretation, assessing the 20-30 year impact of immigration on an
individual worker. As a result, we do not pursue this specification. Alternatively, we could add in individual linked
data from 1900-1910 as an additional observation in our specification. However, interpreting our results for these
workers is also more complicated, as changes in immigration in-flows from 1900-1910 do not have a plausibly
exogenous interpretation, as they are not impacted by WWI or the immigration quotas. However, in Online
Appendix B, we do use data from 1900 to 1910 to construct city-level pre-trends for the individual residents of each
city at each age. We find that our results are robust to controlling for these age-city pre-trends.

                                                         28
workers originally under the age of 15. Increases in immigration lead these young workers to be
more likely to be married 10 years later, and have no impact on workers originally 15 or older
when first observed.
       Our results thus far have exclusively focused on labor market outcomes for men, largely
because labor force participation rates for women were low in this time period and the inherent
difficulties in linking women across multiple Census waves. However, we are able to link a
significant number of women in our sample and we report our estimates of the impacts of
immigration on them in Online Appendix C. We find broadly similar results to the average
results for men in Table 5.
       We also present in Online Appendix C how the impacts of immigration vary for workers
who are second generation immigrants (children of immigrants) versus children with U.S. born
parents and how the impacts of immigration vary by race. We find that our results are not
particularly dependent on workers' parentage with the exception of changes in labor force
participation. We only find significant average effects on labor force participation changes for
workers who had at least one parent who was an immigrant; there is no average effect for
workers whose parents are U.S. born. This difference is driven by a substantially lower impact
on labor force participation changes for young workers whose parents are U.S. born. In terms of
differences across race, we find that the average effect for white workers is very similar to our
baseline findings, which is perhaps unsurprising given less than 10% of our linked sample is
non-white. As noted before, we find significant negative impacts for black workers, consistent
with similar findings in Ager and Hansen (2017). As a result, we would argue that black men are
also some of the "losers" from increased immigration over this time period.
       Finally, in Online Appendix C, we also report our findings when we use simple OLS
instead of our IV strategy for obtaining variation in changes in immigration. We find that these
results look very similar to our baseline results along most dimensions. The most significant
difference is that our estimates of out-migration by natives become statistically insignificant (and
even negative). This is not surprising, however, given that immigrants likely select their location
of residence on local labor market characteristics that are likely appealing to natives as well,
which would reduce the average out-migration response for workers in these labor markets.
       We report several robustness checks in Online Appendix B. We show that our results are
robust to using an alternative identification strategy, using variation in predicted immigration

                                                 29
based on WWI and U.S. Immigration Policy in the 1920s as our instrument for the fraction
immigrants in each city. Our results are also robust to including not yet classified occupation
observations with imputation and reweighting individuals to be consistent with local labor
market specifications generate consistent findings. We also show that our results hold when
including allowing for possible differential trends in city characteristics (for example, fraction
black, skill composition, manufacturing value added level, city size), as in Tabellini (2020).
Finally, we use data from 1900-1910 to construct age-specific pre-trends for changes in
individual outcomes for those workers who originally reside in each city (including those
workers who move away). We construct these pre-trends for each city and each age, and then
control for these in our baseline specification. We find that our results are largely unchanged
when these pre-trends are included as controls.


5 Economic Impacts of Immigration for New Entrants: Young and New
Arrivals
As a final piece of insight, we consider how increased immigration impacted individuals who
were new entrants to labor markets. These new entrants are of two types ­ a new cohort of
workers who originally resided in the city, but were under the age of 15, and new move-ins to the
area.


5.1 Impacts on New Worker Cohort
Table 11 reports the labor market outcomes for the men who were originally ages 5-14 in the
first year they can be observed, and thus potentially entered the labor market 10 years later when
observed again. Since these men were not originally in the labor force, we do not report results
in differences, but focus on whether they were likely to move away, participate in the labor force
the ten years later and the level of their log occupation score when they do enter the labor
market.
        We observe that these young men were more likely to move away from the cities they
originally resided in, with an effect comparable to the average effect for all workers shown in
Table 5. This is not surprising, as it is likely that most of these young men moved with family
units captured in the original sample. However, we do note that these young men were much
less likely to enter the labor force than other young men. This stands in contrast to the effects on

                                                  30
labor force participation for the previous cohort of young workers, who were much more likely
to enter the labor force earlier as a result of increased immigration. Again, though we cannot
interpret the welfare impacts of this effect on labor force participation, we note that there are
potentially important dynamic differences in how immigration impacts young workers of
different cohorts in the same city. Conditional on entering the labor force, however, the incomes
of new young workers in areas with higher immigration are not statistically significantly
different from the incomes of other young workers, though we cannot rule out potential large
negative differences.


5.2 Effects of Immigration for New Move-Ins
Finally, we consider how immigration impacted workers who did not originally reside in treated
cities, but who ultimately moved there. To do this, we revisit our results from Table 9, which
split out the impacts on immigration on move-outs and stayers, assigning treatment on the basis
of the original city of residence. In contrast, in Table 12, we consider the impacts of increased
immigration on move-ins and stayers, where treatment has been assigned on the basis of the
terminal city of residence, studying the population residing in each city at the end of the decade.
We again note that these results cannot be given a causal interpretation, since the migration
decision is an endogenous choice in response to changes in immigration. However, these results
provide descriptive evidence of what is happening to the workers who move in to cities
observing increases in immigration.
         The first thing we observe is that there is a large move-in effect (column 1) in response to
increased immigration, significantly larger than the move-out effect for the original population. 31
When we consider separately the outcomes of movers and stayers, we see results for stayers that
look very similar to Table 9 ­ increased labor force participation, increased incomes and a
significant insurance effect. 32 For move-ins, however, while we do not detect a statistically
significant impact on changes in labor force participation, we do observe large income gains.


31
   We find evidence of US born men moving both between cities in the sample and from other areas not in our
sample. Unlike the full sample of in-migrants, in-migrants who originally lived in one of our sample cities are
positively selected on both labor force participation and occupation scores.
32
   There are few notable differences, however. The magnitudes of these effects are slightly smaller, and there is now
a significant reduction in the probability of moving up the career ladder. Given that we have assigned treatment
differently and are studying a substantially different population, it is not surprising that there are some differences
with our original findings.

                                                          31
These are realized by a larger probability of moving up to a higher-paying occupation and a
much lower probability of moving to a lower paying occupation. Again, since migration is a
selective decision, we cannot attach a causal interpretation to these findings. However, we do
note that these benefits observed by new move-ins are substantially larger than benefits observed
for move-ins to cities with smaller increases in immigration.
       This combination of wage gains for new move-ins and for workers originally residing in
the labor force can explain why at the local labor market level, we observe overall income gains
from increases in immigration. Workers who remained in the labor market and workers who
were drawn to the labor market both observed income gains, whereas those workers who left
these cities observed income losses. On the other hand, the workers who left their original local
labor markets saw income losses, and when they are included, the income gains go away.
       An alternative story to reconcile the differences in our results for income at the local
labor market level and the individual level is that new move-ins are positively selected from the
population as a whole, and thus a change in worker composition induced by immigration raised
incomes on average. We show in Online Appendix C, however, that on average, new move-ins
are younger and have lower initial occupation scores than move outs and the average worker in
this time period (comparing to Table 1). Thus, positive selection was not occurring on average
with move-ins.
       However, increases in immigration could have changed selection of move-ins and so we
consider how move-ins and move-outs from cities experiencing increased immigration compared
to other move-ins or move-outs in Table 13. We consider among the population of either move-
ins or move-outs how changes in immigration relate to the pre-characteristics of these movers,
characteristics such as labor force participation, log occupation score, race, and marital status.
For move-outs from cities with larger increases in the fraction of immigrants, they were less
likely to be initially in the labor force, likely to have lower incomes, more likely to be white and
more likely to be married. The selection on move-ins is very similar, albeit with larger
magnitudes on the income and racial selection, and a positive selection on initial labor force
participation. We do note, however, that the negative selection on income largely goes away for
both move-ins and move-outs if we exclude farm workers (column 3), and thus a key part of the
selection operates on workers employed in the farm sector.



                                                 32
       Given the generally negative selection of move-ins, particularly on income, we argue that
changes in worker composition over initial characteristics did not result in increases in average
incomes in cities with increased immigration. If anything, these compositional changes may
have reduced incomes. As a result, the cause for our differences in income results at the local
labor market and individual level are largely attributable to the selective migration effect.


6 Conclusion
       In this paper, we have studied the impact of immigration on the labor market outcomes of
natives over the years 1910-1930, when immigration flows to the United States were high and
exhibited substantial variability due to changes in global conditions and domestic policy.
Consistent with existing literature, we find that, at the local labor market level 10 years apart,
increases in immigration generate increased labor force participation and increased earnings for
native workers. However, using linked data, we are able to show that the local labor market
results do not fully reflect the impact changes in immigration have on individuals' outcomes.
Once we focus on workers originally residing in the labor market, we find that the increases in
labor force participation are solely concentrated among young workers entering the labor market
sooner than other young workers and that the income gains are non-existent, implying that
aggregate gains are driven by selective out-migration. However, we do show that increased
immigration does generate an "insurance effect," as workers are on average less likely to make a
downward occupation switch when there is increased immigration.
       With our linked data on individual workers, we are further able to identify the relative
"winners" and "losers" of immigration. Younger and lower-skilled workers are "losers" from
increases in immigration, experiencing income losses and higher rates of out-migration. In
particular, those workers who move away from labor market experiencing increases in
immigration appear to fare much worse than those who stay, making them "losers" from
increased immigration as well. We argue that this represents a form of displacement, as
workers' migration responses by skill level are closely correlated with the occupational
distribution of immigrant labor entering the U.S. over this time period. In contrast, older and
higher skilled workers are "winners" from increased immigration.
       Our findings also highlight the importance of understanding the distributional
consequences of increased immigration, and may provide some rationale for the puzzle identified

                                                 33
by Tabellini (2020), that although there are, on average, economic benefits at the local labor
market level from increased immigration, there is yet substantial political opposition to
immigration. Economic losses by displaced workers may rationalize some native opposition to
immigration. Further, given that a significant portion of the economic benefits to native who
stay is achieved through reducing the incidence of negative shocks, it is possible that even those
natives who benefit from immigration may not appreciate the economic benefits they accrue
from immigration. As a result, while there are economic gains on average to increased
immigration, these gains may not be sufficient to temper other native motives for opposition to
immigration.


References
Abramitzky, R., Ager, P., Boustan, L. P., Cohen, E., & Hansen, C. W. (2019). The Effects of
Immigration on the Economy: Lessons from the 1920s Border Closure (No. w26536). National
Bureau of Economic Research.

Abramitzky, R., Boustan, L. P., & Eriksson, K. (2014). A nation of immigrants: Assimilation and
economic outcomes in the age of mass migration. Journal of Political Economy, 122(3), 467-
506.

Ager, P., & Hansen, C. W. (2017). Closing Heaven's Door: Evidence from the 1920s US
Immigration Quota Acts. Working Paper.

Borjas, G. J. (1999). The economic analysis of immigration. In Handbook of labor
economics (Vol. 3, pp. 1697-1760). Elsevier

Borjas, G. J. (2006). Native internal migration and the labor market impact of
immigration. Journal of Human resources, 41(2), 221-258.

Borjas, G. J., Bronars, S. G., & Trejo, S. J. (1992). Self-selection and internal migration in the
United States. Journal of urban Economics, 32(2), 159-185.

Borjas, G. J., Freeman, R. B., & Katz, L. F. (1996). Searching for the effect of immigration on
the labor market. The American Economic Review, 86(2), 246.

Borjas, G. J., Freeman, R. B., Katz, L. F., DiNardo, J., & Abowd, J. M. (1997). How much do
immigration and trade affect labor market outcomes?. Brookings papers on economic
activity, 1997(1), 1-90.

Boustan, L. P., Fishback, P. V., & Kantor, S. (2010). The effect of internal migration on local
labor markets: American cities during the Great Depression. Journal of Labor Economics, 28(4),
719-746.

                                                 34
Cadena, B. C., & Kovak, B. K. (2016). Immigrants equilibrate local labor markets: Evidence
from the Great Recession. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(1), 257-90.

Card, D. (2001). Immigrant inflows, native outflows, and the local labor market impacts of
higher immigration. Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1), 22-64.

Card, D. (2005). Is the new immigration really so bad?. The Economic Journal, 115(507), F300-
F323.

Card, D. (2009). Immigration and inequality. American Economic Review, 99(2), 1-21.

Card, D., & DiNardo, J. (2000). Do immigrant inflows lead to native outflows?. American
Economic Review, 90(2), 360-367.

Card, D., & Peri, G. (2016). Immigration economics by George J. Borjas: a review
essay. Journal of Economic Literature, 54(4), 1333-49.

Carlana, M., & Tabellini, M. (2018). Happily Ever After: Immigration, Natives' Marriage, and
Fertility. Working Paper.

Cattaneo, C., Fiorio, C. V., & Peri, G. (2015). What Happens to the Careers of European
Workers When Immigrants "Take Their Jobs"?. Journal of Human Resources, 50(3), 655-693.

Dahl, G. B. (2002). Mobility and the return to education: Testing a Roy model with multiple
markets. Econometrica, 70(6), 2367-2420.

Dustmann, C., Schönberg, U., & Stuhler, J. (2016). The impact of immigration: Why do studies
reach such different results?. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(4), 31-56.

Foged, M., & Peri, G. (2016). Immigrants' effect on native workers: New analysis on
longitudinal data. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(2), 1-34.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., Sorkin, I., & Swift, H. (2018). Bartik instruments: What, when, why,
and how (No. w24408). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jaeger, D. A., Ruist, J., & Stuhler, J. (2018). Shift-share instruments and the impact of
immigration (No. w24285). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kerr, S. P., & Kerr, W. R. (2011). Economic impacts of immigration: A survey (No. w16736).
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lee, J., Peri, G., & Yasenov, V. (2019). The Labor Market Effects of Mexican Repatriations:
Longitudinal Evidence from the 1930s (No. w26399). National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                 35
Lewis, E., & Peri, G. (2015). Immigration and the Economy of Cities and Regions. In Handbook
of regional and urban economics (Vol. 5, pp. 625-685). Elsevier.

Peri, G. (2011). Rethinking the area approach: Immigrants and the labor market in California.
Journal of International Economics, 84(1), 1-14.

Peri, G. (2016). Immigrants, productivity, and labor markets. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 30(4), 3-30.

Peri, G., & Sparber, C. (2011). Assessing inherent model bias: An application to native
displacement in response to immigration. Journal of Urban Economics, 69(1), 82-91.

Price, J., Buckles, K., Van Leeuwen, J., & Riley, I. (2019). Combining family history and
machine learning to link historical records (No. w26227). National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Ruggles, S., Flood, S., Goeken, R., Grover, J., Meyer, E., Pacas, J. and Sobek, M. (2019).
IPUMS USA: Version 9.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN. https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V9.0

Sequeira, S., Nunn, N., & Qian, N. (2019). Immigrants and the Making of America. Review of
Economic Studies.

Tabellini, M. (2020). Gifts of the immigrants, woes of the natives: Lessons from the age of mass
migration. Review of Economic Studies, 87(1), 454-486.

vom Lehn, C., Ellsworth, C., & Kroff, Z. (2019). Reconciling Occupational Mobility in the
Current Population Survey. Working Paper.

Wozniak, A., & Murray, T. J. (2012). Timing is everything: Short-run population impacts of
immigration in US cities. Journal of Urban Economics, 72(1), 60-78.




                                               36
                 Table 1: Summary Statistics of Full and Linked Samples

                                                      1910 Cohort                                 1920 Cohort
                                    Full Sample   Linked Sample  Among Linked   Full Sample   Linked Sample  Among Linked
                                         (1)            (2)         (3)              (4)            (5)         (6)
 Age                                   32.25         32.13                         33.44         33.20
 White                                  0.91         0.94                           0.90          0.93
 Black                                  0.09         0.06                           0.10          0.07
 Other Race                             0.00         0.00                           0.00          0.00
 In Labor Force                         0.90         0.90            0.02           0.87          0.87           0.06
 Occ. Score                            27.62         28.38          0.91           28.02         28.90          0.42
 Married                                0.47         0.55            0.17           0.52          0.59           0.18
 Never Married                          0.49         0.43           -0.20           0.44          0.38          -0.20
 Divorced                               0.01          0.00           0.00           0.01          0.01           0.01
 No Occ.                                0.10         0.10           -0.02           0.13          0.13          -0.06
 Farm/Farm Labor                       0.01          0.01           0.04           0.01           0.01          0.03
 Other/Labor                           0.11          0.10           -0.02          0.11           0.09          -0.01
 Services                              0.06          0.05           -0.00           0.05          0.04          0.01
 Clerical                               0.09         0.10           -0.02           0.09          0.10          -0.02
 Operatives                             0.14         0.14           -0.02           0.14          0.14          -0.02
 Sales                                  0.09         0.09           -0.01           0.08          0.09           0.02
 Craftsmen                              0.21         0.23            0.01           0.22          0.24          -0.01
 Managers/Officials                    0.08          0.09            0.03           0.07          0.08           0.03
 Professional/Technical                0.05          0.05           0.02            0.05          0.06          0.02


 City-level Fraction Immigrants        0.08           0.08          -0.04          0.04           0.04          -0.02
 City-level Immigrant Shift-Share      0.06           0.06          -0.04          0.03           0.03          -0.01

 Observations                        4,719,124      1,814,783     1,814,783      5,779,699      2,359,935     2,359,935


    Notes: Data obtained from the 1910, 1920, and 1930 full count census. Individuals are linked
overtime using the Price et al. (2019) method explained in the data section. Sample restricted to
men 15-65 that were born in the United States and residing in one of the 178 sample cities in 1910
or 1920 respectively. Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified" are dropped
from the sample. Occ. Score is the median total income for individuals in that occupation in 1950
and more accurately captures occupational status or occupational mobility rather than earnings.




                                                        37
        Table 2: Fraction Moved by First Wave Age and Occupation Group

                                                        Fraction Moved-out
                                                    1910 to 1920 1920 to 1930
                                                         (1)          (2)
                           All                           0.30        0.34
                           15-24                         0.32        0.35
                           25-34                         0.34        0.37
                           35-44                         0.28        0.33
                           45-54                         0.24        0.31
                           55-65                         0.25        0.32
                           No Occ.                       0.36        0.35
                           Farm/Farm Labor               0.37        0.46
                           Other/Labor                   0.33        0.39
                           Services                      0.30        0.32
                           Clerical                      0.27        0.30
                           Operatives                    0.28        0.33
                           Sales                         0.31        0.36
                           Craftsmen                     0.29        0.34
                           Managers/Officials            0.27        0.33
                           Professional/Technical        0.30        0.36


    Notes: Data obtained from the 1910, 1920, and 1930 full count census. Individuals are linked
overtime using the Price et al. (2019) method explained in the data section. Sample restricted to
men 15-65 that were born in the United States and residing in one of the 178 sample cities in 1910
or 1920 respectively. Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified" are dropped
from the sample.




                                                    38
Table 3: City-level Impact of Immigrant Flows on Economic Outcomes of US Born
         Men

                                       Levels Shift Share IV First Difference Shift Share IV
                                       Tabellini Linkable Tabellini           Linkable
                                         (1)          (2)       (3)              (4)
                                          In the Labor Force (Report Gainful Occupation)
          Fraction Immigrants           0.21***    0.18***
                                        ( 0.08)     ( 0.04)
           Fraction Immigrants                                 0.17**         0.16***
                                                               ( 0.07)        ( 0.05)

          Dependent Mean (in levels)     0.91          0.86      0.88            0.85
          Observations                   534           534       356             356
                                                   Log Occupation Income Score
          Fraction Immigrants           0.10**      0.13**
                                        ( 0.04)    ( 0.07)
           Fraction Immigrants                                0.09**          0.11*
                                                              ( 0.05)        ( 0.06)

          Dependent Mean (in levels)     3.26          3.35      3.27            3.35
          Observations                   534           534       356             356


    Notes: Observation at the city level for 1910, 1920, or 1930 for 178 cities that had a population
over 30,000 in each census year. Only US born men 15-65 in the initial census wave are included.
Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified" are dropped from the sample.
Following Tabellini (2020) New Bedford MA and Sacramento CA are excluded from the analysis.
The "Tabellini" specifications use both the data and specification used by Tabellini (2020). The
"Linkable" specifications construct city level measures from individuals that can be linked from one
census wave to the next in the Ancestry version of the full count census. In the levels specifications
city and state by year fixed effects are included. In the first difference specifications state by year
fixed effects are included. Standard errors are corrected for clustering at the metropolitan area level.
p<0.01 ***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*.




                                                  39
Table 4: City-level Impact of Immigrant Flows on Economic Outcomes of US Born
         Men, Accounting for Out-migrants

                                            In Labor Force     Log Occupation Score
                                                (1)                   (2)
               Fraction Immigrants              0.15***                 -0.14
                                                ( 0.04)                ( 0.11)

              1st Wave Dependent Mean            0.91                   3.06
              Observations                       356                    356


     Notes: Observation at the city level for 1910 to 1920 difference or, 1920 to 1930 difference for
178 cities that had a population over 30,000 in each census year. Only US born men 15-65 in the
initial census wave are included. Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified"
are dropped from the sample. Following Tabellini (2020) New Bedford MA and Sacramento CA are
excluded from the analysis. To construct the city level observations, each individual that can be
linked from one census to the next is kept. Individuals are then assigned to the treatment of their
city of residence in the initial Census wave (1910 or 1920) and then the sample is restricted to 15-64
year olds in the given Census wave. As in the unlinked city level estimates, this (1) keeps potential
new entrants who were younger than 15 in the first wave, (2) excludes potential retirees who were
over 54 in the first wave and would age out of the sample, (3) excludes natives that moved into the
city between survey waves, and (4) includes natives that moved away from the city between survey
waves. State by year fixed effects are included. Standard errors are corrected for clustering at the
metropolitan area level. p<0.01 ***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*.




                                                 40
                        Table 5: Impact of Immigrant Flows on Economic Outcomes of US Born Men, Linked Individuals

                                                              In                                  Log Occ.                  Log Occ.  Log Occ.
                                            Moved Out     Labor Force    Enter LF     Exit LF     Score          Occ.      Score> 0  Score< 0
                                               (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)           (7)       (8)
                   Fraction Immigrants         0.57**        0.22***      0.13***    -0.09***       -0.06      -0.30***       -0.06        -0.22***
                                               ( 0.26)       ( 0.06)      ( 0.05)     ( 0.02)      ( 0.05)      ( 0.10)      ( 0.06)        ( 0.06)

                  Dependent Mean                0.32           0.89         0.10        0.06         3.30         0.51         0.33          0.28
                  Observations               4,150,273      3,954,889    3,954,889   3,954,889    3,291,188    3,291,188    3,291,188     3,291,188


          Notes: Sample includes all US born men 15 to 65 that can be linked across two census waves: 1910 to 1920 and 1920 to 1930. Only individuals who were
     in one of the 178 cities in the year are included. Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified" are dropped from the sample. Because it
     is estimated in a first difference, only one observation per person is included. Following Tabellini (2020) New Bedford MA and Sacramento CA are excluded
     from the analysis. State by year fixed effects are included. Age fixed effects are also included to compare same-aged people across cities. Standard errors are
     corrected for clustering at the metropolitan area level. p<0.01 ***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*.
41
                       Table 6: Impact of Immigrant Flows on Occupational Mobility of US Born Men, Linked Individuals

                                                                                          Log Occ. Score
                                                      Decrease in Log Occ. Score                                     Increase in Log Occ. Score
                                             > 0.75     0.75 - 0.5   0.5 - 0.25    0.25 - 0       0       0 - 0.25     0.25 - 0.5   0.5 - 0.75    > 0.75
                                              (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)           (7)           (8)        (9)
                  Fraction Immigrants       0.09***      -0.06***       0.01       -0.25***   0.28***       0.01          0.04      -0.11***       -0.01
                                            ( 0.02)       ( 0.02)     ( 0.03)       ( 0.04)   ( 0.10)      ( 0.02)      ( 0.03)      ( 0.03)      ( 0.03)

                 Dependent Mean               0.03         0.05         0.08         0.12        0.39        0.13         0.10         0.08         0.03
                 Observations              3,291,188    3,291,188    3,291,188    3,291,188   3,291,188   3,291,188    3,291,188    3,291,188    3,291,188


          Notes: Sample includes all US born men 15 to 65 that can be linked across two census waves: 1910 to 1920 and 1920 to 1930. Only individuals who were
     in one of the 178 cities in the year are included. Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified" are dropped from the sample. Because it
     is estimated in a first difference, only one observation per person is included. Following Tabellini (2020) New Bedford MA and Sacramento CA are excluded
     from the analysis. State by year fixed effects are included. Age fixed effects are also included to compare same-aged people across cities. Standard errors are
     corrected for clustering at the metropolitan area level. p<0.01 ***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*.
42
          Table 7: Heterogeneous Impacts by Age of Immigrant Flows on Economic Outcomes of US Born Men, Linked Individuals

                                                                     In                                 Log Occ.                Log Occ.    Log Occ.
                                                    Moved Out    Labor Force   Enter LF    Exit LF      Score        Occ.      Score> 0    Score< 0
                                                       (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)         (8)
                  Fraction Immigrants*Age 15-24       0.91***      0.78***       0.66***   -0.13***     -0.17***   -0.35***     -0.20**      -0.20***
                                                      ( 0.31)       ( 0.13)      ( 0.10)    ( 0.04)      ( 0.06)    ( 0.10)     ( 0.08)       ( 0.05)
                  Fraction Immigrants*Age 25-34       0.54**          0.01        -0.11*   -0.12***       -0.01    -0.33***       0.02       -0.27***
                                                      ( 0.26)       ( 0.06)      ( 0.06)    ( 0.03)      ( 0.05)    ( 0.11)     ( 0.07)       ( 0.07)
                  Fraction Immigrants*Age 35-44         0.35         -0.05      -0.16***   -0.11***       -0.05    -0.31***      -0.08       -0.19***
                                                      ( 0.25)       ( 0.06)      ( 0.05)    ( 0.03)      ( 0.05)    ( 0.10)     ( 0.07)       ( 0.06)
                  Fraction Immigrants*Age 45-54         0.26         -0.08      -0.19***    -0.11*         0.06     -0.19*        0.07       -0.24***
                                                      ( 0.25)       ( 0.09)      ( 0.06)    ( 0.06)      ( 0.06)    ( 0.11)     ( 0.10)       ( 0.07)
                  Fraction Immigrants*Age 55-65         0.00       -0.74***     -0.29***   0.45***        0.06       -0.01        0.05         -0.11
                                                      ( 0.26)       ( 0.18)      ( 0.06)    ( 0.14)      ( 0.06)    ( 0.15)     ( 0.12)       ( 0.07)

                 Dependent Mean                         0.32          0.89        0.10        0.06        3.30        0.51        0.33         0.28
                 Observations                        4,150,273     3,954,889   3,954,889   3,954,889   3,291,188   3,291,188   3,291,188    3,291,188
43




          Notes: Sample includes all US born men 15 to 65 that can be linked across two census waves: 1910 to 1920 and 1920 to 1930. Only individuals who were
     in one of the 178 cities in the year are included. Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified" are dropped from the sample. Because it
     is estimated in a first difference, only one observation per person is included. Following Tabellini (2020) New Bedford MA and Sacramento CA are excluded
     from the analysis. State by year fixed effects are included. Age fixed effects are also included to compare same-aged people across cities. Standard errors are
     corrected for clustering at the metropolitan area level. p<0.01 ***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*.
     Table 8: Heterogeneous Impacts by Initial Occupation of Immigrant Flows on Economic Outcomes of US Born Men, Linked Indi-
              viduals

                                                                                            In       Log Occ.                 Log Occ.    Log Occ.
                                                                            Moved Out   Labor Force  Score         Occ.      Score> 0    Score< 0
                                                                               (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)
                               Fraction Immigrants*No Occ.                     0.34      0.27***
                                                                             ( 0.27)     ( 0.10)
                               Fraction Immigrants*Farm/Farm Labor           1.17***        0.13     -2.09***    -2.24***      -1.35**    -0.51***
                                                                             ( 0.40)     ( 0.11)      ( 0.56)     ( 0.71)      ( 0.57)     ( 0.10)
                               Fraction Immigrants*Other/Labor               1.48***       0.03      -1.12***     -0.70**     -1.45***    0.38***
                                                                             ( 0.37)     ( 0.04)      ( 0.26)     ( 0.32)      ( 0.33)     ( 0.15)
                               Fraction Immigrants*Services                   0.54**     0.09**       0.60***    -0.88***         0.25    -0.96***
                                                                             ( 0.24)     ( 0.04)      ( 0.15)     ( 0.22)      ( 0.16)     ( 0.24)
                               Fraction Immigrants*Clerical                    0.10      0.10***        -0.05      -0.18        -0.16*    -0.31***
                                                                             ( 0.25)     ( 0.03)      ( 0.08)     ( 0.13)      ( 0.09)     ( 0.12)
                               Fraction Immigrants*Operative                 0.85***       0.05         -0.09      -0.16         -0.16      -0.24
                                                                             ( 0.32)     ( 0.03)      ( 0.11)     ( 0.17)      ( 0.15)     ( 0.21)
                               Fraction Immigrants*Sales                       0.41       0.07**      0.40***    -0.85***       0.18**    -0.76***
                                                                             ( 0.26)     ( 0.03)      ( 0.08)     ( 0.22)      ( 0.08)     ( 0.18)
                               Fraction Immigrants*Craftsmen                  0.64**       -0.01       0.19**       0.20       0.39***      -0.20
                                                                             ( 0.25)     ( 0.04)      ( 0.08)     ( 0.16)      ( 0.08)     ( 0.13)
44




                               Fraction Immigrants*Manager/Official            0.17      0.09**       0.42***    -0.46***      0.34***    -0.80***
                                                                             ( 0.25)     ( 0.04)      ( 0.08)     ( 0.12)      ( 0.07)     ( 0.15)
                               Fraction Immigrants*Professional/Technical      0.36        0.06       0.28***      -0.13       0.34***    -0.52***
                                                                             ( 0.27)     ( 0.04)      ( 0.08)     ( 0.12)      ( 0.07)     ( 0.17)

                              Dependent Mean                                   0.32         0.89        3.30        0.51        0.33        0.28
                              Observations                                  4,150,273    3,954,889   3,291,188   3,291,188   3,291,188   3,291,188


          Notes: Sample includes all US born men 15 to 65 that can be linked across two census waves: 1910 to 1920 and 1920 to 1930. Only individuals who were
     in one of the 178 cities in the year are included. Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified" are dropped from the sample. Because it
     is estimated in a first difference, only one observation per person is included. Following Tabellini (2020) New Bedford MA and Sacramento CA are excluded
     from the analysis. State by year fixed effects are included. Age fixed effects are also included to compare same-aged people across cities. "Not Yet Classified"
     occupations are occupation strings that occur rarely in the original Census files and have not been classified into an occupation yet. Standard errors are
     corrected for clustering at the metropolitan area level. p<0.01 ***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*.
     Table 9: Heterogeneous Impacts by Migration Status of Immigrant Flows on Economic Outcomes of US Born Men, Linked Individuals

                                                             In                                  Log Occ.                  Log Occ.      Log Occ.
                                                         Labor Force    Enter LF    Exit LF      Score          Occ.      Score> 0      Score< 0
                                                             (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)
                     Fraction Immigrants*Stayer            0.17***       0.12**       -0.05*      0.12**       -0.50***       -0.01       -0.47***
                                                           ( 0.06)       ( 0.05)     ( 0.03)      ( 0.05)       ( 0.11)      ( 0.07)       ( 0.07)
                     Fraction Immigrants*Move-out          0.35***       0.13**     -0.22***     -0.32***        -0.16      -0.24***         0.09
                                                           ( 0.07)       ( 0.06)     ( 0.05)      ( 0.11)       ( 0.13)      ( 0.09)       ( 0.13)
                    Move-out                                -0.00        0.01***     0.02***     -0.11***       0.21***      0.02***       0.18***
                                                           ( 0.00)       ( 0.00)     ( 0.00)      ( 0.01)       ( 0.01)      ( 0.01)       ( 0.01)

                    Dependent Mean                            0.89         0.10        0.06         3.30         0.51         0.33          0.28
                    Observations                           3,954,889    3,954,889   3,954,889    3,291,188    3,291,188    3,291,188     3,291,188


          Notes: Sample includes all US born men 15 to 65 that can be linked across two census waves: 1910 to 1920 and 1920 to 1930. Only individuals who were
     in one of the 178 cities in the year are included. Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified" are dropped from the sample. Because it
     is estimated in a first difference, only one observation per person is included. Following Tabellini (2020) New Bedford MA and Sacramento CA are excluded
45




     from the analysis. State by year fixed effects are included. Age fixed effects are also included to compare same-aged people across cities. "Not Yet Classified"
     occupations are occupation strings that occur rarely in the original Census files and have not been classified into an occupation yet. Standard errors are
     corrected for clustering at the metropolitan area level. p<0.01 ***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*.
      Table 10: Do US Born Men that Move-out Move to Avoid Immigrants?

                                   Move to City with Fraction Recent Immigrants in
                                   Quartile 1 Quartile 2 Quartile 3 Quartile 4
                                     (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)
     Fraction Immigrants              0.09             0.10         0.24*           0.06
                                     ( 0.06)          ( 0.07)      ( 0.14)         ( 0.15)

    Dependent Mean                    0.07           0.08           0.09             0.08
    Observations                   4,155,506      4,155,506      4,155,506        4,155,506

    Notes: Sample includes all US born men 15 to 65 that can be linked across two census waves:
1910 to 1920 and 1920 to 1930 and that moved cities between waves. Only individuals who were
in one of the 178 cities in the year are included. Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not
Yet Classified" are dropped from the sample. Because it is estimated in a first difference, only one
observation per person is included. Following Tabellini (2020) New Bedford MA and Sacramento
CA are excluded from the analysis. State by year fixed effects are included. Age fixed effects are
also included to compare same-aged people across cities. Standard errors are corrected for clustering
at the metropolitan area level. p<0.01 ***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*.




                                                 46
         Table 11: Impact of Immigrant Flows on Economic Outcomes of Potential New Entrants US Born Men, Linked Individuals

                                                                     Moved Out      In Labor Force      Log Occ. Score
                                                                        (1)              (2)                 (3)
                                        Fraction Immigrants             0.57*           -0.48***              -0.22
                                                                       ( 0.30)           ( 0.15)             ( 0.16)

                                       Dependent Mean                    0.23              0.59                3.17
                                       Observations                   2,253,490         2,201,242           1,291,562

         Notes: Sample includes all US born men 5 to 14 in the initial wave that can be linked across two census waves: 1910 to 1920 and 1920 to 1930. Only
     individuals who were in one of the 178 cities in the year are included. Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified" are dropped from
     the sample. Because it is estimated in a first difference, only one observation per person is included. Following Tabellini (2020) New Bedford MA and
     Sacramento CA are excluded from the analysis. State by year fixed effects are included. Age fixed effects are also included to compare same-aged people
     across cities. Standard errors are corrected for clustering at the metropolitan area level. p<0.01 ***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*.
47
     Table 12: Heterogeneous Impact by Migration Status of Immigrant Flows on Economic Outcomes of US Born Men Non-Movers and
               Move-ins, Linked Individuals

                                                                   In                                 Log Occ.                Log Occ.  Log Occ.
                                                   Moved In    Labor Force   Enter LF    Exit LF      Score        Occ.      Score> 0  Score< 0
                                                     (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)       (8)
                   Fraction Immigrants              1.85***
                                                    ( 0.34)
                   Fraction Immigrants*Stayer                     0.10*        0.04       -0.06         0.10     -0.62***      -0.16*    -0.41***
                                                                 ( 0.06)     ( 0.05)     ( 0.04)      ( 0.08)     ( 0.11)     ( 0.08)     ( 0.08)
                   Fraction Immigrants*Move-in                    -0.09       -0.07        0.02       1.25***       0.02      0.76***    -0.91***
                                                                 ( 0.09)     ( 0.07)     ( 0.06)      ( 0.19)     ( 0.18)     ( 0.18)     ( 0.12)
                  Move-in                                        0.01**      0.02***     0.01***      0.21***     0.25***     0.22***       0.01
                                                                 ( 0.00)     ( 0.00)     ( 0.00)      ( 0.01)     ( 0.01)     ( 0.01)     ( 0.01)

                  Dependent Mean                      0.39         0.87         0.11        0.05        3.21        0.54        0.40        0.23
                  Observations                     4,476,173    4,269,028    4,269,028   4,269,028   3,493,540   3,493,540   3,493,540   3,493,540


          Notes: Sample includes all US born men 15 to 65 that can be linked across two census waves: 1910 to 1920 and 1920 to 1930. Only individuals who were
48




     in one of the 178 cities in the year are included. Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified" are dropped from the sample. Because it
     is estimated in a first difference, only one observation per person is included. Following Tabellini (2020) New Bedford MA and Sacramento CA are excluded
     from the analysis. State by year fixed effects are included. Age fixed effects are also included to compare same-aged people across cities. Treatment is
     assigned based on place of residence in the second census wave, so we are observing those that did not move and those that moved-in. Standard errors are
     corrected for clustering at the metropolitan area level. p<0.01 ***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*.
     Table 13: Selection of US Born Migrants: Relationship Between Fraction Immigrants and Baseline Characteristics of US Born Out-
               and In-Migrants

                                                                          First Wave Characteristic
                                         In          Log Occ.    Log Occ. Sore                               Other                   Never
                                     Labor Force      Score        Non-Farm      White      Black            Race       Married     Married     Divorced
                                         (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)       (5)              (6)        (7)          (8)          (9)
                                                                                   US Born Out-Migrants
           Fraction Immigrants         -0.23***       -0.40*          -0.19        0.27**    -0.25**    -0.02*          0.69***     -0.66***      0.00
                                        ( 0.08)       ( 0.21)        ( 0.18)       ( 0.13)   ( 0.12)    ( 0.01)         ( 0.22)      ( 0.21)     ( 0.01)

          Dependent Mean                  0.88          3.27           3.29           0.92        0.08        0.00        0.55         0.42        0.01
          Observations                 1,296,246     1,144,208      1,123,448      1,346,816   1,346,816   1,346,816   1,346,816    1,346,816   1,346,816
                                                                                    US Born In-Migrants
           Fraction Immigrants          0.15***      -1.07***         0.06         0.74***   -0.71***   -0.03*          0.59***     -0.52***     -0.02***
                                        ( 0.04)       ( 0.24)        ( 0.07)       ( 0.15)    ( 0.15)   ( 0.02)         ( 0.13)      ( 0.12)      ( 0.01)

          Dependent Mean                  0.84          3.04           3.27           0.90        0.10        0.00        0.51         0.46        0.01
49




          Observations                 1,663,723     1,400,422      1,057,382      1,726,700   1,726,700   1,726,700   1,726,700    1,726,700   1,726,700


         Notes: Sample includes all US born men 15 to 65 that can be linked across two census waves: 1910 to 1920 and 1920 to 1930 and that moved cities
     between waves. Only individuals who were in one of the 178 cities in the year are included. Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified"
     are dropped from the sample. Because it is estimated in a first difference, only one observation per person is included. Following Tabellini (2020) New
     Bedford MA and Sacramento CA are excluded from the analysis. State by year fixed effects are included. Age fixed effects are also included to compare
     same-aged people across cities. Standard errors are corrected for clustering at the metropolitan area level. p<0.01 ***, p<0.05**, p<0.1*.
                          Figure 1: Labor Force Participation and Occupation Score Life-cycle Profile for US Born Men
50




         Notes: Data obtained from the 1910, 1920, and 1930 full count census. Sample restricted to men 15-65 that are born in the US. Individuals whose
     occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified" are dropped from the sample. The Occupation Score is the median total income (in hundreds of 1950 dollars)
     of all people with that occupation.

        Source: Author's own calculations.
Figure 2: Potential Displacement: New Immigrant Occupations and Out-Migration
          Responses

     Notes: Data for the fraction of new immigrants obtained from the 1920 and 1930 full count
census. Sample is restricted to male immigrants 15-65 that arrived to the United States within the
last ten years. Individuals whose occupation is recorded as "Not Yet Classified" are dropped from
the sample. Impacts on out-migration are the coefficients from Table 7.

   Source: Author's own calculations.




                                               51
