                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    ROBBING PETER TO PAY PAUL:
    UNDERSTANDING HOW STATE TAX CREDITS IMPACT CHARITABLE GIVING

                                     Chandrayee Chatterjee
                                         James C. Cox
                                       Michael K. Price
                                     Florian Rundhammer

                                       Working Paper 27163
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27163


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




Financial support was provided by the National Science Foundation (grant number SES-1658743)
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Chandrayee Chatterjee, James C. Cox, Michael K. Price, and Florian Rundhammer.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Robbing Peter to Pay Paul: Understanding How State Tax Credits Impact Charitable Giving
Chandrayee Chatterjee, James C. Cox, Michael K. Price, and Florian Rundhammer
NBER Working Paper No. 27163
May 2020
JEL No. C93,H41,L38

                                           ABSTRACT

Donations to charity are widely encouraged by policymakers through targeted tax incentives such
as tax credits for contributions only to qualifying causes. We use a framed field experiment to test
how the largest such program, Arizona's state income tax credit for donations to qualifying
charities, affects donation decisions in a modified dictator game. In the experiment, we
randomize whether subjects receive detailed information about the tax credit program prior to
selecting potential recipients and completing the allocation task. We also vary the number of
charities that subjects can select as recipients along with the (tax-credit) qualifying vs. non-
qualifying composition of the choice set. We find that average giving is unaffected by the
information provision and composition of the choice set. However, subjects direct significantly
more funds towards qualifying charities when provided information about the tax program; an
effect that is enhanced when subjects select multiple recipients from lists that contain a mixture of
qualifying and non-qualifying organizations. Our results underline the importance of including a
portfolio of choices when studying the impact of targeted incentives because this makes it
possible to identify a central feature of our data: participants "rob Peter" (non-qualifying
charities) "to pay Paul" (qualifying charities).

Chandrayee Chatterjee                             Michael K. Price
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics, Finance,
55 Park Place                                      and Legal Studies
Suite 644                                         The University of Alabama
Atlanta, GA 30302                                 250 Alston Hall
cchatterjee1@student.gsu.edu                      Box 870224
                                                  Tuscaloosa, AL 35487
James C. Cox                                      and NBER
Department of Economics                           mkprice2@cba.ua.edu
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
P.O. Box 3992                                     Florian Rundhammer
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992                            Cornerstone Research
Georgia                                           599 Lexington Ave 40th floor
jccox@gsu.edu                                     New York, NY 10022
                                                  florian.rundhammer@gmail.com
                  To give away money is an easy matter and in any man's power. But
                  to decide to whom to give it, and how large, and when, and for what
                  purpose and how, is neither in every man's power nor an easy
                  matter.... Aristotle

1. Introduction

Total giving to charitable organizations in the United States in 2017 exceeded $410 billion or
approximately 2.1% of GDP. As nearly 80 percent of these dollars come from individual donors,
there has been a tremendous amount of research on the primitives of the economics of charity and
the relationship between charities and potential donors (see, e.g., List, 2011 or List and Price, 2012
for overviews of work in this area). To date, much of this work has focused on impacts of different
fundraising techniques on both the number of donors and overall contribution levels to a given
cause. While this literature has successfully documented the effectiveness of various fundraising
strategies and identified ways for a given nonprofit to increase dollars raised, we know very little
about whether and how increased giving to one charity impacts giving to others in the sector and
the size of the overall "charitable pie." Do fundraising campaigns and tax incentives generate new
dollars - increasing the size of the charitable pie? Or do such incentives prompt donors to
reallocate funds amongst the causes they already support?

         Such questions are of first-order importance given the prevalence of tax policies in the
United States and Europe that include credits whose rates vary across causes or organizations
within a cause. 1 As the charitable sector is comprised of millions of organizations competing for
dollars from a finite set of budget constrained donors, we would expect that changes in giving to
one organization should impact overall patterns of giving. What remains unknown is whether
private dollars attracted via government policies (or other fundraising mechanisms) increase total
contributions or simply prompt a substitution of funds across charities. It is this gap in the literature
that our paper aims to fill.

         To do so, we explore how a state level tax credit program impacts overall giving and the
allocation of doantions across qualifying and non-qualifying causes. Specifically, we implemented
a framed field experiment that embedded information about the nation's largest state income tax


1 For example, both Italy and France have credit rates that vary across causes. In the United States, more than 30
states provide credits for contributions to a predetermined set of qualifying causes.

                                                          2
credit program for donations to charity ­ Arizona's Credit for Contributions to Qualifying
Charitable Organizations ­ within a modified dictator game. The program is designed to
encourage giving by providing a dollar-for-dollar state tax credit for donations to a predetermined
set of qualifying causes. 2

         Participants in the experiment were recruited via Qualtrics to complete an on-line
questionnaire (which included the modified dictator game) and were randomized into one of six
treatments. The more than 900 participants in the experiment were adults living in the state of
Arizona and were selected to reflect a random sample of this population. In the first-stage of the
modified dictator game, subjects selected either one or two charities as potential recipients in a
second stage dictator game. In the second stage, subjects determined how to allocate an $80
endowment amongst themselves and the charities selected in the first-stage. Prior agreement with
the Arizona Department of Revenue ensured that receipts generated by the Qualtrics platform for
charitable contributions by subjects in the experiment would be acceptable documentation for
credits claimed on state income tax returns.

         Experimental treatments varied along three main dimensions: (i) whether, prior to making
the first stage decision, subjects were provided detailed information about the credit program and
which organizations qualified for the credit; (ii) the number of potential recipients (one or two)
that could be selected in the first-stage of the experiment; and (iii) whether the lists from which
potential recipients were selected were comprised of only qualifying or non-qualifying charities or
a mix of both types.

         Our treatments were designed to isolate the effect of the tax credit program on four distinct
outcomes of interest: (i) the likelihood of making a donation; (ii) the aggregate amount shared with
the selected recipients; (iii) the likelihood and number of qualifying and non-qualifying
organizations selected as recipients; and (iv) the allocation of donations across qualifying and non-
qualifying organizations.

         Results from our experiment highlight that information has no effect on either the
likelihood a subject contributes or the aggregate amount shared with charity. However, awareness

2
  The program structure implies that donations up to the specified threshold are free to the donor since they reduce
the individual's tax liability by the amount claimed.

                                                          3
of the charitable tax credit program does affect both the mix of qualifying and non-qualifying
charities selected as potential recipients and the allocation of funds amongst a fixed set of
qualifying and non-qualifying organizations. For example, in treatments where subjects are forced
to select one charity of each type, information on the tax credit program causes an approximately
eight percentage point increase in the fraction of contributions allocated to the qualifying cause.
In treatments where subjects are free to select any mix of qualifying and non-qualifying charities
as potential recipients, information on the tax credit program has an even greater effect on the
allocation of funds across qualifying and non-qualifying causes due to changes in the composition
of the donors' portfolios. In such instances, our information treatment leads to an approximately
23 percentage point increase in the likelihood that a subject selects two qualifying organizations
and an approximately 12 percentage point increase in the fraction of contributions allocated to
qualifying causes.

          Our paper speaks to several distinct literatures. First and foremost, our paper speaks to the
literature on competition amongst charities. Prior work in this area has focused on either (i)
developing theoretical models to derive conditions under which competition amongst charities can
lead to lower levels of public good provision (Rose-Ackerman, 1982; Scharf, 2014; Krasteva and
Yildririm, 2016; Lange et al., 2017) or (ii) using experiments to understand how incentives to give
to one cause impact the allocation of funds amongst a predetermined (fixed) set of causes (Null,
2011; Corrazini et al., 2015; Meer, 2017; Samek and Krieg, 2016; Ek, 2017; Cason and Zubrickas,
2019; Filiz-Ozbay and Uler, 2019; Halwell et al., 2019). 3 Our paper extends this work by
separately identifying how incentives for giving to a subset of causes impact both the choice of
causes included in the donor's portfolio and the resulting allocation of funds amongst causes within
their portfolio. As charitable causes care both about the number of donors supporting their cause
and dollars received, this is an important extension of prior work which has focused solely on the
latter.

          Second, our paper speaks to the literature on the role of government in the nonprofit sector.
For example, there is a large literature exploring the effect of federal tax policy on aggregate giving

3
 A related body of work explores charitable giving in the aftermath of natural disasters and whether increased
generosity following such events impacts aggregate patterns of giving in both the short- and long-run (Brown et al.,
2012; Scharf et al., 2017; Deryugina and Marx, 2020). Results from this literature suggest that increased giving
following such events does not crowd out giving to other causes or future donations.

                                                         4
(e.g., Feldstein and Clotfelter, 1976; Feldstein and Taylor, 1976; Clotfelter, 1980; Randolph, 1995;
Auten and Joulfraian, 1996; Auten et al., 2002; Fack and Landais, 2010; Duquette, 2016). 4 The
overarching aim of that work is to explore how federal tax policy and changes in the marginal tax
rate impact aggregate giving ­ i.e., to recover the price elasticity of giving. Our paper differs from
that work along two dimensions. First, we focus on state as opposed to federal tax policy. Given
that more than 30 states have introduced tax incentives to promote giving, this is an important
extension of prior work. Second, the policy we consider only changes the price of giving for a
subset of charities as opposed to federal tax policy which applies to donations to all charitable
organizations. In this regard, our paper is close in spirit to Duquette et al. (2018) who estimate the
effect of state tax credits on aggregate patterns of giving and giving to targeted cause types.
However, unlike Duquette et al. (2018) we are able to explore not only the effect of our policy on
aggregate giving but also the allocation of funds across qualifying and non-qualifying
organizations within a cause type. In doing so, we identify an alternate channel for the null effects
found in Duquette et al. (2018) ­ the reallocation of funds amongst qualifying and non-qualifying
organizations.

        Finally, our paper contributes to the literature on inattention to taxes and tax incentives.
For example, Chetty et al. (2009) develop a model of inattention and provide experimental
evidence to explore how the salience of sales taxes impacts consumer purchases. 5 A related body
of work examines the effects on labor supply of simple messages that educate consumers about
non-linear tax incentives such as the Earned Income Tax Credit (Chetty and Saez, 2013) or Social
Security benefits (Liebman and Luttmer, 2011). Our paper extends this literature by exploring the
effect of such messages on actions that benefit others (charitable giving) as opposed to one's self.
In this regard, our paper is closest in spirit to Gallagher and Muehlegger (2011) who compare the
effect of sales tax waivers and tax credits on the purchase of hybrid cars.

        More broadly our research contributes to a vast body of work exploring how simple
messages (or nudges) that provide consumers information about misperceived or shrouded


4 Our research also speaks to a related body of work exploring crowd-out and the impact of government

expenditures on aggregate patterns of giving (e.g., Kingma, 1989; Payne, 1998; Ribar and Wilhelm, 2002; Andreoni
and Payne, 2003, 2011; Hungerman, 2007; Andreoni et al., 2014).
5 Similar findings are reported in Feldman and Ruffle (2015) who show that subjects in a laboratory experiment

spend significantly more when facing tax-exclusive prices as opposed to tax-inclusive or tax-rebate prices.

                                                       5
attributes such as fuel efficiency (Allcott and Knittel, 2019), energy savings (Allcott and
Taubinsky, 2015; Davis and Metcalf, 2016; Allcott and Sweeney, 2017), benefits of post-
secondary education (Jensen, 2010; Barr and Turner, 2018), restaurant hygiene grades or calorie
labels (Jin and Leslie, 2003; Bollinger et al., 2011), and truth-in-lending style disclosures (Seira et
al., 2017) impact subsequent choices. Amongst this work, our study is closest in spirit to work
exploring how donors respond to information contained in third-party ratings of charities (Figlio
and Kenny, 2009; Brown et al., 2017; Adena et al., 2019). Our paper extends this earlier work by
identifying the margins through which our informational nudge impacts giving to a particular cause
and the allocation of dollars across causes.

2. Policy Background and Program Description

This section introduces the policy environment within which we embed our field experiment. We
begin by describing various state level policies aimed at encouraging private contributions to
charity. In doing so, we discuss how they could impact both the range of causes a donor supports
and the allocation of funds amongst selected causes. We subsequently describe Arizona's policy
which provides a dollar for dollar tax credit for contributions made to a set of qualifying
organizations and how this policy has influenced aggregate patterns of giving in the state.

2.1.   State income tax statutes to encourage contributions

In many countries, charitable contributions by individuals are subject to preferential tax treatment,
often in the form of tax deductions for qualified contributions. For example, itemizing taxpayers
in the U.S. can deduct donations from their taxable income, lowering their tax base and
consequently their tax bill. In practice, this tax provision reduces the marginal cost of giving to
$(1 -  ) per dollar contributed for the marginal tax rate,  (Feldstein, 1975).

                                    [ Insert Table 1 about here]

       Like the federal government, many states have shown interest in encouraging charitable
donations through the use of state-specific tax statutes. Bankman et al. (2018) name more than 100
state tax provisions aimed at encouraging donations by taxpayers. Table 1 provides an overview
of key features of these programs. As noted in the table, programs differ in terms of the types of
causes that are supported, the incentives provided for giving, and whether individuals,


                                                  6
corporations, or both types of donors have access to the tax incentives. More than thirty states
allow taxpayers to donate out of their tax refunds, or to increase tax liabilities, directly on the tax
forms by choosing qualified charities listed on the forms. Such "check-off programs" can influence
donor behavior by reducing the cost of giving or by providing a credible signal of a charity's
quality. An alternate policy to encourage giving is to extend federal deduction limits to allow for
the additional deduction of state income tax for tax filers. More than fifteen states allow such
deductions which serve to lower the price of giving.

       Finally, more than 30 states provide some form of tax credit for contributions to qualified
causes. Qualified causes cover a wide range of activities such as community development efforts,
private school tuition programs, and private charities that provide local services (Bankman et al.,
2018). Unlike deductions, which reduce the taxable income, credits directly reduce the income tax
owed by a specified amount. A 50 percent tax credit, for example, implies that a $200 donation
reduces the state income tax owed by $100. Currently, such programs provide tax credits between
20 and 100 percent of donations and may include caps on the total amount that can be claimed
through the program.

2.2.   Arizona's state income tax credit for charitable contributions

In this study, we focus on Arizona's Credit for Contributions to Qualifying Charitable
Organizations which is the most generous of all state tax credit programs. We refer to the credit
as Charitable Tax Credit (CTC) throughout this paper. The CTC was enacted in 1998 and provides
a one-to-one (or 100 percent) tax credit for contributions to qualifying charities. This incentive
structure implies that taxpayers can contribute to charity at no cost because giving reduces their
state income tax burden by the amount given. The program thus allows taxpayers to redirect dollars
from the general tax fund to a charity -- or multiple charities -- of their choosing.

                                    [ Insert Figure 1 about here]

       The CTC offers a tax credit for contributions up to $400 (single or head of household) or
$800 (married filer) to qualifying charities. Charities must fulfill several criteria to qualify, which
we summarize in Figure 1. Qualifying organizations must be certified with the Arizona
Department of Revenue. A charity must also:



                                                  7
    ·    be a registered 501(c)(3) organization or a designated community action agency that
         received community services block grant;
    ·    provide services that meet immediate basic needs;
    ·    serve Arizona residents who receive temporary assistance for needy families (TANF)
         benefits, are low income residents whose household income is less than 150 percent of the
         federal poverty level, or are chronically ill or physically disabled children;
    ·    spend at least 50 percent of its budget on qualified services to qualified Arizona residents;
         and
    ·    continue spending at least 50 percent of its budget on qualified services to qualified
         Arizona residents. 6

For the 2018 tax year, more than 900 qualifying charities were registered with the Arizona
Department of Revenue. 7

         Recent changes to the CTC have provided greater flexibility to donors. Donations can now
be claimed in tax year t or tax year t + 1 if they are made during tax year t or up until April 15
of tax year t + 1 . For example, a donation in March 2019 could be claimed on either the 2018 or
2019 tax return. Furthermore, taxpayers do not have to be itemizers to claim the credit; they simply
must report their donations on Form 321 and include the form with the state income tax return. 8
Finally, unused credits can be carried forward for up to five consecutive years. Thus, if the
allowable tax credit for an individual in year  exceeds their tax liability, the unused portion can
be used in future tax years.

                                          [ Insert Figure 2 about here]

         Contributions claimed through the CTC have increased dramatically since the inception of
the program in 1998. Figure 2 provides a visual depiction of the trends in the total value of
donations claimed through the CTC and trends in aggregate giving to all registered 501(c)(3)
charities in Arizona over the period 1998-2014. Values in the figure are normalized relative to the
corresponding amount given in 1998. The left hand axis of the figure corresponds to the

6
  See https://azdor.gov/tax-credits/certification-qcos-and-qfcos for details.
7
  The Department of Revenue publishes the current list of qualifying charities on its website at https://azdor.gov/tax-
credits/contributions-qualifying-charitable-organizations.
8
  Taxpayers must also report their donations on Form 301, Nonrefundable Individual Tax Credits and Recapture,
which contains all available individual income tax credits for Arizona residents.

                                                           8
normalized value of contributions to all registered non-profits in the state of Arizona whereas the
right hand axis of the figure corresponds to the normalized value of contributions claimed through
the CTC.

         Figure 2 higlights divergent trends in total tax credits and total contributions: while the
total value of contributions claimed through the CTC has increased by a factor of 45 since the
inception of the program, there has been little change in aggregate giving statewide over this same
time horizon. Hence, while the introduction of the CTC appears to have had a great impact on
giving to qualifying organizations, it has had no impact on overall giving to non-profits in Arizona.
This poses an interesting question, where are the added dollars flowing to qualifying organizations
coming from? Below we describe a field experiment designed to explore how the CTC impacts
aggregate giving and the allocation of funds across cause types.

3. Experimental Design, Procedures, and Data

Our field experiment implements an allocation task that follows Eckel et al. (2005). Specifically,
we utilize a modified dictator game where the recipient is a charitable organization selected from
a predetermined list of causes. The modified dictator game proceeded in two stages. In the first
stage, the subject was provided a set of chartiable organizations and asked to select either one or
two organizations from this set as a recipient in the second stage allocation task.

         The second stage was the allocation task. In the allocation task, subjects receive an
endowment of $80 and are provided an opportunity to share any portion of the endowment with
the organizations selected as recipients in the first stage. Figure 3 provides an example of the
allocation task as observed by the subject. Importantly, the decision has consequences. Subjects
are paid the amount they elect to keep to themselves and the chosen charities receive the shared
allocation as a donation. 9

                                         [ Insert Figure 3 about here]

         We vary three dimensions of the modified dictator game across experimental treatments.
First, some subjects receive detailed information about the CTC, its history, and qualification



9 As noted above, by prior arrangement with the Arizona Department of Revenue, receipts for contributions made
through the experiment could be used by subjects to claim the tax credit when filing their state income tax return.

                                                          9
requirements for charities prior to selecting recipients in the first stage. 10 Second, we vary whether
subjects are asked to select one recipient from a set of ten potential recipients or two recipients ­
one each from two distinct sets of five potential recipients. In treatments that provide information
about the CTC, the lists explicitly indicate whether donations to a potential recipient would qualify
under the CTC. 11 Third, in treatments where the subject selects two recipients, we vary the
composition of the lists and the corresponding mix of qualifying and non-qualifying organzations
that can be selected as recipients. In some treatments, subjects select recipients from one list that
contains five qualifying organizations while the other list contains five non-qualifying
organizations. In other treatments, both lists contain a mix of qualifying and non-qualifying
organizations.

                                          [ Insert Table 2 about here]

         In total, the experiment consists of six treatments that we describe in Table 2. The six
treatments are arranged in three pairs, where the only difference between groups within a pair is
the provision of information about the CTC. The first two treatments, B and T1, have subjects
select a single recipient from a list of ten charities before proceeding to the allocation task. In
these treatments, the list from which subjects select the recipient organization contains five
qualifying and five non-qualifying charities that are arranged in random order. 12 Subjects in
treatment B were not provided any information about the CTC or whether donations to a particular
organization qualified under this program. Subjects in T1, in contrast, were provided information
about the CTC in the first stage of the experiment and, prior to selecting the recipient organization,
observed whether or not donations to alternative recipients qualified for a tax credit under the CTC.

         The remaining four treatments provide two lists of five charities each. In these treatments,
subjects select one charity from each list as recipients in the allocation task. In treatments T2 and
T3, subjects are "forced" to select a recipient of both types as one list contains only qualifying
charities, while the second list is made up exclusively of non-qualifying charities. These treatments
do not allow subjects to alter the number of qualifying and non-qualifying organzations selected

10 We show an example of the information in Figure C1 in the appendix.
11 Tables C1 and C2 in the appendix present all charities in the experiment.
12 We chose the charities for this experiment from the published list of all qualifying charities and the universe of

non-qualifying 501(3)(c) charities that operate in Arizona. The choice of charities for each treatment pair was based
on the annual donations received and its cause. We obtained this information from the charity's 990 tax filings.
Table C3 of the appendix presents the resulting charity lists and their combinations.

                                                         10
as recipients in response to information about the CTC. The only channel for response is an
intensive margin adjustment ­ i.e., changes in the amounts allocated to a qualifying or non-
qualifying organization. 13

           Our final two treatments are designed to allow adjustment along an additional margin as
both lists in treatments T4 and T5 contain a mix of qualifying and non-qualifying charities.
Subjects in these treatments are thus free to select zero, one, or two qualifying organizations as
recipients and can adjust the number of qualifying organzations selected as recipients in response
to information about the CTC. As a result, subjects in these treatments have two channels for
response to information about the CTC; they can reallocate the amount allocated to a fixed mix of
qualifying and non-qualifying recipients and they can adjust the number and mix of each type of
organization selected as recipients.

           This experimental design allows us to study the impact of the CTC on four dimensions of
giving:

      i.   the likelihood of making a donation;
     ii.   the overall dollar amount given;
 iii.      the choice of charity recipient(s); and
 iv.       the allocation of donations across qualifying and non-qualifying organizations.

           A comparison of B and T1 helps us understand whether knowledge of the tax credit affects
the type of organization, qualifying or non-qualifying, selected as the recipient and the resulting
amount donated. The remaining treatments are designed to explore whether and how information
about the CTC impacts the allocation of dollars across qualifying and non-qualifying charities. T2
and T3 are designed to isolate how information about the CTC affects allocation of money across
the two types of charities in the second-stage when the subject is "forced" to select one recipient
of each type in the first-stage. T4 and T5 allow us to assess whether the CTC affects both the
number of qualifying organizations chosen as recipients in the first stage along with the subsequent
amounts donated to the different charity types in the second stage.



13
   The design of these treatments thus shares similarity with past experiments exploring how incentives for giving to
a subset of potential recipients impact the allocation of funds amongst a fixed set of potential recipients (see, e.g.,
Null, 2011; Meer, 2017; Cason and Zubrickas, 2019; Filiz-Ozbay and Uler, 2019; Halwell et al., 2019).

                                                          11
3.1.       Experimental Procedures ­ Survey Implementation

The experiment was embedded in a survey that was implemented in partnership with Qualtrics.
Figure 4 summarizes the structure of the survey and the resulting experiment. As noted in the
figure, every participant completed two question blocks in addition to the allocation task.

                                            [ Insert Figure 4 about here]

The first block, which subjects see at the beginning of the survey, includes a consent form and
basic demographics, such as gender, age brackets, and income brackets. Before seeing the
questions, subjects had to consent to participation with their virtual signature, as required by IRB
guidelines. The main purpose of the demographics questions was to elicit baseline characteristics
that can be used to screen people and ensure that our sample is representative of the population
of Arizona adults. 14

           After completing the allocation task, subjects saw a second block of questions that
focused on auxiliary information about a subject's past charitable donations ­ i.e., past donations
to each of the 20 charities included in our set of potential recipients, awareness of the CTC prior
to the experiment, and tax credits claimed through the CTC and other state level programs. The
second block of questions also included questions relating to basic tax morale and support for
policies to redistribute income and support low-income families.. We use this information to
ensure balance in factors that could impact response to our information treatments. The median
time of completion for the survey was approximately eleven minutes.

           We conducted the survey across two deployment waves that followed identical procedures
and contained all six treatments. The first wave took place in December 2017 while the second
wave was conducted in late April and early May of 2018. Our design thus allows us to study
program impacts at different points of the tax year when the incentives provided by the CTC may
be more or less salient.

           To recruit subjects, we relied on Qualtrics' network of local panel providers, firms that
curate lists of potential participants. We worked with one panel throughout the experiment to
ensure that all participants were exposed to the same survey and payment procedures. This


14
     We excluded residents under the age of 18 because we are interested in behavior related to income tax filings.

                                                           12
approach allowed us to collect data uniformly and recruit a large sample of Arizona residents. The
appendix provides more detail about the implementation of the experiment and our payment
protocol.

         Before proceeding, we should note that subjects had to meet three requirements to
participate in our experiment: (i) they had to be members of the panel maintained by our partner;
(ii) they had to be an Arizona resident of age 18 or older; and (iii) they had to consent to
participation. The first criterion was necessary as invitations to participate in the survey are only
sent to members of the panel via email. The second and third criteria were implemented based
upon response to questions included in the first block of the survey ­ indiviudals could not begin
the survey without consent and Qualtrics would end the survey should a respondent indicate that
they were not a resident of Arizona or were under the age of 18. We further worked with Qualtrics
to ensure that our subject pool was respresentative of the Arizona population along three
dimensions: gender, age, and household income. 15

3.2.     Sample Size and the Allocation Across Cells

Based on power calculations following List et al. (2011), our experimental sample of 900 subjects
across six treatment cells is designed to detect treatment effects of approximately one-third of a
standard deviation. Table 3 provides an overview of the resulting sample by experimental
treatment and wave. In total, we observe 904 completed surveys ­ 454 in the first wave and 450
in the second ­ and an additional 347 incomplete responses ­ 205 in the first wave and 142 in the
second. 16

                                          [ Insert Table 3 about here]

         As noted in the table, there was variation in the number of completed surveys both across
treatments within a wave and across waves within a treatment. For example, the number of
complete surveys in the first wave ranges from a low of 61 in treatment T5 to a high of 84 in
treatment T4. We observe similar variability across waves for many of our treatments. For
example, the number of complete surveys in treatment T5 increases by 10 between the first and


15 Following Qualtrics' best practice, we implemented a quality check that excluded subjects who completed the

survey in less than a third of the median completion time during the soft launch.
16
   Incomplete responses are surveys where the subject existed the survey after completing the allocation task but
before completing the final block of survey questions.

                                                         13
second wave whereas the number of compete surveys in treatment T4 falls by 9 between the first
and second wave.

       Such imbalance is an artifact of using Qualtrics' software and sampling approach. Rather
than ex ante randomizing subjects into treatments and directing them to treatment-specific landing
pages, the Qualtrics software requires that subects are sent to a single landing page with
randomization occuring as probabilistic assignment to a different version of the allocation task
programmed as part of the survey. Hence, while we can control the likelihood a subject is assigned
to a particular treatment, we cannot control the number of subjects that complete the allocation
task in any given treatment.

       This raises concern about selection effects and potential bias in our estimated treatment
effects. We address these concerns by estimating a simple linear regression of the number of
complete responses in each treatment/wave cell on binary indicators for an observation from an
information treatment and observations from treatments that require subjects to select two
recipients in the first-stage.   Although we do observe fewer responses in our information
treatments, the indicator on an information treatment is not significant at meaningful levels.
Moveover, we find no difference in the number of responses for treatments with multiple recipients
relative to those in treatements with a single recipient.

       As a further test on selection effects, we perform a similar comparison for incomplete
surveys. As noted in Table 3, we observe 347 such surveys in the data; 174 of which come from
treatments that provide information on the CTC. Hence, amongst incomplete responses there is
again no significant difference in the number of responses across information and no information
treatments. Viewed in its totality, these analyses call into question concerns regarding differential
selection based on treatment.

4. The Survey Data and Experimental Results

At the completion of each survey wave, we received a dataset from Qualtrics that included answers
to every question in Blocks 1 and 2 of the survey, the charities selected as recipients in the first
stage of the modified dictator game, and the subsequent allocations to the chosen recipients. In
addition to data from the survey, Qualtrics provides auxiliary information such as treatment



                                                  14
assignment, the amount of time it took the respondent to complete the survey, a unique subject ID
number, and the date and time the survey was completed.

         To convert the raw data from Qualtrics into a usable sample, we followed a four step
procedure for cleaning the data. First, we extracted information on the charities selected as
recipients in the first stage of the modified dictator game and the subsequent allocations to each
recipient. We augmented this data set to create outcome variables of interest such as the aggregate
amount donated, the amount donated to qualifying and non-qualifying organizations, and
indicators for the choice of qualifying organization from a mixed list. Second, we extracted
answers from the demographic questions in the first block of the survey and select questions from
the select block of the survey relating to awareness and use of the CTC prior to the experiment,
tax morale, and whether or not the subject had donated to any of the twenty potential recipients in
the past. Third, we created an indicator for the wave of the experiment and indicators for the
experimental treatment to which the subject was assigned. Finally, we repeated the first and third
steps for the set of incomplete responses and merged this with the data set generated in step one.17

         Given the design of our experiment, there are two potential threats to identification and
interprations of our findings that we would like to address before proceeding to the results section.
First, subjects in the experiment may have a strong preference for select causes or a history of
giving to particular organizations that could influence outcomes of the modified dictator game
independent of treatment. For example, an individual may have a history of donating to the
Arizona Community Foundation (a non-qualifying organization) or St. Mary's Food Bank (a
qualifying cause) and thus select these causes as a recipient regardless of other organizations in
the feasible choice set or information provided about these alterantives and the CTC. In this
instance, we would tend to underestimate the effect of the information treatment and incorrectly
infer that it has no impact on donor behavior. 18

         A second threat to identification relates to awareness and past use of the CTC amongst
subjects in our experiment ­ a characteristic that is ex ante unobservable. As our treatment of


17
   We exclude the incomplete data in our primary analysis but include such responses in our supplementary analysis
and for robustness checks.
18
   A similar concern would arise if we selected causes that nobody cared for and subjects select potential recipients
in the no-information case at random. In this instance, however, it is not clear whether and how information about
the CTC would impact the choice of recipient and subsequent allocations.

                                                         15
interest is information about the CTC and whether or not donations to a potential recipient would
qualify for a credit under the program, one might expect that the effect of our intervention could
depend on baseline knowledge of the CTC. If this is indeed true, imbalance in prior awareness of
the credit program across treatments could compromise indentification and lead to biased estimates
of our treatment effects.

         We address these concerns using data from the second block of questions asking subjects:
(i) whether or not they have given to each of the twenty potential recipient organizations in the
past; (ii) whether or not they were aware of the CTC prior to the experiment; and (iii) whether they
had claimed a tax credit through the CTC in the past. As described in the Appendix, we find no
evidence that our results are driven by subjects observing and selecting charities that they have
supported in the past. Moreover, we find that both awareness and use of the CTC prior to the
experiment is balanced across treatments. 19 However, we control for such factors in our robustness
checks and show that doing so does not impact the qualitative nature of our main findings.

Experimental Results

         Table 4 provides summary statistics from our experiment. The upper panel of the table
presents data on aggregate patterns of giving across our various experimental treatments.
Specifically, the upper panel of Table 4 provides data on three metrics of interest: (i) the likelihood
the subject donated to at least one of the selected recipients; (ii) the average contribution level; and
(iii) the fraction of all dollars contributed that were given to a qualifying organization. In total,
81.4% of the subjects in our experiment donated to at least one of the selected recipients. The
average donation in our experiment was $49.50 with approximately 59.3% of this amount allocated
to qualifying causes.

                                          [Insert Table 4 about here]

         The middle panel of Table 4 restricts attention to donations made to qualifying causes
and summarizes four metrics of interest: (i) the number of qualifying causes selected as
recipients in the first-stage; (ii) the likelihood that the subject donated to a selected qualifying


19 Interestingly, we find that a large fraction of individuals who were aware of the CTC program elected not to claim

a credit through that program, even though they had donated to a qualifying charity. Such behavior is consistent with
results from Benzarti (forthcoming) who show that individuals are willing to forego substantial tax savings to avoid
compliance costs.

                                                         16
cause; (iii) the number of qualifying causes that the subject donated to in treatments T4 and T5;
and (iv) the average contribution to qualifying causes. In total, approximately 82% of our
subjects selected at least one qualifying organization as a recipient in the first stage of the
modified dictator game. Of these, 80.2% (592 out of 738) made a positive donation to the
selected qualifying cause with an average gift of $29.33 to selected qualifying causes.

       If we restrict attention to the final two treatments, T4 and T5, approximately 81% of the
subjects (236 out of 291) select at least one qualifying cause as a recipient. Of these,
approximately 51.3% (or 121 subjects) select two qualifying causes as recipients in the first
stage. Amongst the 236 subjects who selected at least one qualifying cause, 80.5% (or 190)
make a positive donation to at least one of the selected causes. Amongst the 121 subjects that
select two qualifying causes, 79.3% make a positive allocation to both of the selected causes.

Impact of Information on Aggregate Pattern of Giving

We begin by exploring the effect of our information treatment on aggregate patterns of giving.
Specifically, we explore the effect of information about the CTC program on two metrics of
interest: (i) average contribution levels and (ii) the likelihood of making a donation. As
summarized in the upper panel of Table 4, average contribution levels range from a low of $44.47
in treatment T1 to a high of $52.23 in treatment T4 and participation rates range from a low of
76.6% in treatment T1 to a high of 85.1% in our baseline treatment. If we restrict attention to a
comparison across paired information and no-information treatments, our raw data suggest no
discernable effect of information on either average gifts or the likelihood of giving.

       To formally test the effect of our information treatment on average contributions we
estimate a linear regression model of the form

                             =  + 1  + 2  + 3   +  + 

where: Yit is the aggregate amount donated by subject i in wave t; Ti is an indicator that equals one
if subject i participated in an information treatment; Mi is an indicator that equals one if subject i
participated in a treatment with two recipients; and t are wave fixed effects. Given prior evidence
showing that demographic factors such as age, gender, and income are correlated with charitable
donations, we augment our baseline specification to include indicators for: (i) female subjects; (ii)



                                                  17
subjects below age 35; (iii) subjects above age 65; (iv) subjects with reported annual income less
than $50,000; and (v) subjects with reported annual income above $100,000.

          The results from these models are presented in Table 5. As noted in the first column of the
table, our information treatments have no discernable impact on the average amount donated in
our experiment. Both the coefficient on the treatment indicator and the coefficient on the
interaction of this indicator with the indicator for multiple-recipient treatments are statistically
insignificant. For example, subjects in T1 give on average about $4.86 (or approximately 9.8
percent) less than do counterparts in our baseline treatment. However, this difference is not
significant at any meaningful level. We observe similar effects when comparing the effect of
information in treatments with multiple recpients ­ average donations in these treatments are
approximately $0.17 lower than that observed in the corresponding no information treatments.

                                     [Insert Table 5 about here]

          We observe qualitatively similar effects in column 2 which includes demographic controls
although the magnitude of the differences increases. For example, when we include demographic
controls, subjects in T1 give approximately $6.76 less than do counterparts in the baseline
treatment ­ a difference that is marginally significant at the p < 0.10 level. In treatments with
multiple recipients, average donations when subjects receive information about the CTC prior to
the first stage give approximately $0.16 less than that observed in the corresponding no
information treatments ­ a difference that is not significant at any meaningful level.

          Before proceeding, we should note that the esimtates on our demographic controls are
consistent with prior findings in the literature (e.g., List, 2004). Specifically, we find that: (i)
women donate approximately $6.84 (or 13.8 percent) more to charity than do male counterparts;
(ii) the elderly donate $5.80 (or 11.7 percent) more to charity than do middle aged counterparts;
and (iii) those with annual household income below $50K donate approximately $9.43 (or 19.1
percent) less to charity than do counterparts with income in the $50-100K range. That our
estimated demographic effects are consistent with prior findings is comforting and suggests that
our sample is representative of the broader population ­ at least with regard to the determinants of
giving.




                                                  18
         We next explore the impact of our information treatments on the likelihood a subject makes
a positive contribution. As noted in Table 4, this probability ranges from 76.6% in treatment T1
to to 85.1% in our baseline condition with little difference across our information and no
information treatments. To formally test the effect of information about the CTC on the likelihood
of giving to a selected cause, we estimate a series of linear probability models of the form

                                 =  + 1  + 2  + 3   +  + 

where Yit is a binary indicator that equals 1 if subject i in wave t shared a positive amount in the
second stage allocation game and the remaining indicators identical to those described above. We
again augment this baseline specification to include demographic controls for gender, age, and
income.

         Results from these models are presented in Table 6 and suggest that our information
treatments had no discernable impact on the likelihood of giving. For example, as noted in the
first column of the table, subjects in treatment T1 were actually 8.7 percentage points less likely
to give than were counterparts in the baseline treatment ­ a difference that is marginally significant
at the p < 0.10 level. Although we are unable to pinpoint the cause of this extensive margin effect,
it drives the difference in average contributions across our baseline treatment and treatment T1. 20
We observe a less pronounced difference in treatments with multiple recipients. Subjects receiving
information about the CTC in such treatments are approximately 0.6 percentage points less likely
to give than counterparts in the corresponding no-information treatments ­ a difference that is not
economically or statistically significant at any meaningful level.

                                          [Insert Table 6 about here]

         The qualitative nature of our findings are unchanged when we add demographic controls.
For example, as noted in column 2, subjects in treatment T1 are approximately 10.3 percentage
points less likely to give than are counterparts in the baseline treatment ­ a difference that is
marginally significant at the p < 0.10 level. If we restrict attention to treatments with multiple
recipients, we observe no economically meaningful impact of information on the likelihood of
giving. Subjects receiving information about the CTC in such treatments are approximately 0.4


20 As noted in Table 4, there is no difference in the average conditional donation across our baseline ($57.71) and
treatment T1 ($58.09).

                                                         19
percentage points less likely to give than counterparts in the corresponding no-information
treatments.

       Viewed in its totality, the empirical estimates in Tables 5 and 6 suggest a first result:

Result 1: Information about the CTC has no impact on aggregate behavior. Both the likelihood
of giving and average contributions are unaffected by our information treatment ­ particularly
when subjects select multiple recipients in the first-stage.

That our information treatment has no impact on average contribution levels in our experiment is
consistent with the data patterns observed in Figure 2 which shows that the introduction of the
CTC has had no discernable impact on aggregate patterns of giving statewide. Result 2 is also
consistent with findngs from Duquette et al. (2018) who use data from the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics and show that state tax credits for charitable contributions have no impact on overall
donations. In what follows, we set forth to understand what drives this result. Perhaps information
about the CTC program and available tax credits for giving to select causes has no impact on donor
choice. Alternately, the aggregate statistics could be misleading if the impact of the CTC is that it
leads to a reallocation of donations across qualifying and non-qualifying causes.

The Allocation of Funds across Qualifying and Non-Qualifying Charites

We next explore whether our information treatment leads subjects to shift donations from
qualifying to non-qualifying charities. To do so, we first discuss summary statistics from Table 4.
As noted in the table, the fraction of donations allocated to qualifying charities is greater in every
information treatment than in its paired no information condition. For example, qualifying
organizations in our baseline treatment receive approximately 60.5% of all donations. In the
matched information treatment (T1), such causes receive approximately 65% of all donations.
Moreover, when subjects are allowed to select two recipients, this difference is enhanced ­ there
is an approximate 7.2 percentage point difference in the fraction allocated to qualifying charities
across treatments T3 and T2 and an approximate 17.7 percentage point difference in the fraction
allocated to qualifying causes across our final treatments T5 and T4.

       To evaluate whether these differences are statistically significant, we estimate a series of
linear regressions of the fraction of donations to qualifying charities on our various treatment
indicators and demographic controls. We calculate the fraction of donations to a qualifying charity

                                                 20
as the amount allocated by subject i to qualifying charities divided by subject i's aggregate
donation and set this fraction to zero should subject i keep the $80 endowment for themself. 21 By
construction, our dependent variable thus takes a value between 0 and 1.

        Estimates for these models are presented in Table 7. As noted in the first column of the
table, there is no difference in the average fraction allocated to qualifying causes across our
baseline treatment and treatment T1 ­ the estimated coefficient on our indicator for an information
treatment is negative but not statistically significant at any meaningful level. There is, however, a
significant increase in the amount allocated to qualifying causes when subjects receive information
about the CTC and select multiple recipients. The estimated coefficient on this interaction term is
0.153 suggesting that subjects in these treatments allocate approximately 15.3% more to qualifying
causes than do counterparts in the corresponding no-information treatments ­ a difference that is
significant at the p < 0.05 level.

                                        [Insert Table 7 about here}

        The qualitative nature of these differences are unchanged when we add demographic
controls. As noted in column 2 of Table 7, information has no impact on the fraction allocated to
qualifying charities when subjects select a single recipient. However, information about the CTC
leads to a significant increase in the fraction allocated to qualifying causes when subjects select
multiple recipients.

        Viewed in conjunction with the null effect of information on average giving, the estimates
in Table 7 suggest a second result:

Result 2: Providing subjects information about the CTC leads to a reallocation of donations
towards qualifying causes but only when subjects select multiple recipients.

Result 2 shares similarity with findings in Null (2011) who shows that changes in the relative price
of giving leads to weak substitution between causes and a partial reallocation of donations from
higher to lower priced causes. Result 2 also shares similarity with findings in Filiz-Ozbay and
Uler (2019) that increases in the rebate rate for one charity relative to that of a substitute cause



21The qualitative nature of our findings remain unchanged if we instead calulate our dependent variable as the
amount allocated to qualifying causes divided by the maximum possible donation ­ the subject's $80 endowment.

                                                       21
leads to a reallocation of funds amongst the two causes. 22 By design, subjects in our experiment
should view qualifying and non-qualifying organizations as substitute causes so we should expect
information about the CTC to cause a reallocation of donations towards qualifying causes.

         For policy-makers and practitioners, Result 2 provides a potential explanation for the
patterns of giving illustrated in Figure 2. The introduction of the CTC likely caused a reallocation
of donations towards qualifying causes. Hence, there can be a dramatic increase in the amounts
claimed through the CTC program with no change in aggregate patterns of giving statewide. For
researchers, Result 2 highlights the importance of examining the effects of incentives not only on
giving to the targeted cause but also on giving to other causes ­ i.e., it highlights the importancDe
of modeling choice and testing behavior in a world with multiple charities or public goods.

Impact of Information on Charity Selection and Allocation

We next set forth to explore the various channels through which our information treatment impacts
the allocation of funds amongst qualifying and non-qualifying causes. In doing so we examine the
effects of information along two distinct margins: (i) the extensive margin ­ the selection of
recipients in the first stage; and (ii) the intensive margin ­ the allocation of funds in the second
stage. 23 In what follows, we restrict attention to the subset of treatments where subjects select
multiple recipients as we do not observe significant differences in the allocation across the different
cause types in treatments with a single recipient.

         We begin by exploring the effect of our information treatment on the selection of recipients
in the first stage of the modified dictator game. Recall that by design, subjects in treatments T2
and T3 were "forced" to select one recipient of each type. We thus focus our analysis on treatments
T4 and T5 where subjects faced mixed lists and could select a "portfolio" of recipients that includes
zero, one, or two qualifying causes. In doing so, we focus on three metrics of interest: (i) the
likelihood of selecting at least one qualifying cause as a recipient; (ii) the likelihood of selecting



22 Alternately, Filiz-Ozbay and Uler (2019) show that increases in the rebate rate for one charity leads to increased
donations to both charities if the causes are complementary. Similar increases in aggregate giving are found in
studies exploring the response of donors to new, but temporary, needs such as disaster relief (Brown et al., 2012;
Scharf et al., 2017; Deryugina and Marx, 2020) or classroom projects in public schools (Meer, 2017).
23 Figures A1 to A4 in Appendix A provide a graphic depiction of these outcomes and show that while there is no

aggregate change in giving, our information treatment changes the type of charities subjects select and the allocation
of funds across cause types.

                                                         22
at least one non-qualifying cause as a recipient; and (iii) the number of qualifying causes selected
as recipients.

         As noted in Table 4, our information treatment impacts the selection of both recipient types.
For example, information about the CTC increases the likelihood of selecting at least one
qualifying cause by approximately 6.9 percentage points (84.9 percent in T5 versus 78 percent in
T4). In contrast, information about the the CTC reduces the likelihood of selecting at least one
non-qualifying cause by 23.7 percentage points (45.5 percent in T5 versus 69.2 percent in T4).

         Taken jointly, these differences lead to changes in the composition in the mix of cause
types within the donors "portfolio" of seleced recipients. For example, whereas 47.2 percent of
subjects (75 out of 159) in T4 select one cause of each type, this fraction falls to approximately
30.3 percent (40 out of 132) in the paired information treatment. In contrast, the number of subjects
selecting two qualifying causes as recipients increases from approximately 30.8 percent (49 out of
159) in the no-information condition to more than 54 percent (72 out of 132) in the paired
information condition.

         To evaluate whether these differences are statistically significant, we estimate a series of
linear probability models of the form

                                          =  +  +  +  + 

where: Yilt equals one if subject i facing list l in wave t selects at least one cause of a given type as
a recipient; Ti is indicator for subjects in our information treatment (T5); t are wave fixed effects;
and µl are list fixed effects. 24 We also estimate an augmented version of this basic model that

includes demographic controls. Across all specfications, the coefficient of interest is  which
captures the effect of our information treatment on the probability of selecting at least one recipient
of the given type.

         Estimates for these models are presented in Table 8. The first two columns examine the
likelihood of selecting at least one qualifying cause as a recipient whereas the last two columns
examine the likelihood of selecting at least one non-qualifying cause as a recipient. Empirical

24
  We estimate one model for the likelihood of selecting at least one qualifying cause as a recipient and another for
the likelihood of selecting at least one non-qualifying cause as a recipient. Note that these two outcomes need not be
isomorphic to each other as a subject can select two causes of a given type or one cause of each type.

                                                         23
results are largely consistent with the aggregate summary statistics. For example, subjects in an
information treatment are approximately 6 percentage points more likely to select at least one
qualifying cause as a recipient. However, this difference is not statistically significant at any
meaningful level.

                                      [Insert Table 8 about here]

        As noted in the last two columns of Table 8, our information treatment does have a
significant impact on the likelihood of selecting at least one non-qualifying cause as a recipient.
Subjects in treatment T5 are approximately 23 percentage points less likely to select at least one
non-qualifying charity as a recipient than counterparts in the no-information condition (T4) ­ a
difference that is statistically significant at the p < 0.01 level.

        Viewed in conjuction, the above results suggest that information about the CTC influences
the compostion of the "portfolio" of cause types selected by subjects. To formally evaluate this
conjecture, we estimate the effect of our information treatment on the number of qualifying causes
selected as recipients in the first stage of the modified dictator game. To do so, we estimate a
series of linear probability models similar to those described above but where the dependent
variable is an indicator if the subject selects a specific number ­ zero, one, or two ­ of qualifying
causes. Results from this exercise are presented in Table 9.

                                      [Insert Table 9 about here]

        The first two columns of the table present results for the probability that the subject selects
no qualifying causes, the middle two columns present results for the probability that the subject
selects one qualifying cause, and the final two columns the probability that the subject selects two
qualifying causes. Results from the table are consistent with our raw data summary and suggest a
significant change in the composition of a subject's "portfolio". Specifically, we find that subjects
in our information treatment are more than 16 percentage points less likely to select a mixed
portfolio that includes one qualifying and one non-qualifying charity ­ a difference that is
statistically significant at the p < 0.01 level and robust to the inclusion of demographic controls.
In contrast, we find that subjects in our information treatment are approximately 22.7 percentage
points more likely to select a portfolio that contains only qualifying causes ­ a difference that is
statistically significant at the p < 0.01 level and robust to the inclusion of demographic controls.


                                                    24
         Estimates from Tables 8 and 9 suggest a third result:

Result 3: Information about the CTC program and whether donations to a given cause qualify
under the program influences the mix of cause types supported.

We believe this result is novel to the literature and suggests a new channel through which
incentives and competition amongst charities influence donor behavior ­ incentives lead donors to
change the portfolio of causes they support. 25 For researchers, this reinforces the need to extend
our models to include multiple charities and the choice of causes supported by a donor. The result
also suggests the need to develop ways to measure the social benefits of donations to a given cause.
From a social welfare perspective, incentives that lead to a reallocation of funds across causes
within a sector is not necessarily a problem if the dollars are flowing from lower-valued to higher-
valued causes.

         For policymakers and practitioners, Result 3 should be viewed as a cautionary tale. Tax
incentives and other policies designed to increase contributions to select causes can introduce an
unintended consequence ­ increased contributions to targeted causes may come at the expense of
support for and donations to other causes. As such, policymakers should take care when designing
such programs and establishing criteria for inclusion. Such choices may implicity determine not
only who gains from the program but also who loses once the program is enacted.

         As a final metric of interest, we revisit the effect of our information treatments on the
allocation of donations across qualifying and non-qualifying causes ­ the intensive margin effect.
To do so, we restrict attention to the subset of subjects who donated to at least one cause and
estimate the following linear regression model

                                          =  +  +  +  + 

where Yilt is the fraction of subject i's total contribution that is directed to qualifying causes and
the remaining variables are identical to those described above. We estimate the model for two
different pairwise comparisons ­ T2 vs. T3 and T4 vs. T5. The first comparison is akin to that
explored in prior work (e.g, Null, 2011; Ek, 2017; Filiz-Ozbay and Uler, 2019; Halwell et al.,


25In many regards, this result shares similarity with prior theoretical work on competition amongst charities and
how fundraising effort can influence the types of causes that a donor supports (see, e.g., Rose-Ackerman, 1982;
Scharf, 2014; or Krasteva and Yildirim, 2016).

                                                         25
2019) which reports how incentives affect allocation of donations across a fixed set of cause types.
The second comparison extends this prior work and captures the combined effect of changes in
the composition of the donor's portfolio of causes and any changes in the allocation of funds across
a fixed portfolio type. For each comparison, we estimate two different specifications, one that only
includes treatment effects and the relevant fixed effects and a second that augments this baseline
model to include demographic controls.

       Results for these models are presented in Table 10 and suggest that information about the
CTC programs leads subjects to increase the fraction of donations allocated to qualifying charities.
For example, when subjects cannot adjust the mix of qualifying and non-qualifying charities
selected as recipients, information provision causes an approximately eight percentage point
increase in the amount allocated to qualified causes ­ a difference that is significant at the p < 0.05
level and robust to the inclusion of demographic controls. For perspective, the average amount
donated in treatment T2 (the no information benchmark) is approximately $49.73. The estimated
treatment effect thus corresponds to an increase of approximately $3.97 in the amount allocated to
qualifying causes.

                                    [Insert Table 10 about here]

       Such effects are enhanced when donors are allowed to both adjust the composition of their
portfolios and reallocate funds within a fixed portfolio mix. As noted in the final two columns of
the table, the effect of information provision on the share allocated to qualifying causes is an
approximate 11.8 percentage point increase ­ a difference that is statistically significant at the p <
0.05 level and robust to the inclusion of demographic controls. For perspective, the average
amount donated in treatment T4 (the no-information benchmark) is approximately $52.23. The
estimated treatment effect thus corresponds to an increase of around $6.16 in the average amount
donated to qualifying causes.

       Viewed in its totality, the estimates in Table 10 suggest a fourth result:

Result 4: Information about the CTC program causes a reallocation of funds amongst qualifying
and non-qualifying causes; an effect that is enhanced when donors are allowed to adjust the
composition of cause types supported.



                                                  26
Result 4 highlights the two channels through which the CTC program likely impacts donor choice.
For those donors who support both types of causes, the program leads to a shift in donations away
from non-qualifying causes and towards qualifying causes. However, there is an additional effect
that enhances such reallocation. For a subset of donors, the CTC leads to a change in the types of
causes supported. Importantly, this helps explain why contributions claimed through the CTC
program have grown exponentially with no discernable impact on overall giving in the state; the
program proverbially robs Peter to pay Paul.

Robustness Checks

As a first robustness check, we estimate the effect of our information treatment on the likelihood
of donating to a given cause type. To do so, we estimate a series of linear probability models of
binary indicators for whether or not the subject donated to a given cause type on our indicator for
subjects assigned to an information condition and both list (choice set) and wave of survey fixed
effects. As in the prior section, we restrict the analysis to the subset of treatments where subjects
select multiple recipients and estimate the model separately for our two pairwise comparisons of
interest (T2 vs. T3 and T4 vs. T5).
       Results from these models are presented in Tables B1 and B2 of the appendix and provide
further insight into the channels through which information impacts the allocation of funds across
cause types.    For example, as noted in Table B1, information provision had a small, but
statistically insignificant, impact on the likelihood of making a donation to a qualifying cause.
Similarly, Table B2 provides evidence that information provision had a negative, but statistically
insignificant impact, on the likelihood of donating to a non-qualifying cause in those treatments
where subjects were "forced" to select one cause of each type. In contrast, information provision
had a negative and statistically significant effect on the likelihood of donating to non-qualifying
causes in situations where subjects were free to select any mix of qualifying and non-qualifying
causes.
       Viewed in conjuction with results from Tables 8-10, these results reinforce that information
provision works through different channels across these two treatment types. In situations where
subjects cannot adjust the mix of cause types supported, information provision works solely along
the intensive margin ­ subjects shift a portion of what they would have otherwise given to non-
qualifying causes to qualifying recipients. However, when subjects are free to adjust the mix of


                                                27
cause types supported, information provision works predominantly through selection of causes ­
the extensive margin.
         As a second robustness check, we expand our sample to include incomplete responses and
rerun our various econometric models. These data are for responders who completed the first
block of the survey and the donation decision but did not complete the second block of survey
questions. The inclusion of such observations affords a way to check for potential selection
effects and expand the power of our statistical tests. 26
         Results from these models are presented in Appendix B and provide qualitative support for
our main findings.          For example, estimates in Tables B3 and B4 reinforce Result 1 that
information provision has no impact on either the probability of donating to a selected recipient
or the average donation amount. Similarly, estimates in Table B5 provide support for Result 2 ­
information provision leads to an increase in the fraction allocated to qualifying causes but only
in treatments where subjects select multiple recipients. Interestingly, however, the magnitude of
this effect is reduced when we include incomplete responses ­ the estimated treatment effect with
incompletes is approximately 4 percentage points (or 25 percent) lower.
         We observe similar, albeit less pronounced effects, when examining the effect of our
information treatments in the pooled sample on the likelihood of selecting a non-qualifying
recipient and the number of qualifying charities selected in conditions across treatments T4 and
T5. For example, as noted in Table B6, subjects receiving information about the CTC in the
pooled sample are approximately 20 percentage points less likely to select a non-qualifying
recipient ­ an effect that is approximately 10 percent lower than the effect in the subset of
complete responses.          Similarly, as noted in Table B7, subjects in the pooled sample are
approximately 15.5 percentage points less likely to select only one qualifying charity and 20.3
percentage points more likely to select two qualifying causes when receiving information about
the CTC prior to the first stage of the modified dictator game ­ effects that are both less
pronounced than that estimated using the subset of complete survey responses.



26 Recall that our second block of survey questions focused largely on tax morale and prior charitable donations.

Such questions may have lead subjects to infer that the experiment was designed to measure altruism or generosity.
As such, it is possbile that subjects who allocated less to selected causes in the second stage allocation game would
disproportionally drop out of the survey while answering the second block of questions. If so, this would bias our
sample of completed surveys in favor of more altruistic types. Ex ante, it is unclear whether and how this would
impact our estimated treatment effects.

                                                         28
          Finally, estimates in Table B8 provide support for Result 4; information provision leads to
an increase in the fraction allocated to qualifying causes with this effect enhanced when subjects
are allowed to adjust the mix of cause types selected as recipients. Again, both of these effects
are less pronounced than when we restrict attention to the subset of complete surveys. However,
the effects in the full sample remain statistically and economically significant.
          Viewed in its totality, estimates from Appendix B highlight the robustness of our main
results. While the point estimates are muted when we include incomplete responses, they remain
economically and statistically significant.


5. Conclusions and Discussion

Policymakers frequently attempt to encourage donations to charity with special tax provisions such
as income tax deductions and credits at the state level. A key feature of many such programs is
that the provisions only apply for donations to select causes rather than any registered 501(c)(3)
organization. We report an online field experiment around the largest such state program,
Arizona's state income tax credit for donations to qualifying charities, to ascertain how awareness
of the program affects overall giving and the allocation of donations amongst causes.

          Our research questions were motivated by two trends in giving following the introduction
of the CTC: (i) claims for contributions to qualifying causes increased nearly 50 fold since the
program's inception; and (ii) aggregate contributions statewide remained fairly constant over this
same time period. We designed our experiment to ascertain whether targeted tax credits increase
aggregate patterns of giving or lead donors to reallocate donations amongst causes. Our design
further allows us to separately identify the effect of targeted tax credits along two margins of
interests ­ the types of causes a donor elects to support and the allocation of funds amongst selected
causes.

          Our experiment included a representative sample of more than 900 Arizona residents who
completed an on-line survey that included a modified dictator game where the set of potential
recipients were non-profit organizations in the state. Subjects in the experiment were randomized
into one of six treatments that varied along three main dimensions: (i) the provision of detailed
information about the CTC and whether donations to a given organization qualified for the credit
under the program; (ii) the number of recipients that could be selected in the first-stage of the

                                                  29
modified dictator game; and (iii) whether the lists from which recipients were selected contained
a mix of qualifying and non-qualifying causes or only one type of cause.

       Empirical results from our experiment show that information provision has no impact on
either the number of donors or the aggregate amount donated. However, information about the
program does influence the allocation of funds amongst qualifying and non-qualifying causes but
only when subjects select multiple recipients. Results from our experiment thus provide a potential
explanation for the observed trends in giving in Arizona that motivated our experiment ­ the
increased contributions to qualifying causes may be coming at the expense of donations to other,
related causes and thus the program has had limited impact on aggregate giving statewide.

       Exploring the mechanisms underlying the reallocation across cause type, we find that it
reflects changes along both the intensive and extensive margins. When subjects are unable to
adjust the mix of cause types supported, information about the CTC leads them to reallocate some
of the money that they would have given to non-qualifying causes to increased donations to
qualifying causes. When subjects are allowed to adjust the mix of cause types supported,
information about the CTC reduces the likelihood of selecting non-qualifying causes and increases
the likelihood of selecting qualifying causes.

       Our findings should prove of interest for both researchers and policymakers alike. For
policymakers, our results provide a cautionary tale and highlight an unintended consequence of
policies designed to encourage giving to a subset of targeted causes. Increased donations to
targeted causes may serve to crowd out donations to other causes and thus have limited impact on
overall patterns of giving. It is thus important to consider such effects when designing targeted
policies and to understand not only who would gain from the program but also who would lose if
it were enacted.

       For researchers, our results suggest the importance of extending our theoretical models and
empirical analysis to consider multiple public goods. Specifically, we should extend our models
to explore whether and how targeted incentives such as tax credits or fund-raising mechanisms
used by individual charities influence the selection of causes a donor supports and the allocation
of donations across causes. Moreover, our findings suggest the need to develop methods to
measure the social benefit of dollars allocated to different causes because the main effect of
targeted charitable tax credits is realocation across causes not increase in total donations.

                                                 30
       Finally, it is important to note that our results are at odds with work exploring the response
of donors to new, but temporary, appeals such as disaster relief or requests to fund classroom
projects in public schools. Future work should explore why donors respond differently to such
appeals than they do to changes in the incentives for giving to a pre-existing cause. In particular,
future work should explore whether and why the immediacy of need and the impermanence of a
request influences its impact on aggregate patterns of giving.




                                                31
References
Adena, M., Alizade, J., Bohner, F., Harke, J., & Mesters, F. (2019). Quality certification for
       nonprofits, charitable giving, and donor's trust: Experimental evidence. Journal of
       Economic Behavior & Organization, 159, 75-100.

Allcott, H., & Knittel, C. (2019). Are consumers poorly informed about fuel economy? Evidence
       from two experiments. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(1), 1-37.

Allcott, H., & Sweeney, R. L. (2017). The role of sales agents in information disclosure: evidence
       from a field experiment. Management Science, 63(1), 21-39.

Allcott, H., & Taubinsky, D. (2015). Evaluating behaviorally motivated policy: Experimental
       evidence from the lightbulb market. American Economic Review, 105(8), 2501-38.

Andreoni, J., & Payne, A. A. (2003). Do government grants to private charities crowd out giving
       or fund-raising? American Economic Review, 93(3): 792-812.

Andreoni, J., & Payne, A. A. (2011a). Is crowding out due entirely to fundraising? Evidence from
       a panel of charities. Journal of Public Economics, 95, June 2011, 334-343.

Andreoni, J., Payne, A., & Smith, S. (2014). Do grants to charities crowd out other income?
       Evidence from the UK. Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 114(C), 75-86.

Auten, G., & Joulfaian, D. (1996). Charitable contributions and intergenerational transfers.
       Journal of Public Economics, 59(1), 55-68.

Auten, G. E., Seig, H. & Clotfelter, C. (2002). Charitable giving, income, and taxes: An analysis
       of panel data. American Economic Review, 92(1): 371­82.

Bankman, J., Shaviro, D. N., Stark, K. J., & Kleinbard, E. D. (2018). Federal Income Taxation.
       Aspen Publishers.

Barr, A., & Turner, S. (2018). A Letter and Encouragement: Does Information Increase
       Postsecondary Enrollment of UI Recipients? American Economic Journal: Economic
       Policy, 10(3), 42-68.

Benzarti, Y. (2020). How Taxing is Tax Filing? Using Revealed Preference to Estimate
       Compliance Costs. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, forthcoming.

                                               32
Bollinger, B., Leslie, P., & Sorensen, A. (2011). Calorie posting in chain restaurants. American
       Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1), 91-128.

Brown, A. L., Meer, J., & Williams, J. F. (2017). Social distance and quality ratings in charity
       choice. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental economics, 66, 9-15.

Brown, S., Harris, M.N., & Taylor, K. (2012). Modelling Charitable Donations to an Unexpected
       Natural Disaster: Evidence from the U.S. Panel Study of Income Dynamics. Journal of
       Economic Behavior and Organization, Vol. 84(1), 97-110.

Cason, T. N., & Zubrickas, R. (2019). Donation Based Crowdfunding with Refund Bonuses.
       European Economic Review, Vol. 119, 452-471.

Chetty, R., Looney, A., & Kroft, K. (2009). Salience and taxation: Theory and evidence.
       American Economic Review, 99(4), 1145-77.

Chetty, R., & Saez, E. (2013). Teaching the tax code: Earnings responses to an experiment with
       EITC recipients. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1), 1-31.

Clotfelter, C. (1980). Tax incentives and charitable giving: evidence from a panel of taxpayers.
       Empirical Economics, Vol. 13(3), 319-40.

Corazzini, L., Cotton, C., & Valbonesi, P. (2015). Donor coordination in project funding: Evidence
       from a threshold public goods experiment. Journal of Public Economics, 128, 16-29.

Davis, L. W., & Metcalf, G. E. (2016). Does better information lead to better choices? Evidence
       from energy-efficiency labels. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
       Economists, 3(3), 589-625.

Deryugina, T. & Marx, B. (2020). Is the Supply of Charitable Donations Fixed? Evidence from
       Deadly Tornados. NBER Working Paper No. 27078.

Duquette, N. J. (2016). Do tax incentives affect charitable contributions? Evidence from public
       charities' reported revenues. Journal of Public Economics, 137, 51-69.

Duquette, N.J., Graddy-Redd, A., & Phillips, M. (2018). The Effectiveness of Tax Credits for
       Charitable Giving. Working Paper Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3201841



                                               33
Ek, C. (2017). Some causes are more equal than others? The effect of similarity on substitution in
       charitable giving. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 136, 45-62.

Fack, G., & Landais, C. (2010). Are tax incentives for charitable giving efficient? Evidence from
       France. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(2), 117-41.

Figlio, D. N., & Kenny, L. W. (2009). Public sector performance measurement and stakeholder
       support. Journal of Public Economics, 93(9-10), 1069-1077.

Filiz-Ozbay, E., & Uler, N. (2019). Demand for giving to multiple charities: An experimental
       study. Journal of the European Economic Association, 17(3), 725-753.

Feldman, N.E. & Ruffle, B.J. (2015). The Impact of Including, Adding, and Subtracting a Tax on
       Demand. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 7(1), 95-118.

Feldstein, M. (1975). The Income Tax and Charitable Contributions: Part I ­ Aggregate and
       Distributional Effects. National Tax Journal, Vol. 28(1), 81-100.

Feldstein, M. & Clotfelter, C. (1976). Tax incentives and charitable contributions in the united
       states: A microeconometric analysis. Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 5(1-2), 1-26.

Feldstein, M., & Taylor, A. (1976). The income tax and charitable contributions. Econometrica,
       Vol. 44(6), 1201-1222.

Galllagher, K.S. & Muehlegger, E. (2011). Giving Green to Get Green? Incentives and Consumer
       Adoption of Hybrid Vehicle Technology. Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management, Vol. 61(1), 1-15.

Harwell, H., Meneses, D., Moceri, C., Rauckhorst, M., Zindler, A., & Eckel, C. (2019). Did the
       Ice Bucket Challenge Drain the Philanthropic Reservoir?

Hungerman, D. M. (2007). Diversity and crowd-out: A theory of cold-glow giving. NBER Working
       Papers No. 13348

Jensen, R. (2010). The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling. The
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2), 515-548.

Jin, G. Z., & Leslie, P. (2003). The effect of information on product quality: Evidence from
       restaurant hygiene grade cards. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2), 409-451.
                                               34
Kingma, B. R. (1989). An accurate measurement of the crowd-out effect, income effect, and price
       effect for charitable contributions. Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 97(5), 1197-1207.

Krasteva, S. & Yildirim, H. (2016). Information, competition, and the quality of charities. Journal
       of Public Economics, Vol. 144, 64-77.

Lange, A., Price, M. K., & Santore, R. (2017). Signaling quality through gifts: Implications for the
       charitable sector. European Economic Review, 96, 48-61.

Liebman, J. B., & Luttmer, E. F. (2011). Would people behave differently if they better understood
       social security? Evidence from a field experiment. NBER Working Paper No. 17287

List, J. A. (2011). The market for charitable giving. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(2): 157-
       80.

List, J. A., Sadoff, S., & Wagner, M. (2011). So you want to run an experiment, now what? Some
       simple rules of thumb for optimal experimental design. Experimental Economics, 14(4),
       439.

List, J. A. & Price, M. K. (2012). Charitable giving around the world: Thoughts on how to expand
       the pie. CESifo Economic Studies, Vol. 58(1), 1-30.

Meer, J. (2017). Does Fundraising Create New Giving? Journal of Public Economics, Vol 145C,
       82-93.

Null, C. (2011). Warm glow, information, and inefficient charitable giving. Journal of Public
       Economics, 95(5-6), 455-465.

Payne, A. A. (1998). Does the government crowd-out private donations? New evidence from a
       sample of non-profit firms. Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 69(3), 323-345.

Randolph, W. C. (1995). Dynamic income, progressive taxes, and the timing of charitable
       contributions. Journal of Political Economy, 103(4), 709­38.

Ribar, D. C., & Wilhelm, M. O. (2002). Altruistic and joy-of-giving motivations in charitable
       behavior. Journal of Political Economy, 110(2), 425-457.

Rose-Ackerman, S. (1982). Charitable giving and "Excessive" fundraising. Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, Vol. 97(2), 193-212.
                                                35
Samek, A. & Krieg, J. (2016). When charities compete: A laboratory experiment with
       simultaneous public goods. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics, 66, 40-
       57

Scharf, K. (2014). Impure prosocial motivation in charity provision: Warm-glow charities and
       implications for public funding. Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 114, 50-57.

Scharf, K., Smith, S., & Wilhelm, M. (2017) Lift and Shift: The Effect of Fundraising Interventions
       in Charity Space and Time.

Seira, E., Elizondo, A., & Laguna-Müggenburg, E. (2017). Are information disclosures effective?
       Evidence from the credit card market. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
       9(1), 277-307.




                                                36
                                                      Tables

                           Table 1: State Policies Encouraging Charitable Contributions

  Policy Type                         Description                                    States   Specific    Itemizers
                                                                                              Causes         Only
  Full or Partial Credit              20-100% credit on state income tax up to        12+       Yes        Yes/No
                                      specified threshold for charitable donations
  Check-off Program                   Donations to approved funds out of tax          30+       Yes          No
                                      refunds or liability directly on tax form
  Neighborhood Assistance Credit      Long-term support of local, community-          12+       Yes          Yes
                                      based charities (usually corporate taxes)
  State Deductions                    Extended limits or special rules for            15+     Yes/No       Yes/No
                                      deduction of charitable contributions
  Tuition Credits                     State scholarship programs for K-12;            13        Yes        Yes/No
                                      extracurriculars for public schools;
                                      50-100% credit on state income tax


Notes: The table describes state-level tax statutes aimed at encouraging charitable donations. Programs
include state income tax credits, tax deductions, and programs decreasing the transaction costs of giving.
Most programs are restricted to specific causes or charities. Arizona's CTC is the only one-to-one tax credit
for non-school donations to qualifying charities. Please note that some states do not levy corporate and/or
individual state income tax, reducing the number of possible state tax statutes.



                              Table 2: Description of Treatments in the Experiment

                         Charity                                                                          Information about
    Treatment          Recipient(s)    Choice Set                    Charity Types                       CTC and Eligibility
 Baseline (B)                 1        1 list of 10   mixed; 5 qualifying and 5 non-qualifying                     No
 Treatment 1 (T1)             1        1 list of 10   mixed; 5 qualifying and 5 non-qualifying                     Yes
 Treatment 2 (T2)             2        2 lists of 5   list 1: qualifying; list 2: non-qualifying                   No
 Treatment 3 (T3)             2        2 lists of 5   list 1: qualifying; list 2: non-qualifying                   Yes
 Treatment 4 (T4)             2        2 lists of 5   both lists mixed                                             No
 Treatment 5 (T5)             2        2 lists of 5   both lists mixed                                             Yes


Notes: The table describes the six treatments of the experiment. Each subject was assigned to only one of
the six treatments. Thus, it is a between subject design.




                                                         37
                        Table 3: Sample Sizes across Treatments in the Experiment

                                           Total     B     T1    T2     T3     T4     T5
                   Wave 1:
                    Complete                454     79     76    80     74     84    61
                    Incomplete              409
                    Useful Incomplete       205     40     28    31     37     28     41
                   Wave 2:
                    Complete                450     82     69    82     71     75    71
                     Incomplete             361
                     Useful Incomplete      142     21     28    23     19     30     21
                   Total:
                     Complete               904    161     145   162   145    159    132
                      Incomplete            770
                      Useful Incomplete     347     61     56    54     56     58     62


Notes: This table splits the sample by treatment and wave. We also categorize subjects as "Complete" when
they finish the entire online survey. Subjects are categorized as "Incomplete" is they exit the survey without
completing it fully. Among the Incomplete subjects, we categorize those who exit after having made the
allocation decision as "Useful Incomplete". We do not have demographic information for subjects who did
not complete the survey.




                                                      38
                             Table 4: Summary Statistics for the Pooled Sample

                                        B           T1          T2           T3           T4               T5    Total
All Decisions:
Subjects                              161          145         162         145           159           132        904
Subjects Donated                      137          111         130         119           133           106        736
Pr(Donated)                          85.1%        76.6%       80.2%       82.1%         83.6%         80.3%      81.4%
Fraction to Qualifying               60.5%       65.0%        51.4%       58.6%         52.8%         70.5%      59.3%
Fraction to Non-qualifying           39.5%       35.0%        48.6%       41.4%         47.2%         29.5%      40.7%
Mean Donation                        $49.11      $44.47       $49.73      $50.95        $52.23        $50.30     $49.50
Conditional Mean                     $57.71      $58.09       $61.98      $62.08        $62.44        $62.64     $60.79
Qualifying Charities:
Can Select                            0 or 1      0 or 1         1            1        0, 1 or 2     0, 1 or 2
Subjects Selected Any                  103          92          162         145          124           112        738
Subjects Selected One                  103          92          162         145           75            40        617
Subjects Selected Two                                                                     49            72        121
Subjects Donated                       87           70         127         118           102            88        592
Pr(Donated)                          84.5%        76.1%       78.4%       81.4%         82.3%         78.6%      80.2%
Subjects Donated to One                                                                   64            30
Pr(Donated to One)                                                                      51.6%         26.8%
Subjects Donated to Two                                                                   38            58
Pr(Donated to Two)                                                                      30.6%         51.8%
Mean Donation                        $29.70      $28.92       $25.57      $29.86        $27.58        $35.45     $29.33
Conditional Mean                     $54.97      $59.91       $32.62      $36.69        $42.99        $53.18     $44.79
Non-Qualifying Charities:
Can Select                            0 or 1      0 or 1         1            1        0,1 or 2      0,1 or 2
Subjects Selected Any                   58          53          162         145          110            60        588
Subjects Selected One                   58          53          162         145           75            40        533
Subjects Selected Two                                                                     35            20         55
Subjects Donated                       50           41         122         100            89            45        447
Pr(Donated)                          86.2%        77.4%       75.3%       69.0%         80.9%         75.0%      76.0%
Subjects Donated to One                                                                   61            29
Pr(Donated to One)                                                                      55.5%         48.3%
Subjects Donated to Two                                                                   28            16
Pr(Donated to Two)                                                                      25.5%         26.7%
Mean Donation                        $19.40      $15.54       $24.16      $21.10        $24.65        $14.85     $ 20.20
Conditional Mean                     $62.48      $54.98       $32.08      $30.59        $44.04        $43.56     $40.79


             Notes: : Figures in the table represent summary statistics across the different treatments.
                                                         39
                                Tables: Estimates for Pooled Data

                            Table 5: Effect of Information Treatment on Donation

                                                                Pooled     Pooled with Demographic Controls
  1(Information Treatment)                                     -4.8603                   -6.7569*
                                                               (3.5652)                  (3.5570)
  1(Indicator for Treatment with Multiple Recipients)           1.7312                     0.4358
                                                               (2.9331)                  (2.9171)
  Information Treatment × Multiple Recipients Indicator         4.6883                     6.5963
                                                               (4.3992)                  (4.3751)
  1(Female)                                                                             6.8362***
                                                                                          (2.1068)
  1(Below Age 35)                                                                          -1.2378
                                                                                          (2.7190)
  1(Above Age 65)                                                                        5.7966**
                                                                                          (2.5532)
  1(Annual Income below $50,000)                                                        -9.4282***
                                                                                          (2.4667)
  1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                                                          -3.4799
                                                                                          (2.5900)
  Fixed Effects:
  Wave Fixed Effects                                              Yes                       Yes
  R2                                                             0.017                     0.044
  N                                                               904                       904


Notes: The dependent variable is the aggregate amount donated by an individual in each wave, pooled over treatments.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level




                                                         40
          Table 6: Effect of Information Treatment on Participation (Likelihood of being a Donor)

                                                                Pooled     Pooled with Demographic Controls
  1(Information Treatment)                                    -0.0874*                  -0.1031**
                                                              (0.0450)                   (0.0450)
  1(Indicator for Treatment with Multiple Recipients)          -0.0328                    -0.0428
                                                              (0.0353)                   (0.0351)
  Information Treatment × Multiple Recipients Indicator        0.0818                    0.0968*
                                                              (0.0551)                   (0.0549)
  1(Female)                                                                             0.0889***
                                                                                         (0.0261)
  1(Below Age 35)                                                                         0.0514
                                                                                         (0.0323)
  1(Above Age 65)                                                                         0.0178
                                                                                         (0.0319)
  1(Annual Income below $50,000)                                                        -0.0748**
                                                                                         (0.0307)
  1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                                                         -0.0468
                                                                                         (0.0322)
  Fixed Effects:
  Wave Fixed Effects                                             Yes                       Yes
  R2                                                            0.010                     0.029
  N                                                              904                       904


Notes: The dependent variable is a binary indicator which takes the value 1 when a positive amount is allocated for
donation, and 0 otherwise. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level




                                                        41
          Table 7: Effect of Information Treatment on Fraction of Donation to Qualifying Charities

                                                                    Pooled       Pooled with Demographic Controls
  1(Information Treatment)                                          -0.0582                      -0.0707
                                                                   (0.0573)                     (0.0574)
  1(Indicator for Treatment with Multiple Recipients)            -0.1141***                   -0.1246***
                                                                   (0.0436)                     (0.0435)
  Information Treatment × Multiple Recipients Indicator           0.1530**                     0.1660**
                                                                   (0.0644)                     (0.0645)
  1(Female)                                                                                      0.0388
                                                                                                (0.0281)
  1(Below Age 35)                                                                                0.0119
                                                                                                (0.0357)
  1(Above Age 65)                                                                               0.0635*
                                                                                                (0.0343)
  1(Annual Income below $50,000)                                                                 -0.0494
                                                                                                (0.0327)
  1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                                                                -0.0504
                                                                                                (0.0344)
  Fixed Effects:
  Wave Fixed Effects                                                  Yes                         Yes
  R2                                                                 0.013                       0.021
  N                                                                   904                         904


Notes: The fraction is defined as donation to qualifying charities over the total donation of a subject.This is closer to a
measure of conditional giving to qualifying charities. For subjects who did not donate at all, we code the fraction as
zero, while keeping them in the sample.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level.




                                                            42
                             Extensive Margin Effects : Charity Selection

Table 8: Effect of Information Treatment on Selecting a Qualifying/ Non-Qualifying Charity for T4 & T5

                                    Qualifying       Qualifying Charity      Non-qualifying     Non-qualifying Charity
                                     Charity     with Demographic Controls      Charity       with Demographic Controls
  1(Information Treatment)            0.0638               0.0596             -0.2269***             -0.2279***
                                     (0.0449)            (0.0450)               (0.0560)               (0.0561)
  1(Female)                                               -0.0439                                       -0.0808
                                                         (0.0467)                                      (0.0563)
  1(Below Age 35)                                         -0.0611                                      0.1337*
                                                         (0.0673)                                      (0.0741)
  1(Above Age 65)                                         -0.0180                                       -0.0639
                                                         (0.0524)                                      (0.0638)
  1(Annual Income below $50,000)                          -0.0090                                        0.0350
                                                         (0.0596)                                      (0.0664)
  1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                          0.0567                                        0.0127
                                                         (0.0547)                                      (0.0689)
  Fixed Effects:
  List Fixed Effects                   Yes                 Yes                    Yes                   Yes
  Wave Fixed Effects                   Yes                 Yes                    Yes                   Yes
  R2                                  0.022               0.037                  0.117                 0.139
  N                                    291                 291                    291                   291


Notes: This table includes T4 and T5 treatments only since these treatments allow the choice of more than one charity
of similar type.
The dependent variable is a binary indicator which takes the value 1 when a qualifying(non-qualifying) charity is
chosen, and 0 otherwise.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level




                                                           43
       Table 9: Effect of Information Treatment on Selecting a Specific Number of Qualifying Charities

                                      Chose Zero   Chose Zero    Chose One    Chose One    Chose Two    Chose Two
  1(Information Treatment)             -0.0638      -0.0596     -0.1630***    -0.1683***   0.2269***    0.2279***
                                       (0.0449)     (0.0450)     (0.0563)      (0.0562)     (0.0560)     (0.0561)
  1(Female)                                          0.0439                    -0.1246*                    0.0808
                                                    (0.0467)                   (0.0584)                  (0.0563)
  1(Below Age 35)                                    0.0611                     0.0726                   -0.1337*
                                                    (0.0673)                   (0.0797)                  (0.0741)
  1(Above Age 65)                                    0.0180                     -0.0819                    0.0639
                                                    (0.0524)                   (0.0634)                  (0.0638)
  1(Annual Income below $50,000)                     0.0090                     0.0260                    -0.0350
                                                    (0.0596)                   (0.0683)                  (0.0664)
  1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                   -0.0567                     0.0694                    -0.0127
                                                    (0.0547)                   (0.0710)                  (0.0689)
  Fixed Effects:
  List Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
  Wave Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
  R2                                    0.022         0.037        0.052        0.079        0.117        0.139
  N                                      291           291          291          291          291          291


Notes: This table includes T4 and T5 treatments only since these treatments allow the choice of more than one charity
of similar type.
The dependent variable is an indicator which takes values between 0 and 2 indicating the number of qualifying
charity/charities being selected.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level




                                                         44
            Intensive Margin: Allocation of Dollars across Charity Types

         Table 10: Effect of Information Treatment on Fraction of Donation to Qualifying Charities

                                                      T2 vs. T3       T2 vs. T3        T4 vs. T5        T4 vs. T5
   1(Information Treatment)                           0.0800**         0.0793**         0.1177**        0.1164**
                                                      (0.0318)         (0.0313)         (0.0497)        (0.0501)
   1(Female)                                                            0.0437                            0.0422
                                                                       (0.0312)                         (0.0510)
   1(Below Age 35)                                                     0.0815**                          -0.0560
                                                                       (0.0369)                         (0.0645)
   1(Above Age 65)                                                     0.1022**                           0.0242
                                                                       (0.0432)                         (0.0597)
   1(Annual Income below $50,000)                                      -0.0656*                          -0.0431
                                                                       (0.0362)                         (0.0604)
   1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                                      0.0002                            0.0003
                                                                       (0.0413)                         (0.0630)
   Fixed Effects:
   List Fixed Effects                                     Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
   Wave Fixed Effects                                     Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
   R2                                                   0.033            0.071            0.047            0.054
   N                                                     307              307              291              291

Notes: We consider treatments T2 to T5 here since subjects can allocate their endowment across two types of charities
in these treatments.
The fraction is defined as donation to qualifying charities over the total donation of a subject. We consider only donors
in this sample i.e. people who have made a positive donation.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level




                                                           45
                                                Figures

                                Figure 1: Criteria for Qualifying Charities




Notes: Overview of the criteria used by the Arizona Department of Revenue to dermine the qualifying status
of charities for the CTC. Qualifying charities must meet all criteria and they must be registered with the
Department of Revenue.




                                                    46
                                               Figure 2: Charitable Giving Trends


                                              Normalized Giving Trends
                                                 (Base Year: 1998)
                          1.8




                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                   40
                          1.6




                                                                                                        Tax Credit Claimed
           Total Giving




                                                                                                   30
                          1.4




                                                                                                   20
                          1.2




                                                                                                   10
                          1




                                                                                               1
                                1998   2000   2002   2004    2006    2008    2010    2012   2014

                                                     Total Giving USA
                                                     Total Giving Arizona
                                                     Arizona Charitable Tax Credit



Notes: We plot giving in three categories from 1998 to 2015: (i) all giving to registered charities in the US;
(ii) giving to registered charities in Arizona; and (iii) giving claimed through the CTC. All annual totals are
normalized to giving in 1998 in the respective category.




                                                              47
                         Figure 3: Example Allocation Task with Two Charities




Notes: Example allocation task. Subjects receive an endowment of $80 and can freely allocate the amount
between themselves and one or two charities that they chose on the previous page of the survey. The survey
software indicates whether a charity qualifies for the CTC only in information treatments.




                                                   48
                       Figure 4: Overview of Timeline and Procedures in the Experiment

                                Information     Charity          Allocation
                                                                                    Receipt
                                about CTC       Choice             Task

           Basic Demographics                                                                 Giving/Tax Behavior




Notes: The experiment consists of three main phases. First, after consenting to participation, subjects answer
basic questions about individual characteristics. Second, subjects face the randomized decision task, which include
information about the CTC in some treatments, the choice of one or two recipient charities depending on the treatment,
the allocation of the endowment between the subject and the recipient(s), and a receipt in case of a positive donation.
Third, we ask subjects about their past donation behavior, knowledge and use of tax credits, and their tax filing behavior.
The two question blocks are identical across treatments.




                                                            49
                                              Appendix

Survey Design and Implementation: Added Detail

       Our project progressed in five steps. First, we designed and developed the survey in
Qualtrics' software. The final survey contains all components of the experimental design that we
described in the previous section. Second, Qualtrics performed an internal quality control of the
survey. This procedure ensured that the survey ran properly on different platforms and devices.
Qualtrics also made sure that all questions follow current best-practice in survey design. After the
quality control, Qualtrics conducted a "soft launch" with about ten percent of the target sample.
The soft launch determined the expected survey duration, looked for unexpected technical
difficulties, and allowed us to review the data format before the final rollout. Both waves of the
experiment contained a soft launch.

       Third, after a successful soft launch, Qualtrics opened the survey for the remaining sample.
Recruitment was automated by the panel. The panel sent out a survey link to all registered members
that met the criteria described above. Survey links were sent out in several sampling waves to
ensure a representative sample based on the specific parameters ­ age, gender, and income ­ that
we had specified. Members who chose to participate were subsequently assigned a unique and
random identifier that we recorded in the data. Subjects could complete the survey on their
preferred device at home or wherever they clicked on the link. If they exited the survey before
completion, they could return to it at a later point. All decisions, including the allocation task, were
automatically recorded by the software.

       Fourth, Qualtrics performed several quality tests on the recorded decisions and shared the
resulting data set with us. We received responses for all completed surveys and all surveys that
were partially completed. Partial completions were from participants who exited the survey before
the end and never returned to finish the remaining questions before the target sample was collected.
Incomplete responses vary in terms of when the subject exited, although the majority of exists
happened after the allocation task allowing us to use incomplete responses in some of our analyses.

       Finally, we implemented payments to subjects and charities based on decisions in the
allocation task. The experimental design includes two main forms of payment: (i) incentive
payments based on the amount of the endowment not allocated to charities; and (ii) donations to
charities based on the subjects' decisions. These incentive payments were implemented in
partnership with the panel provider and include a small show-up fee for completing surveys
through the panel. Although many surveys do not include payments beyond the show-up fee, it is
common to include additional payments for projects that include extraordinary survey elements,
such as voice memos, videos, or diaries.

         Our partner panel pays subjects in "e-Rewards currency", an online currency that can be
used to purchase goods as well as gift cards from several retailers in an online portal. 1 While e-
Rewards currency in not cash-equivalent, its many uses and familiarity of panel participants with
the currency make it an attractive payment method. We thus relied on this existing infrastructure
to pay subjects at the end of each wave of the experiment. 2

         To make payments to recipient charities, we developed a procedure that complied with
the university's IRS compliance policies and the statutes of the CTC whereby the research team
acted as an "umbrella organization" that directed donations to a qualifying charity on behalf of a
donor. 3 To do so, we tallied the total contributions received by each charity in the experiment
and created a separate invoice from the charity to Georgia State University for the donated
amount. After receiving W-9 information from each charity, we set up a vendor profile and
processed all donations which could be used by the charities to provide any service within the
mission of the organization.
         For subjects who shared their endowment with a selected recipient, our software provided
receipts that were designed in collaboration with the Arizona Department of Revenue and could
be used to claim the CTC. The receipts reinforce that a subject's decisions are consequential and
impact not only immediate earnings, but also future tax liabilities should they donate to a




1
  See https://www.e-rewards.com/rewards.do for a list of all possible uses of e-Rewards. We show an example of
current options as of April 2018 in Figure C3.
2 At the end of each wave, we received the decisions for each subject using a random identifier. From this, we

created a list of payments for each ID number based upon the amount kept by that subject in the allocation task. The
panel provider used the ID number and list to distribute e-Rewards to the subjects.
3
  See https://www.azdor.gov/About/FAQs/CharitableTaxCredit.aspx for details. The CTC tax statute includes a
provision for umbrella-type organizations: "Taxpayers may donate to a Qualifying Charitable Organization or
Qualifying Foster Care Organization through an umbrella-type organization provided that the donation is designated
to be directed to a Qualifying Charitable Organization or Qualifying Foster Care Organization that is certified by the
Department."
qualifying cause. 4 The receipt summarizes the donation amount, the recipient charity or charities,
information about the donor, and information about the research team. To match documentation
provided by charities to their donors outside the study, we implemented a software feature that
allows subjects to enter personal information, such as their name and address, in a textbox at the
bottom of the receipt. Subjects were able to save the completed receipts locally as a PDF file or
print it immediately for their tax records. As we did not want to record personally identifiable
data, the software never recorded the entered information and required subjects to delete all
information from the textbox before proceeding the next section of the survey. 5
Threats to Identification
         As noted in the main text, there are two potential threats to identification in our experiment.
First, subjects in our experiment may have a strong preference for select causes or a history of
giving to particular organizations that could influence allocations in our modified dictator game
independent of treatment. Given that past donors are more likely donate and provide larger gifts
than others, imbalance in the mix of qualifying and non-qualifying charities that subjects have
supported in the past could bias our estimated treatment effect. A second threat to identification,
centers around differences in baseline awareness of the CTC across treatments. As our treatment
of interest is information about the CTC and whether donations to a potential recipient would
qualify for a credit under the program, imbalance in awareness of the program could compromise
identification and lead to biased estimates of our treatment effects.

         We attempt to address the first concern using data from Table A1 which summarizes
information from questions in the second block of the survey asking subjects whether or not they
had given to each of the twenty potential recipient charities in the past. We use this data to generate
three metrics of interest: (i) the number of past donations made to each of the twenty potential
recipients; (ii) the number of past donations made to a charity that was included in subjects'




4
  We also provide receipts for donations to non-qualifying charities as such donations are eligible for federal tax
deductions if the subject were to itemize. Figure C2 provides an example of the receipts that were provided to
subjects.
5
  In practice, we required subjects to enter "0" in the textbox before proceeding to the next section. Any other
content included in the textbox would prohibit the subjects from continuing with the survey. We described the
process on the previous page of the survey and provided error messages detailing the necessary steps to continue
should the subject fail to clear the textbox.
feasible choice set; and (iii) conditioned on observing a charity that they had supported in the past,
the number of subjects who selected and gave to that charity in the experiment.

                                   [Insert Table A1 about here]

       Table A1 highlights several patterns calling into question such concerns. First, as noted in
the first column of the table, subjects in our experiment reported making 838 past donations to the
set of charities included in analysis. More importantly, however, these donations were relatively
split amongst qualifying and non-qualifying organizations; 455 or approximately 54.3% of the past
donations were made to qualifying organizations with the remaining 45.7% going to non-
qualifying organizations. Second, we observe a similar pattern if we restrict the analysis to past
donations made to charitable causes included in the feasible set of potential recipients. In total,
subjects in experiment reported 319 donations to organizations that were included in the set of
potential recipients they observed in the first stage of the modified dictator game. Of these,
approximately 61 percent (or 233) were donations made to qualifying organizations.

       Finally, we can examine the extent to which past support for a charity impacts the
likelihood that the subject selects that organization as a recipient in the experiment. As noted in
the third column of Table A1, such organizations are selected as a recipient in the modified dictator
game in approximately 48.5 percent (155 out of 313) of all such possible instances. Interestingly,
if we split this analysis to focus on the selection of qualifying and non-qualifying organizations
separately, we find that subjects are more likely to select a non-qualifying organization that they
have supported in the past than they are to select a qualifying organization that they have supported
in the past. Of the 86 instances in our data where a subject has the opportunity to select a non-
qualifying organization that they have donated to in the past, this organization is selected half the
time. In contrast, when a subject has the opportunity to select a qualifying organization that they
have given to in the past, they only do so 43.8 percent of the time.

       As an additional check, we estimate a series of linear probability models that examine if
there is any correlation between a subject having made a past donation to (i) one of the twenty
potential recipient organizations in our experiment and (ii) one of the ten organizations observed
as part of their feasible choice set and indicators for the treatment to which the subject was
assigned. Results from these models are presented in the final two columns of Table A3. As noted
in the table, there is no significant correlation amongst treatment assignment and our outcomes of
interest.

           Viewed in its totality, these data patterns suggest that subjects in our experiment cared
about the causes selected as potential recipients in the experiment. However, there is no clear
evidence that subjects cared more about qualifying organizations than non-qualifying
organizations or vice versa. Furthermore, we find that past support for causes in our experiment
is balanced across treatments. 6 Finally, there is no evidence that subjects are more likely to select
a qualifying organization that they have given to in the past than they are to select a non-qualifying
organization that they have supported in the past. Hence, subject's past preference towards a
charity and observing those charities in the current choice set does not seem to drive behavior in
our experiment. However, as described later, we control for such factors in our robustness checks
and show that doing so does not change the qualitative nature of our findings.

           A second threat to identification relates to awareness and past use of the CTC amongst
subjects in our experiment ­ a characteristic that is ex ante unobservable. As our treatment of
interest is information about the CTC and whether or not donations to a potential recipient would
qualify for a credit under the program, one might expect that the effect of the intervention could
depend upon baseline knowledge of the CTC. If this is indeed true, imbalance in prior awareness
of the credit program across treatments could compromise identification and lead to biased
estimates of our treatment effects.

           We attempt to address this concern using data from questions in the second block of the
survey asking subjects if they were (i) aware of the CTC program prior to the experiment and (ii)
had claimed a credit through the CTC in the past. Table A2 summarizes the response to these
questions by presenting the percentage of respondents within a treatment who answered that they
were aware of the CTC prior to the survey (Columns 1 and 2) and, conditioned on being aware of
the CTC, had claimed a credit through the program in the past (Columns 3 and 4). As noted in the
first column of the table, almost forty of our subjects (348 out of 903) reported that they were
unaware of the CTC prior to completing our survey. Importantly, however, we see no meaningful
variation in this fraction across paired treatments. For example, there is 1.3 perecentage point



6
    Table A4 summarizes the raw data used to estimate these models.
difference in the fraction of subjects reporting that they were unaware of the CTC prior to the
experiment when comparing our baseline treatment and treatment T1. While this difference is
larger for the two remaining paired treatments (T2 vs T3 and T4 vs T5), neither is statistically
significant using a two-sample test of proportions.

                                   [Insert Table A2 about here]

       Interestingly, a significant fraction of subjects who were aware of the CTC prior to our
experiment reported that they have not made any claims through the program. Of the subjects who
reported that they were aware of the CTC prior to the experiment, approximately 35 percent (or
192 out of 555) have not made a claim through the program. Importantly, however, we see no
significant differences in the proportion of such subjects across our paired treatments. For
example, although there is an approximately 10 percentage point difference in this proportion
across treatments T4 and T5, this difference is not statistically significant at any meaningful level.

       As an additional balance test, we estimate a series of linear regressions exploring the
correlation between our two outcomes of interest: (i) past awareness of the CTC and (ii) past claims
through the CTC on indicators for the treatment to which the subject was assigned. Results from
these regressions are presented in the first two columns of Appendix Table A3. As noted in the
table, there is no significant correlation between treatment assignment and either outcome.

       Viewed in its totality, data from Table A2 call into question concerns regarding bias
relating to imbalance in prior awareness and use of the CTC across paired treatments. Moreover,
data in the table suggest that there is a non-trivial fraction of our subjects who were unaware of
the CTC program prior to our experiment. However, as described later, we control for such
factors in our robustness checks and show that doing so does not change the qualitative nature of
our findings.
               Table A1: Past Donation Behavior and Current Choice by Charity in the Experiment

                                                              Had Previously
                                        # Who Donated to                             Gave to charity
                                                                Donated to
             Charities                     Charity in                               Conditional on Past
                                                                Charity in
                                            the Past                                    Donation
                                                             Current Choice Set
Qualifying Charities:
Arizona's Children Association                 20                     4                      2
Community Food Bank                            143                    40                     22
Phoenix Rescue Mission                         45                     22                     10
Pima Council on Aging                           4                     4                      1
Southwest Behavioral Health Services            7                     6                      2
Southwest Human Development                     2                     0                      0
St. Mary's Food Bank                           149                    94                     48
Teen Lifeline                                   8                      6                      4
Tucson Urban League                             3                      3                      1
United Food Bank                               64                     54                     22
Non-qualifying Charities:
Arizona Community Foundation                   15                      3                      0
Arizona Youth Partnership                      41                      4                      1
Association for Supportive Child Care          12                      2                      1
Childhelp                                       19                     0                      0
Feed My Hungry Children                        106                     4                      4
Food for the Hungry                            45                     10                      1
Hospice of the Valley                          56                     20                     13
Make-A-Wish Foundation                         97                     42                     23
NARBHA                                          2                     1                      0
Pima Prevention Partnership                     0                     0                      0
Total                                          838                   319                    155


   Notes: This table summarizes information on past donations of subjects to the selected charities. It also
   provides information on the extent to which past donation to a charity impacts the likelihood of the same
   organization being chosen as a recipient in the experiment.
                  Table A2: Credit Awareness and Credit Claimed Before the Experiment

                                Not Aware     Aware    Not Claimed     Claimed
                           B       38.5%      61.5%       37.8%         62.2%
                           T1      37.2%      62.8%       40.7%         59.3%
                           T2      47.5%      52.5%       36.5%         63.5%
                           T3      37.2%      62.8%       35.2%         64.8%
                           T4      31.4%      68.6%       30.3%         69.7%
                           T5      38.9%      61.1%       41.3%         58.8%


Notes: The credit awareness percentages in each treatment cell is out of the entire sample (903). However,
the Credit Claimed percentages are out of the sample of those who were aware of the credit. We find one
subject who did not answer this question since these were administered after the experiment. Thus, the total
sample size in this case is 554, one less than the total number of subjects who are aware of the tax credit,
555.
                                               Table A3: Balance of Observables




                       Credit Awareness   Credit Claimed   Past Donation to Any Charity   Past Donation to Any Charity faced in the Choice Set
  T1                        0.0121            -0.0300                0.0313                                     0.0399
                           (0.0556)          (0.0717)               (0.0573)                                   (0.0561)
  T2                        -0.0828           0.0440                 0.0713                                     0.0265
                           (0.0695)          (0.0893)               (0.0717)                                   (0.0694)
  T3                        0.0159            0.0525                 0.0046                                     -0.0304
                           (0.0684)          (0.0847)               (0.0705)                                   (0.0670)
  T4                        0.0917            0.1042                 0.0206                                     -0.1029
                           (0.0659)          (0.0817)               (0.0716)                                   (0.0672)
  T5                        0.0095            -0.0021                0.0536                                     -0.0583
                           (0.0707)          (0.0891)               (0.0727)                                   (0.0683)
  Fixed Effects:
  List Fixed Effects         Yes               Yes                     Yes                                        Yes
  Wave Fixed Effects         Yes               Yes                     Yes                                        Yes
  R2                        0.019             0.009                   0.006                                      0.015
  N                          903               554                     904                                        904


Notes: This table summarizes the balance of four characteristics that we record across the treatments. We regress the
binary indicator variable of each characteristic on the indicator for the different treatments
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level
                         Table A4: Past Donation Behavior and Current Choice

                                               Baseline    T1    T2     T3    T4    T5     Total
        Sample Size (N)                        161         145   162    145   159   132    904
        Past Donation to any Charity (N)       71          69    80     63    77    68     428
        Saw Past Charity in Choice set (N)     59          59    56     43    53    49     319
        Donated to Past Charity (N)            24          28    28     23    28    24     155


Notes: This table shows the link between past donations and the likelihood of donation to charities in the
current choice set by treatments.
                                                                 Figure A1: Fraction of Qualifying and Non-qualifying Charities Selected




                                                           100
           Fraction of recipients selected by donors (%)
                                                           80
                                                           60
                                                           40
                                                           20
                                                           0




                                                                     Baseline      T1             T2        T3           T4              T5

                                                                                     Chosen Qualifying           Chosen Non-qualifying




Notes: This graph shows the proportion of qualifying and non-qualifying charities selected in each treatment.
                                                 Figure A2: Propensity to Donate by Qualifying and Non-qualifying Charities
                                               100
                                               80
          Fraction of Positive Donations (%)
                                               60
                                               40
                                               20
                                               0




                                                       Baseline      T1           T2          T3           T4         T5

                                                                             Qualifying            Non-qualifying




Notes: This graph shows the likelihood of donation to qualifying and non-qualifying charities in each
treatment.
     Figure A3: Fraction of Positive Donations Directed to Qualifying and Non-qualifying Charities
                                               100
                                               80
          Fraction of Positive Donations (%)
                                               60
                                               40
                                               20
                                               0




                                                     Baseline     T1              T2     T3            T4             T5

                                                                Donation to Qualifying        Donation to Non-qualifying




Notes: This graph shows the proportion of donations that went to qualifying and non-qualifying charities
respectively out of the total number of donations.
    Figure A4: Fraction of Total Donations (in $) Directed to Qualifying and Non-qualifying Charities
                                      100
                                      80
          Fraction of Donations (%)
                                      60
                                      40
                                      20
                                      0




                                            Baseline      T1              T2     T3            T4             T5

                                                       Donations to Qualifying        Donations to Non-qualifying




Notes: This graph shows the the fraction of their endowment subjects allocated to qualifying and non-
qualifying charities on an average.
                                     Appendix B: Robustness Checks
           Table B1: Effect of Information Treatment on Making a Donation to a Qualifying Charity

                                                     T2 vs. T3       T2 vs. T3        T4 vs. T5      T4 vs. T5
   1(Information Treatment)                            0.0340           0.0315             0.0269     0.0255
                                                      (0.0455)        (0.0452)            (0.0559)   (0.0565)
   1(Female)                                                          0.0949**                        0.0100
                                                                      (0.0463)                       (0.0585)
   1(Below Age 35)                                                    0.1313**                       -0.0224
                                                                      (0.0539)                       (0.0778)
   1(Above Age 65)                                                      0.0847                       -0.0234
                                                                      (0.0564)                       (0.0662)
   1(Annual Income below $50,000)                                      -0.0553                       -0.0193
                                                                      (0.0540)                       (0.0701)
   1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                                     -0.0116                        0.0232
                                                                      (0.0598)                       (0.0711)
   Fixed Effects:
   List Fixed Effects                                    Yes             Yes                Yes        Yes
   Wave Fixed Effects                                    Yes             Yes                Yes        Yes
   R2                                                   0.008           0.040              0.014      0.016
   N                                                     307             307                291        291

Notes: The dependent variable is the aggregate donation (in $) to a qualifying charity.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level
        Table B2: Effect of Information Treatment on Making a Donation to a Non-Qualifying Charity

                                                   T2 vs. T3       T2 vs. T3       T4 vs. T5   T4 vs. T5
   1(Information Treatment)                         -0.0672         -0.0702       -0.2114***   -0.2109***
                                                    (0.0514)       (0.0506)        (0.0571)     (0.0573)
   1(Female)                                                       0.1247**                      -0.0100
                                                                   (0.0520)                     (0.0586)
   1(Below Age 35)                                                   0.0680                      0.1008
                                                                   (0.0627)                     (0.0784)
   1(Above Age 65)                                                  -0.0626                     -0.1155*
                                                                   (0.0663)                     (0.0650)
   1(Annual Income below $50,000)                                   -0.0530                      0.0118
                                                                   (0.0595)                     (0.0702)
   1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                                  -0.0478                      0.0186
                                                                   (0.0659)                     (0.0696)
   Fixed Effects:
   List Fixed Effects                                  Yes            Yes              Yes        Yes
   Wave Fixed Effects                                  Yes            Yes              Yes        Yes
   R2                                                0.015           0.049            0.075      0.096
   N                                                  307             307              291        291

Notes: The dependent variable is the aggregate donation (in $) to a non-qualifying charity.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level
          Appendix B : Robustness Checks with Inclusion of Incompletes
Note : The number of "useful incompletes" in our sample that we include for this analysis is 347. Thus the
 total sample size is 1251 (904+347). These are people who made the donation decision but dropped out
  before completing the experiment. We do not have demographic information for these people. Thus in
column 2 with demographic controls we merely see the number of completes. This serves as a quick check
       to see whether including the incompletes in column 1 leads to results different from Column 2.



                            Table B3: Effect of Information Treatment on Donation

                                                                Pooled     Pooled with Demographic Controls
  1(Information Treatment)                                     -3.5697                   -6.7569*
                                                               (2.9481)                  (3.5570)
  1(Indicator for Treatment with Multiple Recipients)           3.4374                     0.4358
                                                               (2.4201)                  (2.9171)
  Information Treatment × Multiple Recipients Indicator         3.6869                     6.5963
                                                               (3.5960)                  (4.3751)
  1(Female)                                                                             6.8362***
                                                                                          (2.1068)
  1(Below Age 35)                                                                          -1.2378
                                                                                          (2.7190)
  1(Above Age 65)                                                                        5.7966**
                                                                                          (2.5532)
  1(Annual Income below $50,000)                                                        -9.4282***
                                                                                          (2.4667)
  1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                                                          -3.4799
                                                                                          (2.5900)
  Fixed Effects:
  Wave Fixed Effects                                              Yes                       Yes
  R2                                                             0.015                     0.044
  N                                                              1,251                      904


Notes: The dependent variable is the aggregate amount donated by an individual in each wave, pooled over treatments.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level
         Table B4: Effect of Information Treatment on Participation (Likelihood of being a Donor)

                                                                Pooled     Pooled with Demographic Controls
  1(Information Treatment)                                    -0.0659*                  -0.1031**
                                                              (0.0348)                   (0.0450)
  1(Indicator for Treatment with Multiple Recipients)          -0.0179                    -0.0428
                                                              (0.0271)                   (0.0351)
  Information Treatment × Multiple Recipients Indicator        0.0640                    0.0968*
                                                              (0.0422)                   (0.0549)
  1(Female)                                                                             0.0889***
                                                                                         (0.0261)
  1(Below Age 35)                                                                         0.0514
                                                                                         (0.0323)
  1(Above Age 65)                                                                         0.0178
                                                                                         (0.0319)
  1(Annual Income below $50,000)                                                        -0.0748**
                                                                                         (0.0307)
  1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                                                         -0.0468
                                                                                         (0.0322)
  Fixed Effects:
  Wave Fixed Effects                                             Yes                       Yes
  R2                                                            0.011                     0.029
  N                                                             1,251                      904


Notes: The dependent variable is a binary indicator which takes the value 1 when a positive amount is allocated for
donation, and 0 otherwise. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level
         Table B5: Effect of Information Treatment on Fraction of Donation to Qualifying Charities

                                                                    Pooled       Pooled with Demographic Controls
  1(Information Treatment)                                          -0.0326                      -0.0707
                                                                   (0.0487)                     (0.0574)
  1(Indicator for Treatment with Multiple Recipients)            -0.1018***                   -0.1246***
                                                                   (0.0370)                     (0.0435)
  Information Treatment × Multiple Recipients Indicator           0.1200**                     0.1660**
                                                                   (0.0544)                     (0.0645)
  1(Female)                                                                                      0.0388
                                                                                                (0.0281)
  1(Below Age 35)                                                                                0.0119
                                                                                                (0.0357)
  1(Above Age 65)                                                                               0.0635*
                                                                                                (0.0343)
  1(Annual Income below $50,000)                                                                 -0.0494
                                                                                                (0.0327)
  1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                                                                -0.0504
                                                                                                (0.0344)
  Fixed Effects:
  Wave Fixed Effects                                                  Yes                         Yes
  R2                                                                 0.011                       0.021
  N                                                                  1,251                        904


Notes: The fraction is defined as donation to qualifying charities over the total donation of a subject.This is closer to a
measure of conditional giving to qualifying charities. For subjects who did not donate at all, we code the fraction as
zero, while keeping them in the sample.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level.
       Table B6: Effect of Information Treatment on Selecting a Qualifying/ Non-Qualifying Charity

                                    Qualifying       Qualifying Charity      Non-qualifying     Non-qualifying Charity
                                     Charity     with Demographic Controls      Charity       with Demographic Controls
  1(Information Treatment)            0.0474               0.0596             -0.2030***             -0.2279***
                                     (0.0400)            (0.0450)               (0.0464)               (0.0561)
  1(Female)                                               -0.0439                                       -0.0808
                                                         (0.0467)                                      (0.0563)
  1(Below Age 35)                                         -0.0611                                      0.1337*
                                                         (0.0673)                                      (0.0741)
  1(Above Age 65)                                         -0.0180                                       -0.0639
                                                         (0.0524)                                      (0.0638)
  1(Annual Income below $50,000)                          -0.0090                                        0.0350
                                                         (0.0596)                                      (0.0664)
  1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                          0.0567                                        0.0127
                                                         (0.0547)                                      (0.0689)
  Fixed Effects:
  List Fixed Effects                   Yes                 Yes                    Yes                   Yes
  Wave Fixed Effects                   Yes                 Yes                    Yes                   Yes
  R2                                  0.014               0.037                  0.098                 0.139
  N                                    411                 291                    411                   291


Notes: This table includes T4 and T5 treatments only since these treatments allow the choice of more than one charity
of similar type.
The dependent variable is a binary indicator which takes the value 1 when a qualifying(non-qualifying) charity is
chosen, and 0 otherwise.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level
    Table B7: Effect of Information Treatment on Selecting a Specific Number of Qualifying Charities

                                      Chose Zero   Chose Zero    Chose One    Chose One    Chose Two    Chose Two
  1(Information Treatment)             -0.0474      -0.0596     -0.1555***    -0.1683***   0.2030***    0.2279***
                                       (0.0400)     (0.0450)     (0.0472)       (0.0562)    (0.0464)     (0.0561)
  1(Female)                                          0.0439                    -0.1246**                   0.0808
                                                    (0.0467)                    (0.0584)                 (0.0563)
  1(Below Age 35)                                    0.0611                      0.0726                  -0.1337*
                                                    (0.0673)                    (0.0797)                 (0.0741)
  1(Above Age 65)                                    0.0180                      -0.0819                   0.0639
                                                    (0.0524)                    (0.0634)                 (0.0638)
  1(Annual Income below $50,000)                     0.0090                      0.0260                   -0.0350
                                                    (0.0596)                    (0.0683)                 (0.0664)
  1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                   -0.0567                      0.0694                   -0.0127
                                                    (0.0547)                    (0.0710)                 (0.0689)
  Fixed Effects:
  List Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
  Wave Fixed Effects                     Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
  R2                                    0.014         0.037        0.050        0.079        0.098        0.139
  N                                      411           291          411          291          411          291


Notes: This table includes T4 and T5 treatments only since these treatments allow the choice of more than one charity
of similar type.
The dependent variable is an indicator which takes values between 0 and 2 indicating the number of qualifying
charity/charities being selected.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level
        Table B8: Effect of Information Treatment on Fraction of Donation to Qualifying Charities

                                                   T2 vs. T3        T2 vs. T3       T4 vs. T5        T4 vs. T5
   1(Information Treatment)                         0.0657**        0.0793**        0.1082***        0.1164**
                                                    (0.0255)        (0.0313)         (0.0410)        (0.0501)
   1(Female)                                                         0.0437                            0.0422
                                                                    (0.0312)                         (0.0510)
   1(Below Age 35)                                                  0.0815**                          -0.0560
                                                                    (0.0369)                         (0.0645)
   1(Above Age 65)                                                  0.1022**                           0.0242
                                                                    (0.0432)                         (0.0597)
   1(Annual Income below $50,000)                                   -0.0656*                          -0.0431
                                                                    (0.0362)                         (0.0604)
   1(Annual Income Above $100,000)                                   0.0002                            0.0003
                                                                    (0.0413)                         (0.0630)
   Fixed Effects:
   List Fixed Effects                                  Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
   Wave Fixed Effects                                  Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
   R2                                                 0.027           0.071            0.038           0.054
   N                                                   417             307              411             291

Notes: This table includes T4 and T5 treatments only since these treatments allow the choice of more than one charity
of similar type.
The dependent variable is an indicator which takes values between 0 and 2 indicating the number of qualifying
charity/charities being selected.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** denotes significance at the 1 percent level
** denotes significance at the 5 percent level
* denotes significance at the 10 percent level
                                           Appendix C

                                 Figure C1: Information about the CTC




Notes: Subjects in treatments with information about the CTC see this information page before choosing a
charity for the allocation task.
                  Figure C2: Example Receipt for Donation made to a Qualifying Charity




Notes: Example receipt for donations made to a qualifying charity. The text box at the bottom of the page
allows subjects to enter their personal information. Before proceeding to the next page of the survey, subjects
are forced to delete any personally identifiable data. A click on the button opens a standard print window
that provides functionalities for saving a PDF locally or printing the receipt directly.
                                Figure C3: e-Rewards Currency Portal




Notes: Subjects received all show-up fees and payments based on their allocation decision in e-Rewards
currency. e-Rewards can be used to purchase goods from online vendors.
                            Table C1: Charities in the Experiment, Part 1

              Charity                     Qualifies                    Mission Statement
                                        for the CTC
Arizona Community Foundation                No        Lead, serve and collaborate to mobilize enduring
                                                      philanthropy for a better Arizona.
Arizona Youth Partnership                   No        Arizona Youth Partnership's mission is to partner
                                                      with communities to cultivate healthy foundations
                                                      for youth and promote strong families.
Arizona's Children Association             Yes        The mission of Arizona's Children Association is
                                                      protecting children, empowering youth, and strength-
                                                      ening families.
Association for Supportive Child Care       No        Our mission is to enhance the quality of care for
                                                      children in Arizona.
Childhelp                                   No        Childhelp exists to meet the physical, emotional, edu-
                                                      cational, and spiritual needs of abused, neglected and
                                                      at-risk children. We focus our efforts on advocacy,
                                                      prevention, intervention, treatment and community
                                                      outreach.
Community Food Bank                        Yes        We change lives in the communities we serve by
                                                      feeding the hungry today, and building a healthy,
                                                      hunger-free tomorrow.
Feed My Hungry Children                     No        Feed My Hungry Children helps stand in the gap to
                                                      provide the things that needy, hurting people may
                                                      need to survive and become self-sufficient. Feed My
                                                      Hungry Children's humanitarian projects are com-
                                                      mitted to helping children and their families around
                                                      the world.
Food for the Hungry                         No        Together we follow God's call responding to human
                                                      suffering and graduating communities from extreme
                                                      poverty.
Hospice of the Valley                       No        Comfort and dignity as life nears its end.
Make-A-Wish Foundation                      No        We grant the wishes of children with life-threatening
                                                      medical conditions to enrich the human experience
                                                      with hope, strength, and joy.
NARBHA                                      No        Managing integrated health care with a conscience.
                                                      To be recognized as the innovative leader in manag-
                                                      ing superior behavioral health care.
Phoenix Rescue Mission                     Yes        Providing Christ-centered, life-transforming solu-
                                                      tions to persons facing hunger and homelessness.
                              Table C2: Charities in the Experiment, Part 2

                Charity                    Qualifies                    Mission Statement
                                         for the CTC
Pima Council on Aging                        Yes       Our mission is to provide dignity and respect for
                                                       aging, and to advocate for independence in the lives
                                                       of Pima County's older adults and their families, now
                                                       and for generations to come.
Pima Prevention Partnership                  No        Building partnerships with young people, families,
                                                       and communities to improve their quality of life.
Southwest Behavioral Health Services         Yes       We inspire people to feel better and reach their poten-
                                                       tial. Through helping people discover their strengths,
                                                       we improve our communities.
Southwest Human Development                  Yes       Southwest Human Development strengthens the
                                                       foundation Arizona's children need for a great start
                                                       in life.
St. Mary's Food Bank                         Yes       St. Mary's Food Bank serves to alleviate hunger
                                                       through the gathering and distribution of food while
                                                       encouraging self-sufficiency, collaboration, advo-
                                                       cacy and education.
Teen Lifeline                                Yes       To provide a safe, confidential, and crucial crisis ser-
                                                       vice where teens help teens make healthy decisions
                                                       together.
Tucson Urban League                          Yes       The mission of the Tucson Urban League is to ad-
                                                       vance economic and social prosperity for African
                                                       Americans and other underserved Tucson area resi-
                                                       dents by creating access to opportunity through ad-
                                                       vocacy, community partnerships, and programs and
                                                       services.
United Food Bank                             Yes       The mission of United Food Bank is to provide access
                                                       to nutritious food for those who are without - by
                                                       servicing as a community bridge between those who
                                                       want to help and those who are in need.
                                    Table C3: Charity Lists by Treatment

                           Subgroup 1                                 Subgroup 2
              Pair 1: Baseline and Treatment 1
              Arizona Community Foundation              Arizona's Children Association
              Hospice of the Valley                     Arizona Youth Partnership
              Make-A-Wish Foundation                    Association for Supportive Child Care
              NARBHA                                    Childhelp
              Phoenix Rescue Mission                    Community Food Bank
              Pima Council on Aging                     Feed My Hungry Children
              Pima Prevention Partnership               Food for the Hungry
              Southwest Behavioral Health Services      Teen Lifeline
              Southwest Human Development               Tucson Urban League
              St. Mary's Food Bank                      United Food Bank
              Pair 2: Treatment 2 and Treatment 3
              List 1
              Phoenix Rescue Mission                    Arizona Youth Partnership
              Pima Council on Aging                     Association for Supportive Child Care
              Southwest Behavioral Health Services      Childhelp
              Southwest Human Development               Feed My Hungry Children
              St. Mary's Food Bank                      Food for the Hungry
              List 2
              Arizona Community Foundation              Arizona's Children Association
              Hospice of the Valley                     Community Food Bank
              Make-A-Wish Foundation                    Teen Lifeline
              NARBHA                                    Tucson Urban League
              Pima Prevention Partnership               United Food Bank
              Pair 3: Treatment 4 and Treatment 5
              List 1
              Hospice of the Valley                     Arizona's Children Association
              Pima Prevention Partnership               Arizona Youth Partnership
              Southwest Behavioral Health Services      Childhelp
              Southwest Human Development               Community Food Bank
              St. Mary's Food Bank                      Feed My Hungry Children
              List 2
              Arizona Community Foundation              Association for Supportive Child Care
              Make-A-Wish Foundation                    Food for the Hungry
              NARBHA                                    Teen Lifeline
              Phoenix Rescue Mission                    Tucson Urban League
              Pima Council on Aging                     United Food Bank


Notes: Subjects were randomly assigned to a treatment. Within each treatment, subjects were subsequently
assigned to one of two subgroups that differed in terms of the charity list(s) from which subjects could choose
the recipient(s) in the allocation task. Each treatment pair contained the same lists of charities.
