                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     WHEN COERCIVE ECONOMIES FAIL:
      THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF THE US SOUTH AFTER THE BOLL WEEVIL

                                     James J. Feigenbaum
                                     Soumyajit Mazumder
                                        Cory B. Smith

                                      Working Paper 27161
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27161


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We thank Amy Bailey for kindly sharing her data on lynching victims in the U.S. South. For
detailed and insightful feedback, we thank Daron Acemoglu, Matt Blackwell, Devin Caughey,
Ryan Enos, Jennifer Hochschild, Mike Olson, Jon Rogowski, Jim Snyder, Randall Walsh, Ariel
White, and Jhacova Williams. We would also like to thank seminar participants of the Harvard
American Politics Research Workshop, Harvard Graduate Political Economy Workshop, and the
Harvard Economic History Workshop for helpful comments and suggestions. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by James J. Feigenbaum, Soumyajit Mazumder, and Cory B. Smith. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When Coercive Economies Fail: The Political Economy of the US South After the Boll Weevil
James J. Feigenbaum, Soumyajit Mazumder, and Cory B. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 27161
May 2020
JEL No. J15,K0,N3,N5

                                          ABSTRACT

How do coercive societies respond to negative economic shocks? We explore this question in the
early 20th-Century United States South. Since before the nation's founding, cotton cultivation
formed the politics and institutions in the South, including the development of slavery, the lack of
democratic institutions, and intergroup relations between whites and blacks. We leverage the
natural experiment generated by the boll weevil infestation from 1892-1922, which disrupted
cotton production in the region. Panel difference-in-differences results provide evidence that
Southern society became less violent and repressive in response to this shock with fewer
lynchings and less Confederate monument construction. Cross-sectional results leveraging spatial
variation in the infestation and historical cotton specialization show that affected counties had
less KKK activity, higher non-white voter registration, and were less likely to experience
contentious politics in the form of protests during the 1960s. To assess mechanisms, we show that
the reductions in coercion were responses to African American out-migration. Even in a context
of antidemocratic institutions, ordinary people can retain political power through the ability to
``vote with their feet.''

James J. Feigenbaum                              Cory B. Smith
Department of Economics                          Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Boston University                                cbsmith@mit.edu
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
jamesf@bu.edu

Soumyajit Mazumder
Harvard University
smazumder@g.harvard.edu
1       Introduction

        Coercive labor institutions feature prominently in many countries' histories. The United
States, for much of its history, relied on either slave labor or systems of labor repression
like the postbellum black codes to maintain high levels of cotton production and low wages.
Great Britain relied extensively on coercive contract enforcement through Master and Ser-
vant Laws as well as debt peonage (Naidu and Yuchtman 2013). Colonial experiences of
forced labor and slavery across Africa and Latin America have been shown to have enduring
impacts that persist today (Nunn 2008; Dell 2010; Nunn and Wantchekon 2011; Acemoglu
et al. 2012; Lowes and Montero 2018). A long line of research in economics demonstrates
why these coercive institutions arise; yet, fewer studies explore what happens when these in-
stitutions decline. In this paper, we ask whether negative shocks to the underlying economic
foundations of these institutions lead them to increase or moderate their repression.
        To answer this question, we study the U.S. South during the late 19th- and early 20th-
Century. This period, prominently known as "Jim Crow" arose in the wake of the failures
(and some successes) of Reconstruction to fundamentally alter the political economy struc-
tures and power relations of the U.S. South (Foner 1988; Du Bois 2014; Logan 2018). Most
notably, the Jim Crow South had all of the essential ingredients of a labor coercive society.
African Americans, the primary source of labor in the Southern agricultural economy, faced
geographic mobility restrictions, denial of public goods such as schooling, and lived under
constant threat of violence by both white mobs and the planter elites. All of these compo-
nents evolved precisely to maintain the dominance of the cotton economy in the domestic
and international political economy (Wright 1996; Beckert 2015).1 The difficulty of South-
ern life for African Americans ultimately led many of them to move to northern states, a
    1
    While cotton was not the only important southern crop in the period of our study, we focus on it rather
than similarly repressive labor regimes around sugar or other crops for two reasons. First, cotton was clearly
the most important crop in the south. For instance, estimates from the 1890 Agricultural Census suggest
that the plurality of crop acreage and production was in cotton. Second, the boll weevil infestation, which
greatly reduced infested areas cotton productivity and suitability, enables us to identify with geographic and
temporal precision the decline of King Cotton.



                                                      1
process known as the Great Migration. This movement threatened the economic interests of
Southern planters who stood to lose members of a formerly captive workforce.
   How might we expect a negative shock to this coercive economy to affect repression?
Several studies on repression and violence suggest that negative economic shocks should
increase repression especially in non-democratic societies (Besley and Persson 2009, 2011).
This is consistent with a wider literature that argues that negative economic shocks lead to
more violence and less social order (Miguel et al. 2004a; Mitra and Ray 2014). Given the
U.S. South's autocratic nature (Mickey 2015), one might expect similar dynamics in this
context. At the same time, other studies show that negative shocks can actually induce
positive changes in the underlying political structures (Hornbeck and Naidu 2014; Karadja
and Prawitz 2019). These sets of findings suggest that such shocks can engender institutions
to become more inclusive depending on the ability of groups to exert "exit power" through
out-migration (Hirschman 1970). We address this empirical discrepancy using a powerful
natural experiment generated by the arrival of the boll weevil infestation.
   The boll weevil infestation is an attractive source of plausibly exogenous variation in
the strength of the underlying coercive economy for three reasons. First, the spread of
the boll weevil plague from its entry point near Brownsville, Texas in 1892 was primarily
based on wind patterns and geographic distance, rather than political or cultural factors
(Higgs 1976; Lange et al. 2009; Ager et al. 2017; Bloome et al. 2017). Second, since the
boll weevil fed nearly exclusively on cotton, we are able to better isolate migration shocks
in a coercive sector of the economy. Third and importantly for our preferred mechanism,
historical sources indicate that the boll weevil's arrival in Southern counties prompted many
workers to migrate as they sought to avoid the economic damage it caused (Giesen 2004).
   Using a panel difference-in-differences framework that leverages the timing of spread
of the boll weevil throughout the South, we find that this negative shock led to less re-
pression instead of more. Counties that experienced greater exposure to the boll weevil
infestation were less likely to lynch African Americans and less likely to put up Confeder-


                                             2
ate memorials--two behavioral proxies for the Jim Crow system of violence against African
Americans. Moreover, we show in cross-sectional regressions that leverage the spatial varia-
tion in the infestation and cotton specialization that these same counties had less Ku Klux
Klan activity, higher non-white voter registration, and fewer instances of contentious collec-
tive action during the Civil Rights Movement. To assess mechanisms, we also show using
a panel design that this positive change to Southern society seems to have been driven the
ability of workers to "vote with their feet," exit Jim Crow society, and move to the North.
Our work thus relates to a number of studies on migration in response to undesirable con-
ditions, both in the US South and other contexts (Margo 1991; Hirschman 1970; Wilkerson
2011; Karadja and Prawitz 2019; Ferrara and Fishback 2020). Overall, our findings suggest
that even in the context of societies marked by large degrees of repression and racial animus,
negative shocks can create positive change in conditions on the ground when individuals
have "exit power." In contrast, we do not find evidence for broader changes in the political
economy of the South: political competition does not increase and Southern congressional
support for civil rights grows even weaker.
   A rich literature on coercive labor institutions has outlined the causes and consequences
of these institutions, both in developing and former colonial countries, as well as in the
US and other nations. Much of this scholarship focuses on, for good reason, the ways in
which exploitative colonial labor arrangements arose from economic fundamentals (Sokoloff
and Engerman 2000; Acemoglu et al. 2001) and affected long-run economic and political
development (Nunn 2008; Dell 2010; Nunn and Wantchekon 2011; Acemoglu et al. 2012).
Work on chattel slavery in the United States has argued that slavery impeded southern
economic development, placing the antebellum south among the "middling countries of that
era" and "locat[ing] the roots of postbellum regional backwardness firmly in the antebellum
period," (Wright 2013). Naidu and Yuchtman (2013) explore the rise and fall of labor coercive
arrangements in Great Britain as a result of Master and Servant Laws. Our context, in
contrast to Naidu and Yuchtman (2013), also has an important racial and ethnic dimension


                                              3
to it that is common to many coercive societies. Despite the vast literature showing that
ethnic and racial divisions lead to powerful groups oppressing the powerless, our study shows
that, even in the face of these identity-based challenges, the workers still retain a very basic
form of political voice through the threat of voting with their feet.
       Moreover, our findings also speak to the literature on American economic history. Too
voluminous to review in depth, we note a few works that relate to our study of the political
economy effects of the cotton economy and the legacy of slavery. Logan (2015) argues that
economic roles in the South were intertwined with racial identity, which pushes us to consider
the arrival of the boll weevil as a potentially important shock to both the racial and economic
system of the South. On the interaction of racial violence and politics, Jones et al. (2017)
show the negative effects on black voter turnout after local lynchings while Williams (2017)
traces the correlation between lynching and voter turnout to today.2 During Reconstruction,
black political efficacy led to violence against black elected officials (Logan 2019). Cook et al.
(2017) connect patterns of rural and urban segregation with lynching.3 Many studies have
traced the role convict labor and incarceration played in coercing black labor throughout the
South, including Adamson (1983); Blackmon (2009); Muller (2018). Our study also provides
an important foil to Acharya et al. (2018) who document the persistence of racial prejudice
resultant from local legacies of slavery; instead, we show that the behavioral implications of
these legacies such as racialized violence seem to respond to economic fundamentals as well.
Despite the deep legacies of slavery and violence against African Americans in the region,
we document how the repression of African Americans ebbed and flowed in response to the
underlying economic incentives for African Americans to vote with their feet.
       We also contribute to the scholarship on the ways in which environmental disasters can,
under some conditions, shift societies into more preferable equilibria. A growing literature
   2
     Chacon and Jensen (2018) show how the monopoly of violence mattered to public finance in the postbel-
lum south, documenting increased taxation in regions patrolled by the Union Army during Reconstruction.
After Reconstruction, the Southern whites regained control over state and extrajudicial violence.
   3
     Cook (2012) also is assembling a more complete database of lynchings in the United States. We hope
future work in this area draws on these types of data to better characterize racial violence in the United
States.


                                                    4
in economics shows that in societies who are trapped in a "bad" growth equilibrium, natu-
ral and environmental disasters can help to "shock" these societies into "good" equilibrium
(Hornbeck and Naidu 2014; Hornbeck and Keniston 2017).4 A recent set of studies specifi-
cally on the boll weevil demonstrates that this infestation had a markedly negative impact
on the Southern economy (Lange et al. 2009; Ager et al. 2017) leading to a reduction in child
labor and a later ages of marriage (Eriksson et al. Decemeber 2018; Bloome et al. 2017).
Muller and Schrage (2019) also examine the effects of the boll weevil on social control, docu-
menting that as Georgia counties were exposed to the infestation, rates of black incarceration
rose. But incarceration--or the threat of incarceration--is only one dimension of coercion.
Our study, in contrast, shows that the boll weevil shock led to less racial violence, symbolic
white supremacy, and voter registration suppression as the incentives to maintain a highly
coercive society decreased.
        Our paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we describe the historical context of the
Southern cotton-dependent economy and the role of the boll weevil in disrupting it. In Sec-
tion 3 we describe our data and how we use the boll weevil's spread leads to our econometric
strategy. In Section 4 we document the economic impacts of the boll weevil on the Southern
economy. In Section 5 we present our main results of the boll weevil's effects on repression.
We discuss potential mechanisms in Section 6 and conclude in Section 7.

2       Historical Background: A Brief History of "King Cotton"

        Cotton, for much of the history of the US South, has held a privileged position as the
region's primary commodity and an important engine for its economic growth (Wright 2013).
The crop also shaped the political and social institutions of the South, from the colonial
period to the Civil War via slavery and afterwards around tenant farming and Jim Crow.
        The United States was the dominant producer of cotton on world markets in the an-
tebellum period, accounting for 77 percent of Britain's cotton consumption, 90 percent of
    4
    Of course, natural and environmental disasters do not always lead better equilibria. Hornbeck (2012)
shows how the Dust Bowl-affected areas have had a persistent negative impact on growth trajectories.



                                                   5
France's consumption, 60 percent of German consumption, and nearly 92 percent of Russia's
consumption (Beckert 2004). American production of cotton was almost entirely a Southern
enterprise, thanks in part to Southern soils and climate. But maintaining such a large and
profitable network of cotton production required more than well-suited soil and climate. The
South also needed prodigious amounts of cheap labor. To supply plantation workers, the
white Southern planter elite primarily relied on the system of chattel slavery where millions
of slaves taken from Africa were forced to pick cotton under brutal working conditions.5

                                        [Figure 1 about here.]

       Slavery in the American South came to an end with the Union's victory in the American
Civil War, rocking the cotton economy. In the postbellum period, the Southern economy,
which relied on cheap black labor, collapsed (Ransom 1989; Foner 1988).6 While the abolition
of slavery reduced the ability of the white planter elite to benefit from unpaid labor, slaves
were also an important financial asset to the Southern economy thereby making the collapse
of slavery even more salient to the South after the Civil War (Wright 2013; Gonz´
                                                                                alez et al.
2017).
       While the South temporarily lost economic ascendancy in cotton markets after the Civil
War, it again rose to be the leader in cotton production on world markets (Beckert 2004),
a rise closely tied to the re-imposition of a coercive labor regime. Though the abolition of
chattel slavery made African American laborers in the South legally free to supply labor
to the market, the white Southern planter elite attempted to recreate patterns of slavery
through coercive labor contracts and pernicious systems of convict labor (Alston and Ferrie
1985; Wright 1996; Blackmon 2009).7 Forms of sharecropping and tenant farming were
   5
     Not only did slavery debilitate the individuals who were forced to move to the United States, but it
also stalled economic growth and eroded trust in the societies that "exported" slaves (Nunn 2008; Nunn and
Wantchekon 2011).
   6
     War-time destruction also played some role in the postwar southern economic troubles (Feigenbaum
et al. 2018), as did changes in global cotton demand and supply (Wright 1996).
   7
     Shlomowitz (1979) describes some of the financial difficulties among planters attempting to pay wages
to farm labor in the postbellum period as sharecropping and tenant farming developed. Traditional wage
labor contracts were tried but share cropping and tenant farming soon grew dominant, especially after the
withdrawal of Union troops for the unreconstructed South (Foner 1988).

                                                    6
among the most common coercive agricultural labor market institutions implemented in the
postbellum period (Fite 1984).8
       Maintaining a system of massive labor coercion of African Americans in the South ne-
cessitated de jure and de facto political institutions to maintain the racial order that came
to be known colloquially as Jim Crow. Much of this relied on voter suppression aimed at
the de facto disenfranchisement of African Americans (Key 1949). At an even more extreme
level, whites managed racial subordination through extra-legal violence and terrorism in-
cluding lynchings and organizations such as the Ku Klux Klan. The racialized systems of
labor coercion needed to maintain Southern economic dominance in the cotton market were
predicated on the use of political institutions aimed at widespread black disenfranchisement
and the consent (and participation) of whites to uphold the existence of these "authoritarian
enclaves" (Mickey 2015).
       One significant disruption to the South's cotton economy, however, came in the form of
a slow-moving natural disaster. In 1892, a cotton pest named the boll weevil crossed into
Texas from Mexico (Lange et al. 2009). Female weevils lay their eggs inside cotton fruits or
"bolls" and the developing insects feed on the plant, ultimately destroying the cotton fiber.
Farmers whose crops were infected thus faced with the destruction of their crop or, at best,
an intensive process of manually removing the best plant-by-plant. Damage was widespread
with counties losing a majority of their crop in the worst years. Various schemes to prevent
the pest's spread failed and the boll weevil slowly spread across the South, ultimately reaching
most cotton-producing areas by the early 1920s (Giesen 2004).
       How did the boll weevil affect the (mostly black) agricultural labor force of the South?
Sharecropping tenants received little governmental or other support when hit by the pest.
When combined with the other hardships they faced, many unsurprisingly chose to migrate.
A number of scholars argue that the agronomic insecurity the pest's arrival precipitated
   8
    Tolnay (1999) enumerates three primary forms of tenants. First, cash tenants rented land in cash.
Second, share tenants rented land but paid with a share of crop yield. Third, sharecroppers rented land as
well as farm equipment and farm animals, paid with a (larger) share of crop yield.



                                                    7
played an important role in "pushing" migrants north. Southern planters, however, were not
content to see their workforce leave and considered a variety of legal and extralegal schemes to
induce or force them to stay. Theoretically, planters could either retain their workers through
coercive measures, such as harsh vagrancy laws, or through more positive inducements, such
as discouraging racial violence. Which type of response dominated, however, is an open
question (Tolnay and Beck 1990).

3     Research Design: Data and Methods

      How did disruptions to the cotton economy affect labor markets, institutions, politics,
and white and black behavior and attitudes? To explore these relationships, we combine sev-
eral different data sources that capture economic conditions, race relations, and protesting
behavior in the U.S. South with an identification strategy that leverages the negative shock to
the cotton economy from the boll weevil. For outcomes we observe during the infestation--
including economic and demographic outcomes from the census but also lynchings--we es-
timate panel models that use the combination of the cross-sectional and over-time variation
in the destruction of the cotton economy by the boll weevil. For other outcomes for which
we only have post-period cross-sectional data, we take advantage of the timing of the spread
of the boll weevil combined with pre-existing dependence on cotton for identification.

3.1     Data

      We compile data that allows us to characterize the politics and society of the Cotton
South--and the post-Cotton South--across a number of dimensions, measuring racial vio-
lence and repression, black political protest, and migration patterns, as well as economic
measures of cotton production, farm ownership, and labor arrangements. We also document
our procedure for standardizing counties throughout our sample period to properly account
for shifting county borders in the South.
      Economic disruption: As an implicit first stage, we also estimate the effects of the
boll weevil on cotton production and the southern agricultural economy. To measure this,


                                               8
we draw data from Haines and Preston (1997) and the complete count decennial censuses
on acres planted in cotton, black farm ownership rates, and black child labor rates.
      Racial violence: To measure racial violence in the Jim Crow period, we study lynch-
ings. 83% of documented lynching victims were black and the spatial variation in lynching
captures the degree to which whites engaged in extra-judicial policing of black communi-
ties.9 To measure this feature of Southern politics, we use data from Bailey et al. (2008),
which documents detailed information on all known lynching victims in the South from 1877
onward.10 We aggregate the number of lynchings perpetrated against black victims to the
county-level and we can measure lynchings before and after the arrival of the boll weevil.
Figure 2 displays the spatial variation in lynching.


                                          [Figure 2 about here.]


      We also supplement in our analysis of racial violence through lynching by investigating
the impact on the erection of Confederate statues. We collect data on statue location and
dates from the Southern Poverty Law Center (2019). The construction of Confederate statues
taps into the more psychological ways in which white southerners express a commitment to
racist Jim Crow ideology.
      Political Repression and Resistance: Using additional cross-sectional data, we also
measure important features of political repression and resistance beyond lynchings and Con-
federate statues. First, we transcribe county-level data on voter registration by race using
from the first report by the US Commission on Civil Rights (United States Commission on
Civil Rights 1959). We interpret this variable as a measure of voter suppression since it
measures black electoral participation prior to the Voting Rights Act. We also measure the
organizational strength of hate groups using data on the presence and number of Ku Klux
Klan (KKK) chapters. To measure KKK chapters (commonly referred to as Klaverns), we
draw data from Mazumder (2018) who transcribes the location of chapters from contempo-
  9
      Based on the authors' own calculations using data from Bailey et al. (2008).
 10
      See Cook (2012) for a description of ongoing efforts to generate a national lynching database.


                                                       9
rary reports created by the House Un-American Activities Commission. This data provides
a snap-shot of the spatial distribution of the KKK
       The existence of black insurgency during the Civil Rights Movement captures one way
in which African Americans could have responded to labor coercion. Though this certainly
does not capture all resistance to existing political economy structures, protest and collective
action measures did lead to institutional changes, notably the Civil Rights Act (1964) and
the Voting Rights Acts (1965). Data comes from the Dynamics of Collective Action dataset,
which records demonstrations of collective action by African Americans based on reporting
in New York Times articles.11 We geocode each protest event to match its respective county
in the South. Figure 3 shows a map of counties recorded as having a Civil Rights protest.


                                         [Figure 3 about here.]


       Finally, we supplement data on black protest with data on the formation of black po-
litical organizations as proxied by the presence and number of National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) Chapters from 1924-1964 collapsed to the county-
level.12 We rely on this measure since the NAACP was one of the main organizations fighting
for black civil rights at the time (Francis 2014). We use data collected by Gregory (2019)
based on NAACP archival reports.
       Formal politics: Finally, we also consider the way in which elite politics might have
also changed in response to the boll weevil. To do so, we compute measure of political
competition for elected offices for the President, House of Representatives, and the Senate,
which is the negative absolute value of the distance between the Democrats' vote share and
0.5 in line with Besley et al. (2010). Thus, higher values indicate more political competition.
We also consider the ways in which legislator ideology on racial issues might be shifting in
response this shock. For this analysis, we use data on legislator ideal points on civil rights
  11
    The raw data is available at http://web.stanford.edu/group/collectiveaction/cgi-bin/drupal/.
  12
    Unfortunately, the timing of the boll weevil exposure comes right before the start of the dataset. Thus,
we are unable to estimate effects within a panel framework.



                                                    10
estimated by Bateman et al. (2017).13 While traditional scores of legislator ideology tend to
use the second dimension of DW-Nominate as a measure of civil rights scores, Bateman et al.
(2017) demonstrate that this measure is not valid since the agenda also shifts throughout
congresses thereby making votes made in each incomparable. To fix this issue, Bateman et al.
(2017) estimate ideal points for each legislator fixing the agenda to only consider voting on
civil rights-related bills. In our main analysis, we use this score, but we also show that the
results are robust to using the second dimension of DW-Nominate instead.
       Our main independent variable is the interaction of historical cotton production and boll
weevil infestation status. While the boll weevil wrecked cotton growing in all counties it
entered, these effects were much more serious in counties specialized in cotton cultivation; a
pest ruin cotton harvests is unlikely to matter much in counties specialized in rice or sugar.
Because contemporaneous cotton specialization is obviously endogenous to the boll weevil,
we measure the intensity with the log of cotton bales per acre produced in a given county
in 1890 before the boll weevil entered the United States. To track the movement of the boll
weevil through the south, digitized USDA maps like the one shown data shown in Figure 4.


                                          [Figure 4 about here.]


       To account for pre-existing differences prior to the arrival of the boll weevil, we collect
data at the county level on a number of covariates. We include data on population and
improved acres in 1890 as well as measures of cotton, tobacco, and wheat suitability. 1890
covariate data come from Haines and Preston (1997) and the suitability data comes from
the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO).14
       As county borders shift slightly over our time period, we follow the literature in stan-
dardizing them. As in Hornbeck (2012) and other papers analyzing county-level data across
  13
     Ideal points are constructed for each legislator by scaling each legislators votes on a set of bills to the
same space. In this sense, ideal points are essentially just a factor decomposition method to summarize
high-dimensional information on votes to one or two ideal point, ideology spaces. Standard practice is to
interpret lower scores on a given dimension as more liberal on that dimension.
  14
     The data on crop suitability can be accessed at http://www.fao.org/nr/gaez/en/.



                                                      11
censuses, we intersect county boundaries in 1920 with all other decennial boundaries, draw-
ing on county maps from NHGIS. Using these intersected county polygons, we aggregate up
to standardized 1920 borders, with a uniform distribution of our variables of interest over
space.

3.2      Empirical Strategy

      To understand the effects of the decline of the cotton economy on institutions, we would
want to experimentally produce negative shocks to local cotton production. To approximate
this experimental setup, we use the negative exogenous shock resulting from the boll weevil
infestation of cotton crops during the time period 1892-1922 to identify the causal effect of
this negative shock to cotton production on the nature of labor coercion in the U.S. South.
This is important since cotton production during this historical time period could have been
endogenous to political institutions and elite behavior.
      One of the advantages of using the boll weevil infestation is that both the introduction
and spread of the infestation were orthogonal to the potential outcomes of political economy
factors in the South. As Figure 4 shows, the boll weevil first entered from Mexico through
Brownsville, Texas and then rapidly spread all throughout the South. Existing studies of the
economic effects of the boll weevil infestation on the cotton economy highlight the massive
degree of crop destruction brought on by the boll weevil, which lead to the persistent decline
in the size of the cotton economy in the areas hit hardest by the boll weevil (Lange et al.
2009; Ager et al. 2017). Importantly, the boll weevil could only travel short amounts at a
time and mainly followed wind pattern trajectories. Thus, the arrival and spread of the boll
weevil can be seen as haphazard and plausibly exogenous.
      In our main empirical strategy, we estimate equations of the following form via OLS:


                  Ycst =  [BWExposure]cst × [CottonFraction]c,1890 + c + t + cst             (1)

      In this panel framework, we operationalize the size of the shock created by the boll


                                               12
weevil infestation in each county c in state s with the interaction term [BWExposure]cst ×
[CottonFraction]c,1890 . [BWExposure]cst is a term equal to 1 if the boll weevil was present in
county c at time t. [CottonFraction]c,1890 is the fraction is improved farm acreage devoted
to cotton in the 1890 pre-period. The interaction term captures that the importance of the
shock created by the boll weevil should depend on the intensity of cotton production to the
county. We compare changes in county level outcomes within counties by including county
fixed effects, c , and within census waves by including year fixed effects, t . County fixed
effects will purge any confounding factors at the county level for which we are unable to
control.
   Our key parameter of interest is  , the effect of boll weevil exposure for increasingly more
cotton-dependent counties. The variable Ycst represents our different outcomes of interest.
 is identified off of within county changes netting out global time trends. Throughout
the paper, we also show estimates that allow for time trends in cotton specialization and we
estimate models with a lagged dependent variable Ycs,t-1 to capture autoregressive processes.
Although the latter can be subject to Nickell bias in short panels (Nickell 1981), we consider
this bias less worrisome than the omission of county fixed effects and results are generally
similar across multiple specifications. We cluster standard errors at the county level.
   While the panel specification increases our confidence that we are identifying the effects
of the boll weevil on various outcomes, we are limited to questions with available data
contemporaneous to the infestation. To estimate the effects of the boll weevil on outcomes
that are only observed after the boll weevil--effects that might be longer-run--we turn to a
cross-sectional specification.
   Making use of the fact that earlier boll weevil exposure would have led to longer periods
for slow-moving institutional adjustments, we compute treatment as the number of years
exposed to the boll weevil interacted with county-level cotton specialization in the pre-
infestation period. We control for both measures--years with the boll weevil and cotton
specialization in 1890--and so only retain the plausibly exogenous spatial variation that


                                              13
comes from the interaction. Although certain economic effects from the infestation would
likely have taken place rapidly, it is unlikely that social or political institutions would be
able to immediately adjust; any shift to a new equilibrium would have required a significant
amount of time. Figure 5 provides some empirical support for this point, showing that the
boll weevil's effects on violence increased with longer exposure. As before, counties with
more intense cotton production would also have been more affected. We thus estimate the
following equation:




    Ycs = 1 Years of Boll Weevil Exposurec × Share Cotton Acres 1890c

                             + 2 Years of Boll Weevil Exposurec

                                          + 3 Share Cotton Acres 1890c + Xcs + s + cs (2)


     Similar to our panel results  is our key parameter of interest--the causal effect of
most years of boll weevil exposure as a county's historical dependence on cotton increases.
The term Ycs represents our outcome of interest in county c in state s. For assessing the
politics of coercion, we use data on pre-VRA voter registration, KKK membership, Civil
Rights protests, and NAACP chapters, all measured cross-sectionally in years as dictated
by the data sources. We include state fixed effects, s , so that our effects are identified
off of within state differences. While our measure of boll weevil exposure is balanced on
most observables, there are a few that have slight imbalances such as manufacturing and
population. We include these as controls Xcs though inclusion of them does not affect our
results. We use robust standard errors in the cross section.

4    The Boll Weevil Disrupted the Coercive Southern Economy

     How did the Cotton South adjust to the post-boll weevil economy? Lange et al. (2009)
document the adjustment of planters moving away from cotton to other crops and Ager
et al. (2017) show a reduction in farm labor wages, farm tenancy, and sharecropping. In this

                                             14
section, we replicate and extend these economic and agricultural results, showing that the
boll weevil did indeed reshape the coercive southern economy.
   Following the boll weevil infestation, we see that acreage in cotton fell dramatically, as
reported in Panel A of Table 1. Using the estimate from column (1), an average southern
county which had 25% of its farmland in cotton in 1890 would have seen its post-boll weevil
acreage fall by roughly 10 percentage points, with larger estimated in other columns. These
results are robust to including--or not--lagged values of the dependent variable or time
trends in historical cotton share. The move away from cotton also led to more general
economic restructuring as tenant farming (Panel B) and child labor (Panel C) decreased
significantly as well.

                                     [Table 1 about here.]

   The declines in child labor, as we show in Panel C, echo results in the economic history
literature. As Baker (2015) documents, examining the annual spread of the infestation across
Georgia, the decline in demand for child labor in the cotton fields led to increases in black
child enrollment in school. Baker et al. (2018) trace the effect boll weevil effects on education
forward in time, linking children affected by the infestation to their adult-selves in 1940 and
showing that both black and white men hit by the boll weevil as children had more years of
education.
   The arrival of the boll weevil precipitated reductions in the most negative aspects of the
old cotton regime. After the Civil War, tenant farming and sharecropping formed the basis of
Southern elites' control over their black labor force. Although former slaves had significantly
more autonomy as sharecroppers, planters retained much of their authority in their position
as landlords. This power was reinforced by white resistance to black landownership, laws
restricting wage competition, and laws against "vagrancy" applied against workers seeking
alternate employment (Foner 1988). Combined, the social and legal framework of the South
gave white planters monopsonistic power and limited avenues of social mobility for black
farmers. It is thus striking that the boll weevil prompts an increase in black farm ownership

                                               15
(Panel B) and improves working conditions as suggested by the decrease in black child labor
(Panel C).
      Did the weakening of the cotton economy, which we document in this section, change
social and political repression in the South? We explore the boll weevil's effects on such
outcomes next.

5     The Boll Weevil Reduced Sociopolitical Repression

      We find consistently strong evidence that the negative shock to the cotton industry
significantly reduced the degree of economic and political coercion in the United States
South despite deep racial enmity towards African Americans by whites. We show both short
and long run effects of the boll weevil on racial violence, political protest, and minority group
collective action.

5.1     Effects of the Boll Weevil on Violence and Repression in the Short Run

      A key component of coercion is the use and threat of violence (Acemoglu and Wolitzky
2011; Chwe 1990). But what happens when the economic rationale for coercion collapses?
Does the use and threat of violence recede?
      In the U.S. South, we argue that the boll weevil's shock to the cotton economy might
lead to a decrease in violence against African Americans, particularly if the costs of violence
and repression--to the planter elite--exceeds the new lower value of the cotton harvest.
The historical record offers mixed predictions on this topic. On the one hand, since at
least Reconstruction, Southern states implemented "anti-vagrancy" and anti-inducement
laws designed to limit the ability of African Americans to search for better employment
opportunities (Foner 1988). Departing black workers also had reason to fear violent reprisals
from white planters (Giesen 2004; Wilkerson 2011). Thus, increased migration desire could
plausibly have resulted in increased coercion from whites hoping to retain their labor force.
On the other hand, Tolnay and Beck (1990) argue that white elites strategically reduced
levels of coercion to induce black workers to remain in the South.


                                               16
       We assess these theories using the same panel design described previously but with the
number of lynchings in a given county in a given year as a measure of racial violence as
the outcome. While underlying racial tension in the U.S. South was high throughout this
period, we see robust evidence that the degree of violence and repression by whites against
African Americans responds to changes in the cotton economy.15 Table 2 Panel A shows that
lynchings decrease following the boll weevil's arrival. The estimate in column (1) implies the
average county sees a reduction of 0.04 lynchings per year, a substantial reduction roughly
equal to the whole sample's mean.

                                         [Table 2 about here.]

       The timing of the response of lynching to the boll weevil's arrival underscores our argu-
ment that the weakening of the cotton economy resulted in less racial violence. We leverage
the annual data on lynching and boll weevil arrival in Figure 5, presenting an event study
of the number of lynchings on years to or since boll weevil arrival in a county. We group
each annual observation into five-year bins, setting 1 to 5 years before the boll weevil as
the reference period and include year and county fixed effects. We cluster at the county
level. Though the effects of infestation on lynching is negative and insignificant in the year
of arrival through 4 years later, in the years farther out we see a substantial and statistically
significant reduction in lynchings. As the cotton economy's grip on these counties fade after
the boll weevil's arrival, racial violence decreases. The data show little evidence of a pretrend
as lynchings were not significantly more or less likely in these counties before the boll weevil
arrived.

                                        [Figure 5 about here.]

       Symbolic assertions of racial hierarchy also lessened upon the boll weevil's arrival. In
Table 2 Panel B we show results on the construction of statues which memorialized Con-
  15
    Our lynching results echo an older strand of literature on the interaction between cotton prices and
production and racial violence. As Tolnay and Beck (1995) have shown, when cotton prices are low, lynchings
tend to spike. Christian (2017) confirmed the original Tolnay and Beck findings with more recent methods.

                                                    17
federate figures. Data are drawn from the Southern Poverty Law Center (2019). We find
that post-weevil construction is lower by about 0.003 statues per county year, roughly equal
to half the sample mean.16 Defending the "lost cause" of the Confederacy was often a way
to reject the equalizing aims of the Civil War and Reconstruction (Strother et al. 2017/ed;
Foner 2017). Consequently, our results suggest that the South's desire to publicly assert
such attitudes fell in response to the threat of black migration and the reduced importance
of the cotton economy.

5.2     Effects of the Boll Weevil on Violence and Repression in the Long Run

      We argue that the boll weevil reshaped the political economy of the south in the long run
as well. Turning to our cross-section specification, where we leverage variation in both the
timing of boll weevil infestation and the specialization in cotton historically, we show more
black voter registration, less KKK membership, and fewer Civil Rights Protests in response
to larger boll weevil treatments in Table 3.
      Our conclusions in this section are necessarily more speculative as our empirical strat-
egy is weaker. Rather than leverage the sharp changes in timing as the boll weevil spread
throughout the South, we instead define treatment as the interaction of historical specializa-
tion in cotton--measured by the share of acres in cotton in 1890 before the infestation--with
how long a county was exposed the boll weevil. For our longer run outcomes measured in
the 1940s to 1960s, we consider counties heavily specialized in cotton and hit by the boll
weevil for longer to be more strongly treated.


                                         [Table 3 about here.]


      We find evidence suggesting that the boll weevil shock increased black voter registra-
tion in the South. Despite the promise of the Fifteenth Amendment to the Constitution
guaranteeing voting rights irrespective of race, disenfranchisement of African Americans was
strikingly common especially before the passage of the Voting Rights Act in 1965. In our
 16
      With more precision, the sample mean is 0.00632.


                                                    18
sample, blacks are 17 percentage points less likely than whites to be registered to vote and,
even when registered, would have faced many informal barriers to actually casting a ballot.
Low rates of black voter registration were maintained through selectively applied formal bar-
riers such as the required literacy tests and poll taxes (Ogden 1958) as well as social censure
and political violence (Foner 1988). Ultimately, the lack of democratic rights enabled African
Americans' educational and economic exclusion (Naidu 2012).
    Exposure to the boll weevil increased black voter registration as shown in Columns 1
and 2 of Table 3, Panel A. We measure black voter registration prior to the VRA using
data collected for the first report by the US Commission on Civil Rights (United States
Commission on Civil Rights 1959). On average, these effects indicate that among places
with the median amount of cotton dependence, an additional year of the BW increased black
voter registration by half a percentage point and the black-white gap by approximately one
percentage point. The increase was both absolute (Column 1) and relative to white voter
registration (Column 2). Since the primary reasons for low rates of black registration were
externally imposed barriers, we interpret these effects as indicating a relaxation of repressive
barriers in the South's democratic processes.17
    We also find evidence, though less precisely estimated, that membership in a racist ter-
rorist organization like the KKK fell in response to the boll weevil (Column 3). Data on
KKK chapters comes from Mazumder (2018) who transcribes data on the location of KKK
chapters from reports created by the House Un-American Activities Commission. Collective
action played a major role in the South's transition out of Jim Crow (McAdam 1999; Mickey
2015; Mazumder 2018). Thus, we explore the boll weevil's role in explaining variation in
overall patterns of collective action--both for and against the Civil Rights Movement--in
the final two columns of Table 3. We estimate the effects of the boll weevil on the log
number of pro-Civil Rights protests (using data from the Dynamics of Collective Action
  17
     Naidu (2012) documents the effects of poll taxes and literacy tests in reducing electoral turnout and
increasing Democratic vote share in the Jim Crow South, while Jones et al. (2012) estimate large effects of
both formal laws and informal modes of voter suppression.



                                                    19
dataset geocoded to counties) and the log number of NAACP chapters in a given county
(Gregory 2019). There were approximately 10% fewer pro Civil Rights protests in counties
more treated by the boll weevil, which we define as counties with both more years under the
infestation and more cotton specialization in 1890 (Column 4).18 We also explore the role of
black organizing against Jim Crow as proxied by the number of NAACP Chapters (Gregory
2019) in Column 5. Our results indicate that counties with greater exposure to the cotton
economy also experienced less civil rights organizing through the NAACP with the arrival of
the boll weevil, though the effects are statistically insignificant. Our evidence suggests that
the decreased violence documented in Section 5 decreased incentives to engage in collective
action--a result consistent with grievance models of collective action.

6        Mechanisms: Foot-Voting or Formal Politics?

         In this section we explore potential mechanisms for the reduced violence in southern
counties following the boll weevil's arrival. Consistent with earlier work, we present evidence
that the increased willingness of African Americans to migrate led to white concessions in
the form of reduced coercion (Margo 1991; Tolnay and Beck 1990). In the early 20th century
South, coercion and in particular the mob violence of lynchings were a major reason for
black outmigration (Wilkerson 2011). Because the arrival of the boll weevil made many of
these families more willing to migrate, planters had a larger incentive to practice restraint.
Black families were thus able to "vote with their feet" not simply in the sense of leaving with
adverse conditions, but in actually influencing society with their actions. Migration thus
had political implications in the sense of the "voice" and "exit" of Hirschman (1970). We
consider and find little evidence for other mechanisms, including formal political channels.

6.1         Foot-Voting: African Americans Fled the South and the Boll Weevil

         As the southern cotton economy shifted in response to the boll weevil, did southerners
leave the region to escape the economic shock? Table 4 presents results on migration. In
    18
         We find little evidence of an impact on anti-civil rights protesting by whites of the boll weevil.




                                                          20
Panel A, we see that an average southern county's black share of the population falls about
1.4 percentage points. Unsurprisingly, this is driven primarily by outmigration of African-
Americans; most specifications in Panel B show that the size of the black population shrinks
in response to the boll weevil in counties with historical specialization in cotton.19


                                         [Table 4 about here.]


       As we have shown, the negative shock to the cotton economy caused by the boll weevil
induced out-migration of African Americans and changes to the southern cotton economy.
These results are consistent with our framework, which posits that negative shocks to coer-
cive industries should reduce the amount of labor coercion. By reducing the value of their
inside option, the arrival of the boll weevil thus increased the potency of "exit" by African
Americans, many of whom worked as sharecroppers. Southern planters thus faced two barri-
ers in using coercion to maintain their economic and social status. First, as cotton declined
in importance and the economy diversified, labor coercion became less economically mean-
ingful. Second, coercion could backfire if it caused workers to simply leave in response. Thus,
African-Americans in the South had gained a measure of political power through the threat
of voting with their feet.

6.2      Alternative Mechanisms: Selective Migration or Income Shocks

       We have argued that the economic shock of the boll weevil induced African-American out
migration and that the exit--and threat of exit--resulted in positive changes on the ground
in the South, namely fewer lynchings and a decline in the construction of monuments to
white supremacy, as well as increased black farm ownership and decreased black child labor.
In this subsection, we show why our story is inconsistent with two plausible alternative
mechanisms--selective migration or income shocks--that do not work though exit as in
Hirschman (1970).
  19
    We find no evidence of white out-migration in response to the boll weevil infestation. If anything, the
boll weevil may have induced white in-migration to infested counties but these results were specification
dependent.


                                                    21
6.2.1   No Evidence of Selective Migration

   The vast majority of lynching victims in the South were black men (Bailey and Tolnay
2015). If men were more likely than women to out-migrate in response to the boll wee-
vil's infestation, the reduction in the population at risk of racial violence could explain why
lynchings fell (Table 2). However, when we break the migration results in Table 4 down by
sex in Table 5, we find the both black men and black women fled southern counties hit by
the boll weevil in similar numbers. Panels A and B replicate the change in log population
analysis from Table 4 Panel B, but calculating changes of men (A) and women (B). Here,
we see slightly more negative point estimates for the change in female population in two
specifications but slightly more negative point estimates for the change in male population
in two other specifications. The differences between male and female outcomes within spec-
ification are all fairly small and not statistically significant. We conclude, based on Table 5,
that there is no clear evidence for selective out-migration based on risk of being a victim of
racial violence.

                                     [Table 5 about here.]

6.2.2   Income Shocks

   We have argued that the arrival of the boll weevil weakened the labor coercive regime
built around cotton in the South. But the infestation was also a simple income shock. In
areas heavily specialized in cotton agriculture, a pest that decimated cotton output would
lower incomes for farmers, sharecroppers, and farm laborers and likely spillover to the rest
of the county. Even without the political economy mechanisms we trace from outmigration,
such a large income shock could have large downstream effects.
   However, the pattern of our results is not consistent with a simple income shock story. A
vast literature has found that economic shocks can lead to more violence and conflict (Miguel
et al. 2004b), though Dube and Vargas (2013) distinguish between price shocks that could
increase the opportunity cost of violence or the potential gains from violent appropriation.

                                              22
Economic shocks may lead to increases in minority persecution, as Jedwab et al. (2019) find
with pogroms against Jews after the Black Death.20 Within the southern context, Christian
(2017) links temporary shocks, like fluctuations in cotton prices, to racial violence. However,
as we show in Table 2, lynchings fall in counties exposed to the boll weevil. Further, the
causes for racial violence were diverse and not solely connected to one sector of the economy
or solely to the economy in general (Cook 2012; Troesken and Walsh 2017). All this leads
us to conclude that the story is not a simple one running from a negative economic shock to
violence against a racial minority.21

7        Effects of the Boll Weevil on Formal Politics

         The boll weevil reduced everyday violence and repression, but were these changes accompanied--
and even made more durable--by shifts in political power or formal politics in the South? In
this section we examine interparty competition and politician roll call voting and find that
this is not the case.
         After the Civil War and emancipation, a major threat to the political power of the white
planter elite was a political realignment to competition divided by class rather than race.22
As the boll weevil reshaped the southern economy, the planter elite had to balance this
complicated political economy to retain power. Reducing racial violence and repression may
have reduced black outmigration, but what of the poor white farmers and sharecroppers
also hurt by the arrival of the boll weevil? Despite changes on the ground, our results
in this section suggest that white elites still held fast to power and solidified their all-white
    20
     Anderson et al. (2018) document that recent economic shocks increase anti-black sentiment in the United
States. Economic shocks leading to hostility towards immigrants is also well documented in the literature,
for example Mayda (2006).
  21
     Our results on Confederate statues and monuments is more consistent with the classic income shock
story. Monuments are expensive and not economically productive, exactly the kinds of expenditures we
would expect to fall in response to an income shock. At the same time, we also show in Figure A.2 that
the impact on monument creation is persistent into the 1940s and 50s despite the Boll Weevil shock being
transitory in its effect on the overall economy and actually increasing the incomes of whites (Clay et al.
2019). In addition, that we find outmigration in response to the shock is consistent with past literature
showing people fleeing natural disasters (Hornbeck 2012; Hornbeck and Naidu 2014).
  22
     Both during Reconstruction and after, such coalitions did indeed form. Famously, the (poor, white)
Populist Party in North Carolina "fused" with the (black) Republicans in the 1890s, winning the state
legislature in 1894 and 1896 and the governor's mansion in 1896 (Edmonds 2013; Ali 2010).


                                                    23
racial alliance as the dominance of the Democratic Party increased and Southern members of
Congress were even more strongly opposed to Civil Rights legislation after the boll weevil.23
       We see little evidence that the boll weevil's arrival fostered new political competition
in the Solid South where the Democratic party was dominant and all-white(Mickey 2015;
Caughey and Warshaw 2018). Table 6 reports the impact of the boll weevil on an index of
political competition. Following (Besley et al. 2010) we define competition as -|dct - 0.5|
where dct is the fraction of total votes won by the South's dominant party, the Democrats, in
county c in year t. Across presidential, house, and senate elections and most specifications,
the boll weevil seems to reduce competition with a median effect of 1.8 percentage points
on the average county.24 While the boll weevil fostered social change in many arenas, the
findings in Table 6 suggest that the pest did not open the formal political system. Thus,
political openness is unlikely to account for the reductions of violence we showed previously.

                                          [Table 6 about here.]

       The boll weevil infestation changed civil rights positioning among Southern politicians
in Congress. While few Southern representatives were strong advocates for the Civil Rights
Movement, there was some variation in the degree of opposition. Table 7 shows that the
boll weevil affected relative support and opposition in Congress, measuring positions on civil
rights in two ways. First, we use newly constructed data by Bateman et al. (2017) (BCL),
which documents congressional legislator ideologies specifically on racial issues. Second, we
use the second dimension of DW-NOMINATE scores for members the US House of Repre-
sentative, generally understood to measure the left-to-right orientation of representatives'
social views respectively (Poole and Rosenthal 1997). In the Appendix, we show the effects
of the boll weevil on the first (economic) dimension of DW-Nominate (Table A.2). For each
  23
     We also examined the effect of the boll weevil on voting for the two major Dixiecrat presidential candi-
dates, Strom Thurmond in 1948 and George Wallace in 1968. While we see no effects of the boll weevil on
Thurmond's vote share, in 1968, after the Civil Rights Act and the Voting Rights Act, we do see counties
more substantially treated by the boll weevil--with treatment measured as the number of years with the
boll weevil infestation interacted with the cotton specialization of the county in 1890--had lower vote shares
for Wallace. We present these results in Appendix Table A.1.
  24
     25% cotton usage × a median coefficient of -0.072.

                                                     24
county, we average the scores of the county's Congressional representatives to compute a
final score. The boll weevil led to a large rightward shift in both the BCL scores as well
as the second dimension of DW-NOMINATE. This change would, if anything, suggest that
elected representatives became less progressive on issues of civil rights. Thus, impacts on
formal politics are unlikely to explain the reductions in violence seen in earlier results.


                                     [Table 7 about here.]


8   Conclusion

    How do economic structures shape political behavior in contexts marred by intergroup
animus? In this paper, we explore this question in the context of the U.S. South using
the arrival of the boll weevil cotton pest as an exogenous shock to a coercive economy.
Using a panel difference-in-difference, we find that the boll weevil reduces both tangible and
symbolic coercion in terms of anti-black lynchings and Confederate monument construction.
Our cross-sectional analysis indicated long-run effects on other outcomes as well: counties
more exposed to the boll weevil have higher rates of black voter registration and suggestively
lower rates of membership in the Ku Klux Klan (KKK).
    We argue that the lessening repression stemmed from black workers "voting with their
feet" in the style of Hirschman (1970), a result which parallels the role of migration in
other political changes (Karadja and Prawitz 2019; Margo 1991). We rule out several other
potential explanations, notably that these changes were instituted at the behest of elected
representatives. Overall, the results imply that while African Americans were routinely
silenced within the formal political system, they nonetheless retained an influential measure
of voice within the American South.




                                              25
State




         West Virginia

              Virginia

                Texas

           Tennessee

        South Carolina

        North Carolina

             Missouri

           Mississippi

            Louisiana

             Kentucky

              Georgia

               Florida

             Arkansas

             Alabama
                                0                      40                     80
                                                                                   Pct. Crops in Cotton (Acres)



                         Figure 1: Importance of Cotton across the U.S. South in 1890




                                                     26
   Number of Lynchings, 1892-1950
      0    1     5    10    20

Figure 2: Map of Lynchings, 1892-1950




                 27
        Civil Rights Era Protest
            Protest   No Protest   No Data

Figure 3: Map of Civil Rights Protests, 1960-1965




                        28
Figure 4: Map of USDA Map of Boll Weevil Exposure




                       29
                                0.1
 Estimated Boll Weevil Effect




                                0.0




                                -0.1




                                -0.2




                                -0.3
                                       -20   -10                 0                 10          20
                                                   Years To or After Boll Weevil

Figure 5: Event Study Effect of Boll Weevil on Lynchings, 1892-1950. Combining annual data on lynchings
with the year of the boll weevil's arrival in each infested county, we estimate an event study. Because
lynchings are relatively rare, we aggregate the timing of treatment into five year bins. As in the main
specifications, treatment is defined as the boll weevil infestation interacted with the 1890 cotton intensity in
the county. The 0-bin indicates the average effect of the boll weevil on lynchings from the year of arrival to
four years after; the 5-bin indicates the average effect of the boll weevil on lynchings from five years after to
nine years after. We include county fixed effects, year fixed effects, years until the boll weevil fixed effects,
and cluster standard errors at the county level. All estimates are relative to the effect of 1890 cotton intensity
in the 5 years to 1 year before the arrival of the boll weevil.




                                                            30
               Table 1: The Effect of the Boll Weevil on the Southern Cotton Economy

                                                           Panel A. Acres Planted in Cotton
                                              (1)                (2)              (3)            (4)
                                                                                        
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton         -0.651                 -2.028          -2.294         -0.871
                                         (0.300)                (0.141)         (0.188)        (0.201)
Lagged Outcome                                                   0.318                           0.323
                                                                (0.011)                         (0.011)
Year FEs                                     Yes                 Yes             Yes            Yes
County FEs                                   Yes                 Yes             Yes            Yes
Cotton Time Trend                             No                 No              Yes            Yes

Observations                                 6609               5803             6609           5803
Y Mean                                       8.27               8.98             8.27           8.98

                                                          Panel B. Black Farm Ownership Rate
                                              (1)                (2)              (3)            (4)
                                                                                        
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton             18.620             23.981            3.474         11.101
                                             (2.231)            (3.097)          (2.061)        (3.107)
Lagged Outcome                                                  -0.112                         -0.224
                                                                 (0.019)                       (0.020)
Year FEs                                     Yes                 Yes             Yes            Yes
County FEs                                   Yes                 Yes             Yes            Yes
Cotton Time Trend                             No                 No              Yes            Yes

Observations                                 4466               3638            4466            3638
Y Mean                                       25.45              24.68           25.45           24.68
                                                              Panel C. Black Child Labor
                                              (1)                (2)              (3)            (4)
                                                                        
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton        -20.695                -24.950          -3.666         -11.751
                                         (2.621)                (2.627)         (2.916)         (2.653)
Lagged Outcome                                                  -0.108                         -0.146
                                                                 (0.020)                       (0.019)
Year FEs                                     Yes                 Yes             Yes            Yes
County FEs                                   Yes                 Yes             Yes            Yes
Cotton Time Trend                             No                 No              Yes            Yes

Observations                                 3772               2961            3772            2961
Y Mean                                       26.74              23.61           26.74           23.61

Note: Standard errors clustered by county.




                                                     31
        Table 2: The Effect of the Boll Weevil on Racial Violence and Confederate Memorials

                                                              Panel A. Lynchings
                                              (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
                                                                                     
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton         -0.157             -0.156           -0.072           -0.068
                                         (0.020)            (0.011)          (0.023)          (0.016)
Lagged Outcome                                                0.025                            0.024
                                                             (0.004)                          (0.004)
Year FEs                                     Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
County FEs                                   Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Cotton Time Trend                             No              No              Yes              Yes

Observations                                 67090          66286            67090            66286
Y Mean                                        0.04           0.04             0.04             0.04

                                                          Panel B. Confederate Statues
                                              (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)
                                                                                     
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton         -0.011             -0.011           -0.017           -0.017
                                         (0.004)            (0.003)          (0.008)          (0.005)
Lagged Outcome                                              -0.015                            -0.015
                                                             (0.004)                          (0.004)
Year FEs                                     Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
County FEs                                   Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Cotton Time Trend                             No              No              Yes              Yes

Observations                                 72172          71368            72172            71368
Y Mean                                        0.01           0.01             0.01             0.01

Note: Standard errors clustered by county.




                                                     32
    Table 3: The Effect of the Boll Weevil on Repression and Collective Action in the Long Run

                          Pre-VRA Voter Registration        KKK        Pro Civil Rights   NAACP
                           Black     Black-White Gap     Membership        Protests       Chapters
                            (1)               (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)
Years with BW ×
Share Cotton Acres 1890     2.276             4.962        -0.019           -0.100         -0.037
                           (0.687)           (0.987)        (0.014)          (0.044)        (0.025)
Years with BW               0.212            -0.812        -0.001           -0.012         -0.011
                           (0.202)            (0.286)       (0.004)          (0.013)        (0.007)
Share Cotton Acres 1890   -75.227        -76.033             0.422            1.298        -0.362
                          (10.382)        (14.791)          (0.209)          (0.667)        (0.372)
State FEs                   Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
1890 Controls               Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes

Observations                956               871           960               961           962
Y Mean                     28.19             -16.64         0.29             -1.81          0.64

Note: Standard errors clustered by county.




                                                    33
                    Table 4: The Effect of the Boll Weevil on Black Net Migration

                                                          Panel A. Population Fraction Black
                                              (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)
                                                                                         
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton          -5.465               -6.283           -2.384           -3.922
                                          (1.461)              (0.420)          (0.869)          (0.592)
Lagged Outcome                                                   0.801                             0.797
                                                                (0.008)                           (0.008)
Year FEs                                     Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
County FEs                                   Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
Cotton Time Trend                             No                 No              Yes               Yes

Observations                                 7401               6595             7401             6595
Y Mean                                       32.02              31.63            32.02            31.63

                                                      Panel B. Change in Log Black Population
                                             (1)               (2)             (3)               (4)
                                                                                     
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton         -0.019              -0.019          -0.016             -0.009
                                         (0.006)             (0.005)         (0.007)            (0.008)
Lagged Outcome                                               -0.030                             -0.030
                                                              (0.001)                           (0.001)
Year FEs                                     Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes
County FEs                                   Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes
Cotton Time Trend                            No                No              Yes               Yes

Observations                              6595                6595            6595              6595
Y Mean                                    0.01                0.01            0.01              0.01
                                                            Panel C. Log Black Population
                                              (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)
                                                                        
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton          -0.224               -0.188             0.052          -0.086
                                          (0.179)              (0.054)           (0.095)         (0.076)
Lagged Outcome                                                   0.698                             0.698
                                                                (0.009)                           (0.009)
Year FEs                                     Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
County FEs                                   Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
Cotton Time Trend                             No                 No              Yes               Yes

Observations                                 7401               6595             7401             6595
Y Mean                                       7.96               8.02             7.96             8.02

Note: Standard errors clustered by county.




                                                     34
               Table 5: The Effect of the Boll Weevil on Black Net Migration by Sex

                                                Panel A. Change in Log Black Male Population
                                         (1)                (2)             (3)                 (4)
                                                                                   
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton       -0.013             -0.018          -0.017           -0.010
                                        (0.006)           (0.005)         (0.007)          (0.008)
Lagged Outcome                                            -0.029                           -0.029
                                                          (0.001)                          (0.001)
Year FEs                                 Yes                Yes             Yes                 Yes
County FEs                               Yes                Yes             Yes                 Yes
Cotton Time Trend                        No                 No              Yes                 Yes

Observations                             6838              6838             6838               6838
Y Mean                                   0.01              0.01             0.01               0.01

                                               Panel B. Change in Log Black Female Population
                                         (1)                (2)             (3)                 (4)
                                                                                   
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton       -0.015             -0.020          -0.011           -0.005
                                        (0.005)           (0.005)         (0.007)          (0.007)
Lagged Outcome                                            -0.025                           -0.025
                                                          (0.001)                          (0.001)
Year FEs                                 Yes                Yes             Yes                 Yes
County FEs                               Yes                Yes             Yes                 Yes
Cotton Time Trend                        No                 No              Yes                 Yes

Observations                             6838              6838             6838               6838
Y Mean                                   0.01              0.01             0.01               0.01

Note: Standard errors clustered by county.




                                                   35
                    Table 6: The Effect of the Boll Weevil on Political Competition

                                                    Panel A. Presidential Election Competition
                                             (1)             (2)             (3)                  (4)
                                                                                     
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton          -0.085            -0.017         -0.121               -0.063
                                          (0.015)            (0.008)        (0.014)             (0.011)
Lagged Outcome                                               0.381                                0.379
                                                            (0.008)                              (0.008)
Year FEs                                   Yes               Yes             Yes                 Yes
County FEs                                 Yes               Yes             Yes                 Yes
Cotton Time Trend                            No              No              Yes                 Yes

Observations                              15910             14957          15910                 14957
Y Mean                                    -0.23             -0.23          -0.23                 -0.23

                                                      Panel B. US House Election Competition
                                             (1)              (2)             (3)                  (4)
                                                                                      
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton          -0.008             -0.011          -0.048              -0.050
                                          (0.016)            (0.008)         (0.018)             (0.012)
Lagged Outcome                                                0.279                                0.278
                                                             (0.007)                              (0.007)
Year FEs                                     Yes              Yes             Yes                  Yes
County FEs                                   Yes              Yes             Yes                  Yes
Cotton Time Trend                            No               No              Yes                  Yes

Observations                               24592             21500           24592               21500
Y Mean                                     -0.36             -0.36           -0.36               -0.36
                                                      Panel C. US Senate Election Competition
                                             (1)              (2)             (3)                 (4)
                                                                                      
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton          -0.133            -0.088          -0.140               -0.087
                                          (0.034)            (0.067)         (0.034)              (0.067)
Lagged Outcome                                                0.041                                0.040
                                                             (0.015)                              (0.015)
Year FEs                                     Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes
County FEs                                   Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes
Cotton Time Trend                            No               No              Yes                 Yes

Observations                               8536              6172            8536                 6172
Y Mean                                     -0.35             -0.34           -0.35                -0.34

Note: Standard errors clustered by county.




                                                    36
                    Table 7: The Effect of the Boll Weevil on Politician Ideology

                                                   Panel A. Bateman et al Civil Rights Scores
                                           (1)              (2)             (3)                  (4)
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton           0.685             0.206          0.389                0.157
                                          (0.061)           (0.019)        (0.071)              (0.031)
Lagged Outcome                                               0.730                               0.729
                                                            (0.004)                             (0.004)
Year FEs                                   Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes
County FEs                                 Yes              Yes             Yes                 Yes
Cotton Time Trend                          No               No              Yes                 Yes

Observations                              27801            25235           27801                25235
Y Mean                                     1.29             1.31            1.29                 1.31

                                                        Panel B. DW-Nominate Dimension 2
                                            (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton             0.304             0.131               0.299           0.126
                                            (0.032)           (0.011)             (0.040)         (0.016)
Lagged Outcome                                                 0.608                               0.608
                                                              (0.004)                             (0.004)
Year FEs                                    Yes               Yes                 Yes              Yes
County FEs                                  Yes               Yes                 Yes              Yes
Cotton Time Trend                           No                 No                 Yes              Yes

Observations                               35316             34291             35316              34291
Y Mean                                      0.39              0.39              0.39               0.39

Note: Standard errors clustered by county. In the Appendix, we show the effects of the boll weevil on the
 first (economic) dimension of DW-Nominate (Table A.2).




                                                   37
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Camilo Garc´
                            ia-Jimeno, and James A. Robinson. 2012. "Finding Eldorado:
  Slavery and Long-Run Development in Colombia." Journal of Comparative Economics
  40:534­564.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. "The Colonial Origins
  of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation." American Economic Review
  91:1369­1401.

Acemoglu, Daron and Alexander Wolitzky. 2011. "The Economics of Labor Coercion."
  Econometrica 79:555­600.

Acharya, Avidit, Matthew Blackwell, and Maya Sen. 2018. Deep Roots: How Slavery Still
  Shapes Southern Politics . Princeton University Press.

Adamson, Christopher R. 1983. "Punishment after slavery: Southern state penal systems,
 1865-1890." Social Problems 30:555­569.

Ager, Philipp, Markus Brueckner, and Benedikt Herz. 2017. "The Boll Weevil Plague and
  Its Effect on the Southern Agricultural Sector, 1889­1929." Explorations in Economic
  History 65:94­105. 00004.

Ali, Omar H. 2010. In the Lion's Mouth: Black Populism in the New South, 1886-1900 .
  Univ. Press of Mississippi.

Alston, Lee J. and Joseph P. Ferrie. 1985. "Labor Costs, Paternalism, and Loyalty in South-
  ern Agriculture: A Constraint on the Growth of the Welfare State." The Journal of
  Economic History 45:95­117.

Anderson, D Mark, Benjamin Crost, and Daniel I Rees. 2018. "Do Economic Downturns
 Fuel Racial Animus." Technical report, April 2018. Working paper.

Bailey, Amy Kate and Stewart E Tolnay. 2015. Lynched: The victims of southern mob
  violence . UNC Press Books.

Bailey, Amy Kate, Stewart E. Tolnay, E. M. Beck, Alison Renee Roberts, and Nicholas H.
  Wong. 2008. "Personalizing Lynch Victims: A New Database to Support the Study of Mob
  Violence." Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History
  41:47­64.

Baker, Richard B. 2015. "From the Field to the Classroom: The Boll Weevil's Impact on
  Education in Rural Georgia." The Journal of Economic History 75:1128­1160.

Baker, Richard B, John Blanchette, and Katherine Eriksson. 2018. "Long-Run Impacts of
  Agricultural Shocks on Educational Attainment: Evidence from the Boll Weevil." Working
  Paper 25400, National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                            38
Bateman, David A., Joshua D. Clinton, and John S. Lapinski. 2017. "A House Divided?
  Roll Calls, Polarization, and Policy Differences in the U.S. House, 1877-2011." American
  Journal of Political Science 61:698­714.
Beckert, Sven. 2004. "Emancipation and Empire: Reconstructing the Worldwide Web of
  Cotton Production in the Age of the American Civil War." The American Historical
  Review 109:1405­1438.
Beckert, Sven. 2015. Empire of Cotton: A Global History . Vintage Books.
Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson. 2009. "Repression or Civil War?" American Economic
  Review: Papers & Proceedings 99:292­297.
Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson. 2011. "The Logic of Political Violence." Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 126:1411­1445.
Besley, Timothy, Torsten Persson, and Daniel M Sturm. 2010. "Political competition, policy
  and growth: theory and evidence from the US." The Review of Economic Studies 77:1329­
  1352.
Blackmon, Douglas A. 2009. Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black
  Americans from the Civil War to World War II . Anchor Books.
Bloome, Deirdre, James Feigenbaum, and Christopher Muller. 2017. "Tenancy, Marriage,
  and the Boll Weevil Infestation, 1892­1930." Demography 54:1029­1049. 00003.
Caughey, Devin and Christopher Warshaw. 2018. "Policy Preferences and Policy Change:
  Dynamic Responsiveness in the American States, 1936­2014." American Political Science
  Review 112:249­266.
Chacon, Mario and Jeffrey L Jensen. 2018. "De Facto Power, Democracy, and Taxation:
 Evidence from Military Occupation during Reconstruction." Available at SSRN 3092630
 .
Christian, Cornelius. 2017. "Lynchings, Labour, and Cotton in the US South: A Reappraisal
 of Tolnay and Beck." Explorations in Economic History 66:106­116.
Chwe, Michael Suk-Young. 1990. "Why Were Workers Whipped? Pain in a Principal-Agent
  Model." Economic Journal pp. 1109­1121.
Clay, Karen, Ethan Schmick, and Werner Troesken. 2019. "Changes in Black-White Inequal-
  ity: Evidence from the Boll Weevil." Working Paper.
Cook, Lisa, Trevon Logan, and John Parman. 2017. "Racial Segregation and Southern
  Lynching." Technical Report w23813, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
  MA.
Cook, Lisa D. 2012. "Converging to a National Lynching Database: Recent Developments and
  the Way Forward." Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary
  History 45:55­63.

                                           39
Dell, Melissa. 2010.   "The Persistent Effects of Peru's Mining "Mita"."     Econometrica
  78:1863­1903.
Du   Bois,    W.    E.     B.  2014.         "The    African    Roots      of        War."
 https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2014/08/the-african-roots-of-
 war/373403/.
Dube, Oeindrila and Juan F. Vargas. 2013. "Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Conflict:
 Evidence from Colombia." The Review of Economic Studies 80:1384­1421.
Edmonds, Helen G. 2013. The Negro and Fusion Politics in North Carolina, 1894-1901 .
  UNC Press Books.
Eriksson, Katherine, Baker Richard, and John Blanchette. Decemeber 2018. "Long-Run Im-
  pacts of Agricultural Shocks on Educational Attainment: Evidence from the Boll Weevil."
  .
Feigenbaum, James J, James Lee, and Filippo Mezzanotti. 2018. "Capital Destruction and
  Economic Growth: The Effects of Sherman's March, 1850-1920." Working Paper 25392,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ferrara, Andreas and Price V Fishback. 2020. "Discrimination, Migration, and Economic
  Outcomes: Evidence from World War I." Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Fite, Gilbert C. 1984. Cotton Fields No More: Southern Agriculture, 1865-1980 . Lexington,
  KY: University Press of Kentucky.
Foner, Eric. 1988. Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863-1877 . Harper
  and Row. OCLC: 16130460.
Foner, Eric. 2017. "Opinion -- Confederate Statues and `Our' History." The New York
  Times .
Francis, Megan Ming. 2014. Civil Rights and the Making of the Modern American State .
  Cambridge University Press.
Giesen, James Conrad. 2004. The South's Greatest Enemy? Ph.D., University of Georgia.
Gonz´
    alez, Felipe, Guillermo Marshall, and Suresh Naidu. 2017. "Start-up Nation? Slave
 Wealth and Entrepreneurship in Civil War Maryland." The Journal of Economic History
 77:373­405.
Gregory, James N. 2019. "Mapping Social Movements." Technical report, University of
  Washington.
Haines, Michael R. and Samuel H. Preston. 1997. "The Use of the Census to Estimate
  Childhood Mortality: Comparisons from the 1900 and 1910 United States Census Public
  Use Samples." Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History
  30:77­96.

                                            40
Higgs, Robert. 1976. "The Boll Weevil, the Cotton Economy, and Black Migration 1910-
  1930." Agricultural History 50:335­350.

Hirschman, Albert O. 1970. Exit, voice, and loyalty: Responses to decline in firms, organi-
  zations, and states , volume 25. Harvard university press.

Hornbeck, Richard. 2012. "The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short- and
  Long-Run Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe." American Economic Review
  102:1477­1507.

Hornbeck, Richard and Daniel Keniston. 2017. "Creative Destruction: Barriers to Urban
  Growth and the Great Boston Fire of 1872." American Economic Review 107:1365­1398.

Hornbeck, Richard and Suresh Naidu. 2014. "When the Levee Breaks: Black Migration and
  Economic Development in the American South." American Economic Review 104:963­
  990.

Jedwab, Remi, Noel D. Johnson, and Mark Koyama. 2019. "Negative Shocks and Mass
  Persecutions: Evidence from the Black Death." Journal of Economic Growth .

Jones, Daniel B, Werner Troesken, and Randall Walsh. 2012. "A Poll Tax by Any Other
  Name: The Political Economy of Disenfranchisement." Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Jones, Daniel B., Werner Troesken, and Randall Walsh. 2017. "Political Participation in
  a Violent Society: The Impact of Lynching on Voter Turnout in the Post-Reconstruction
  South." Journal of Development Economics 129:29­46. 00001.

Karadja, Mounir and Erik Prawitz. 2019. "Exit, Voice, and Political Change: Evidence from
 Swedish Mass Migration to the United States." Journal of Political Economy 127:1864­
 1925.

Key, V. O. 1949. Southern Politics in State and Nation . University of Tennessee Press.
  OCLC: 542025319.

Lange, Fabian, Alan L. Olmstead, and Paul W. Rhode. 2009. "The Impact of the Boll
  Weevil, 1892­1932." The Journal of Economic History 69:685.

Logan, Trevon. 2018. "Do Black Politicians Matter?" Technical Report w24190, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. 00000.

Logan, Trevon D. 2015. "A Time (Not) Apart: A Lesson in Economic History from Cotton
  Picking Books." The Review of Black Political Economy 42:301­322.

Logan, Trevon D. 2019. "Whitelashing: Black Politicians, Taxes, and Violence." Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lowes, Sara and Eduardo Montero. 2018. "Concessions, Violence, and Indirect Rule: Evi-
  dence from the Congo Free State."

                                            41
Margo, Robert A. 1991. "Segregated schools and the mobility hypothesis: A model of local
 government discrimination." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106:61­73.

Mayda, Anna Maria. 2006. "Who is against immigration? A cross-country investigation of
 individual attitudes toward immigrants." The review of Economics and Statistics 88:510­
 530.

Mazumder, Soumyajit. 2018. "The Persistent Effect of the U.S. Civil Rights Movement on
 Political Attitudes." American Journal of Political Science 62:922­935.

McAdam, Doug. 1999. Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency, 1930-
 1970 . University of Chicago Press, second edition edition.

Mickey, Robert. 2015. Paths Out of Dixie: The Democratization of Authoritarian Enclaves
 in America's Deep South, 1944-1972 . Princeton University Press.

Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti. 2004a. "Economic Shocks and
 Civil Conflict: An Instrumental Variables Approach." Journal of Political Economy
 112:725­753.

Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti. 2004b. "Economic Shocks and
 Civil Conflict: An Instrumental Variables Approach." Journal of Political Economy
 112:725­753.

Mitra, Anirban and Debraj Ray. 2014. "Implications of an Economic Theory of Conflict:
 Hindu-Muslim Violence in India." Journal of Political Economy 122:719­765.

Muller, Christopher. 2018. "Freedom and Convict Leasing in the Postbellum South." Amer-
 ican Journal of Sociology 124:367­405.

Muller, Christopher and Daniel Schrage. 2019. "The Political Economy of Incarceration in
 the U.S. South, 1910-1925." .

Naidu, Suresh. 2012. "Suffrage, Schooling, and Sorting in the Post-Bellum U.S. South."
  Technical Report w18129, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. 00108.

Naidu, Suresh and Noam Yuchtman. 2013. "Coercive Contract Enforcement: Law and the
  Labor Market in Nineteenth Century Industrial Britain." American Economic Review
  103:107­144.

Nickell, Stephen. 1981. "Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects." Econometrica: Journal
  of the Econometric Society pp. 1417­1426.

Nunn, Nathan. 2008. "The Long-Term Effects of Africa's Slave Trades." The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 123:139­176.

Nunn, Nathan and Leonard Wantchekon. 2011. "The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust
 in Africa." The American Economic Review 101:3221­3252.

Ogden, Frederic D. 1958. The poll tax in the south . University of Alabama Press.

                                            42
Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of
  Roll Call Voting . Oxford University Press.

Ransom, Roger L. 1989. Conflict and Compromise: The Political Economy of Slavery,
  Emancipation and the American Civil War . Cambridge University Press.

Shlomowitz, Ralph. 1979. "The Origins of Southern Sharecropping." Agricultural History
  53:557­575.

Sokoloff, Kenneth L. and Stanley L. Engerman. 2000. "History Lessons: Institutions, Factors
  Endowments, and Paths of Development in the New World." The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 14:217­232.

Southern Poverty Law Center. 2019. "Whose Heritage? Public Symbols of the Confederacy."
  Technical report, Southern Poverty Law Center.

Strother, Logan, Spencer Piston, and Thomas Ogorzalek. 2017/ed. "PRIDE OR PREJ-
  UDICE?: Racial Prejudice, Southern Heritage, and White Support for the Confederate
  Battle Flag." Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race 14:295­323.

Tolnay, Stewart Emory. 1999. The Bottom Rung: African American Family Life on Southern
  Farms . University of Illinois Press.

Tolnay, Stewart E and Elwood M Beck. 1990. "Black flight: Lethal violence and the Great
  Migration, 1900-1930." Social Science History pp. 347­370.

Tolnay, Stewart Emory and E. M. Beck. 1995. A Festival of Violence: An Analysis of
  Southern Lynchings, 1882-1930 . University of Illinois Press.

Troesken, Werner and Randall Walsh. 2017. "Collective action, white flight, and the origins
  of formal segregation laws." Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

United States Commission on Civil Rights. 1959. "Report of the United States Commission
 on Civil Rights 1959." .

Wilkerson, Isabel. 2011. The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of America's Great
 Migration . Vintage Books.

Williams, Jhacova. 2017. "Historical lynchings and contemporary voting behavior of blacks."
 Technical report, Technical report, Louisiana State University.

Wright, Gavin. 1996. Old South, New South Revolutions in the Southern Economy since the
 Civil War . Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press. OCLC: 495302227.

Wright, Gavin. 2013. Slavery and American Economic Development .            Baton Rouge:
 Louisiana State Univ Press. OCLC: 840267115.




                                            43
A   For Online Publication: Additional Results




                                     44
[Table A.1 about here.]

[Figure A.1 about here.]

[Figure A.2 about here.]

[Table A.2 about here.]




          45
Log Cotton per Acre in 1890

0            3            6         9

 Figure A.1: Map of Cotton Specialization in 1890




                         46
                                0.02
 Estimated Boll Weevil Effect




                                0.00




                                -0.02




                                -0.04
                                        -20   -10                 0                 10         20
                                                    Years To or After Boll Weevil

Figure A.2: Event Study Effect of Boll Weevil on Timing of Confederate Memorial Construction, 1892-
1950. Combining annual data on the construction of Confederate memorials with the year of the boll weevil's
arrival in each infested county, we estimate an event study. Because construction of memorials is relatively
rare, we aggregate the timing of treatment into five year bins. As in the main specifications, treatment is
defined as the boll weevil infestation interacted with the 1890 cotton intensity in the county. The 0-bin
indicates the average effect of the boll weevil on lynchings from the year of arrival to four years after; the
5-bin indicates the average effect of the boll weevil on the creation of Confederate memorials from five years
after to nine years after. We include county fixed effects, year fixed effects, years until the boll weevil fixed
effects, and cluster standard errors at the county level. All estimates are relative to the effect of 1890 cotton
intensity in the 5 years to 1 year before the arrival of the boll weevil.




                                                             47
            Table A.1: The Effect of the Boll Weevil on Dixiecrat Presidential Vote Shares

                                       Thurmond in 1948                          Wallace in 1968
                                 (1)                      (2)              (3)                      (4)
Years with BW ×
Pct. Cotton Bales
per Acre, 1890                  0.004                    0.001          -0.005                 -0.011
                               (0.004)                  (0.004)          (0.004)                (0.004)
Years with BW                   0.002                -0.001               0.002                     0.003
                               (0.001)                (0.001)            (0.001)                   (0.001)
Pct. Cotton Bales
per Acre, 1890                  0.245                    0.112            0.182                     0.187
                               (0.055)                  (0.058)          (0.057)                   (0.060)
State FEs                        Yes                     Yes              Yes                      Yes
1890 Controls                    No                      Yes               No                      Yes

Observations                    1017                    960               1017                     960
Y Mean                          0.32                    0.33              0.42                     0.43

Note: Standard errors clustered by county.




                                                   48
                    Table A.2: The Effect of the Boll Weevil on Politician Ideology

                                                          Panel A. DW-Nominate Dimension 1
                                              (1)                (2)            (3)           (4)
                                                                                       
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton           -0.003                0.020          0.031        -0.010
                                           (0.018)              (0.007)        (0.019)       (0.011)
Lagged Outcome                                                   0.475                        0.476
                                                                (0.005)                      (0.005)
Year FEs                                     Yes                Yes             Yes           Yes
County FEs                                   Yes                Yes             Yes           Yes
Cotton Time Trend                             No                 No             Yes           Yes

Observations                                 35316             34291           35316         34291
Y Mean                                       -0.28             -0.29           -0.28         -0.29

                                                          Panel B. DW-Nominate Dimension 2
                                              (1)                (2)            (3)           (4)
                                                                                       
Boll Weevil Infestation X Cotton              0.304              0.131          0.299         0.126
                                             (0.032)            (0.011)        (0.040)       (0.016)
Lagged Outcome                                                   0.608                        0.608
                                                                (0.004)                      (0.004)
Year FEs                                     Yes                Yes             Yes           Yes
County FEs                                   Yes                Yes             Yes           Yes
Cotton Time Trend                             No                 No             Yes           Yes

Observations                                 35316             34291           35316         34291
Y Mean                                        0.39              0.39            0.39          0.39

Note: Standard errors clustered by county.




                                                     49
