                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE INFLUENCE OF EARLY LIFE HEALTH CONDITIONS ON LIFE COURSE
                                 HEALTH

                                     Manuel Flores Mallo
                                      Barbara L. Wolfe

                                      Working Paper 27174
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27174


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020


This paper uses data from SHARE Waves 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 (DOIs: 10.6103/SHARE.w1.700,
10.6103/SHARE.w2.700,          10.6103/SHARE.w3.700,        10.6103/SHARE.w4.700,     10.6103/
SHARE.w5.700, 10.6103/SHARE.w6.700, 10.6103/SHARE.w7.700), as well as from the
generated Job Episodes Panel (DOI: 10.6103/SHARE.jep.700). See, correspondingly, Börsch-
Supan et al. (2013) and Brugiavini et al. (2019) for methodological details. The SHARE data
collection has been funded by the European Commission through FP5 (QLK6-CT-2001-00360),
FP6 (SHARE-I3: RII-CT-2006-062193, COMPARE: CIT5-CT-2005-028857, SHARELIFE:
CIT4-CT-2006-028812), FP7 (SHARE-PREP: GA N°211909, SHARE-LEAP: GA N°227822,
SHARE M4: GA N°261982) and Horizon 2020 (SHARE-DEV3: GA N°676536, SERISS: GA N
°654221) and by DG Employment, Social Affairs & Inclusion. Additional funding from the
German Ministry of Education and Research, the Max Planck Society for the Advancement of
Science, the U.S. National Institute on Aging (U01_AG09740-13S2, P01_AG005842,
P01_AG08291,       P30_AG12815,         R21_AG025169,        Y1-AG-4553-01,    IAG_BSR06-11,
OGHA_04-064, HHSN271201300071C) and from various national funding sources is gratefully
acknowledged (see www.share-project.org). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Manuel Flores Mallo and Barbara L. Wolfe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Influence of Early Life Health Conditions on Life Course Health
Manuel Flores Mallo and Barbara L. Wolfe
NBER Working Paper No. 27174
May 2020
JEL No. D1,I10,I14,J0

                                          ABSTRACT

We expand on earlier studies investigating the links between early health and later health by
including different dimensions of early-life health and multiple life course outcomes consisting of
the age of onset of serious cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) and multiple job-related health
outcomes. The four dimensions of childhood health are mental, physical, self-rated general health
and severe headaches or migraines. The data set we use includes 21 countries from the Survey of
Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe. We find that the different dimensions of childhood
health have unique ties to later outcomes. For men, early mental health problems play a stronger
role for life course job-related health outcomes, but early poor or fair general health is more
strongly linked to the spike in onset of CVDs in their late 40s. For women, these links between
childhood health dimensions and life course outcomes are less clear-cut than for men. The spike
in onset of CVDs in their late 40s is driven by those with severe headaches or migraines while
those with early physical health problems generally do better as captured by job-related
outcomes. We also explore and control for possible mediating factors and assess the importance
of omitted variables using a test proposed by Oster (2019).


Manuel Flores Mallo
Universitat Internacional de Catalunya
Immaculada, 22
08017 Barcelona
Spain
mflores@uic.es

Barbara L. Wolfe
3458 Social Science Building
University of Wisconsin
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
BWolfe@wisc.edu
Previous studies have illustrated the multidimensional nature of health (Kalwij
and Vermeulen, 2008) and have shown that both childhood-specific diseases and
childhood health summary variables contain useful information about adult
health (Smith, 2009a, 2009b). In our study, we will elaborate on these findings
and explore the influence that differentdimensions of early-life health have on
the onset of specific health conditions and permanent or temporary withdrawals
from the labor force over the life course and other potential mediating factors. In
particular, we will explore the link between four dimensions of early-life health
and regular use of dental care since childhood and 1) the probability of having an
onset of one of six health conditions including five cardiovascular diseases and
chronic lung disease over the life course in five-year intervals over ages 16-80;
2) the probability of having 1+ or 2+ episodes of ill health during adulthood; 3)
the accumulated number of career gaps in employment in five-year intervals
over ages 25-64; 4) the probability of leaving the labor force in five-year
intervals over ages 25-64; and 5) the probability of having retired from a job
because of own ill health. We will also look at mediating factors including the
years in full-time education, and an alternate measure, the probability of having
a low, medium or high education level, the probability of having ever worked, the
probability of being ever married, and the probability of having ever had a
natural child. In doing so, we will control for the current country of residence,
cohort, and measures of family socio-economic status (SES) when a child. Our
analysis sample includes men and women from 20 European countries plus
Israel.

Literature Review  

There is a growing literature that demonstrates that the SES-health gradient in
adulthood has its origins in an individual's early life (Case etal., 2002; Currie and
Stabile, 2003). Two chapters in recent volumes of the Handbook of Labor
Economics (Almond and Currie, 2011a; Black and Devereux, 2011), for instance,
show that adverse health events in early life and parental SES have long-lasting
effects on later life health and SES-related outcomes such as earnings and work
effort. Several theories exist for such a relationship. For instance, the fetalorigins
hypothesis (e.g. Barker, 1995; Almond and Currie, 2011b) suggests a direct link
from the prenatal period to adult health that may be independent of social class
in adult life, lifecoursemodels assume that illness and deprivation during
childhood may have long-term consequences for health during adulthood, either
directly through the illness itself or indirectly by restricting educational
achievement and life opportunities (e.g. Kuh and Wadsworth, 1993) and
pathwaysmodels suggest that the observed SES-health gradient in adulthood is
only indirectly attributable to early life events through later life events (e.g.
Marmot etal., 2001). Later studies for the U.K. (Case etal., 2005) and the U.S.
(Case and Paxson, 2008) also present evidence in line with the theoretical
predictions and show that having good health during childhood and growing up
in a more comfortable environment result in a higher level of education, and
good health and higher economic status later in life. All these findings are
important to policymakers because they may suggest that policies aimed at
improving children's health and SES have long-lasting benefits for both the
individual and society because of increased human capital accumulation, hence

                                          2
better employment opportunities, and better later life health (see also Marmot et
al., 2012).

Several recent studies find causal impacts of very specific exogenous early life
events on later life outcomes. A recent review of these is quite helpful and quite
exhaustive (Almondetal., 2018) so we largely skip this literature. To provide a
flavor, we note a few: using the 1918 influenza pandemic as a measure of a
health shock around birth is shown to relate to later life outcomes such as
education, health and SES (e.g. Almond, 2006; Nelson, 2010; Almond and
Mazumder, 2005). Chen and Zhou (2007) show that the 1959­1961 famine in
China adversely affected height, earnings and labor supply, and Barreca (2010)
shows that malaria exposure adversely affects educational attainment and
increases poverty risk. Painter etal. (2005) and Roseboom etal. (2001, 2006)
provide evidence on long-term effects on later life health of prenatal under
nutrition during the Dutch famine of 1944/1945. In addition, van den Berg etal.
(2006) show that economic conditions around birth--measured by the business
cycle--affect mortality later in life. Bhalotra and Venkataranani (2015) show
that a decrease in pneumonia in infancy reduces work related disabilities. Their
emphasis is on the role of the introduction of antibiotics in the infants' state of
residence. Another study by Kesternich etal. (2014) uses the experience of war
to investigate its influence on adult outcomes including health, education, and
net worth.

In work slightly more closely tied to the question we explore below, several
authors have established a link between low birth weight and adult health. See
for example Figlio etal. (2014) and Bharadoyetal. (2014).

In terms of specific health conditions, Currie and Stabile (2006, 2009), Fletcher
and Wolfe (2008, 2009) and Currieetal. (2010) show that childhood mental
health problems have long-term effects on outcomes that are larger than those of
specific physical health conditions. Currie etal. (2010) used data from the
Manitoba, Canada for 50,000 children and their siblings. They linked health data
to information on school performance and welfare use after age 18 and
compared children with mental health issues with their own siblings. They
examined the effects of having been diagnosed or treated for mental health
problems in four different age ranges, 0­3, 4­8, 9­13, and 14­18, and compared
the impact of mental health problems with those of having been diagnosed or
treated for asthma and injuries. They found that mental health conditions have
more serious consequences than these two physical health conditions.

One of the missing aspects of most of these studies is that the focus is on the fetal
period and that of young children. As Currie (2020) points out, adolescent is
quite understudied and calls these ages "the missing middle". P.10. Yang etal.
(2017) put this differently as "A dominant paradigm to explain the early- and
later-life connection is the sensitiveperiodmodel, which posits that exposures
during sensitive periods of development (e.g., gestation, birth, childhood, and
adolescence) induce enduring structural and functional changes in organisms
through biological programming that are difficult to reverse and, in turn, affect
later disease risk (Barker, 1998; Ben-Shlomo and Kuh, 2002; Guo and Harris,

                                          3
2000)." The authors further suggest that the focus on gestation, birth and early
childhood is based on a model that early-life conditions have stronger effects on
adult outcomes than conditions experienced at subsequent time points. But do
they? And, at what age are these effects most commonly manifested? Yang etal.
(2017) go on to study the influence of SES on two measures of health,
inflammation and metabolic syndrome of adults by age group. Their most
relevant finding for us is that the link from SES to health of older adults is
through SES as an adult rather than as a child.3 The effect of SES as a child does
influence SES as an adult, so an indirect effect is found.

The literature most closely tied to our research is far more limited. One early
paper is by Case etal. (2005), that uses the National Child Development Study,
which followed all children born in Great Britain (Scotland, England and Wales)
in the week of March 3, 1958 from birth through to age 42 to study the link
between childhood health and adult health, as well as education and SES. The
key early health measure they use is the number of physician-assessed chronic
health conditions observed at ages 7 and 16; the key adult health measure is self-
reported health at ages 23, 33 and 42. They find that chronic health conditions at
age 16 are tied to adult health at all three points in time while the effects of
conditions at age 7 faded over time. When they go on to look at type of
conditions, they find that physical impairments; mental and emotional
conditions; and systems conditions all contribute approximately equally to
poorer health at age 42. They interpret this as consistent with a life course
model.

A more recent paper that uses data similar to ours is a study by Smith etal.
(2012). Their data are taken from the China Health and Retirement Longitudinal
Study (CHARLS) that focused initially on two provinces in China and was
modeled after the U.S. Health and Retirement Study (HRS) and the Survey of
Health, Aging and Retirement in Europe (SHARE). They explore the tie between
childhood health, measured by self-reported general health (SRH) before age 16,
and adult health, measured also by SRH, as well as doctor diagnoses of chronic
illnesses, depression, lifestyle and health behaviors (physical activities, smoking,
drinking), activities of daily living (ADLs), and instrumental activities of daily
living (IADLs) as an adult. They plot the percentage of respondents reporting
good or better health over ages 45-80 and show that those whose childhood
health was good or better are four times more likely to have a good or better
health as an adult than those with poorer health as a child. The authors find
strong statistical associations of childhood health on adult health outcomes but,
interestingly, mainly only for Chinese women. Their main outcomes are
measured in 10-year age intervals with sensitivity checks for five-year and one-
year intervals.

Our contribution goes beyond these two studies in the following ways: 1) We use
four measures of childhood health before age 16: self-reported or general health,
a measure of physical health, a measure of mental health and a measure of

3Yang etal. (2017) state "In late adulthood [...], current SES completely mediated the
associations between early-life SES and both biomarker outcomes, supporting a pathway model
whereby the influence of childhood SES on adult physiology operates through adult SES."

                                             4
severe headaches or migraines. These measures are more extensive than those
used in other studies although, as in the study of China, they are retrospective. 2)
We measure multiple aspects of adult health with a focus on both job-tied health
and onset of specific health conditions. This is unique in our knowledge of the
literature. 3) We measure outcomes over all of adult life in 5-year intervals. This
is similar to the approach used by Smith etal. (2012) for China but more detailed
and more closely tied to work. We also focus on exactly at what age a person is
most likely influenced by each particular type of health problem we measure.

Model and approach 

Data 

We use individual-level data from SHARE, a multidisciplinary and representative
cross-national panel of the European population aged 50 and up. As explained
further below, our measures of childhood health problems and our life course
measures of health problems in each year are mainly retrospective. For life
course health conditions and job-tied health measures they include,
correspondingly, data over ages 16 to 80 and 25 to 64 in one-year intervals,
which we combine into five-year buckets.4

In the work reported below, we use data from the first seven waves of SHARE
that were collected in approximately biannual periods between 2004/05 and
2017 (Börsch-Supan etal., 2013). These include information on
sociodemographic background characteristics, current health and socioeconomic
status. We construct our life course health measures using information from the
regular Waves 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6. These waves include a question on a battery of
health conditions (PH006) and on their age of onset (PH009). We focus on six
conditions including five cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) and lung disease that
are asked in all these waves to reconstruct our life course health profiles.5 Most
of our other data are from two retrospective waves, Wave 3, also known as
SHARELIFE (2008/09), and Wave 7 (2017), where a SHARELIFE questionnaire
was administered to all respondents who did not participate in Wave 3.
SHARELIFE was, thereby, expanded to 14 additional countries that entered
SHARE after Wave 3 plus Israel, which had exited SHARE in Wave 3 and returned
in Wave 5. SHARELIFE contains retrospective information on respondents' early
life circumstances and work careers. Interviewers in SHARELIFE used a life
history calendar to guide respondents to answer questions as accurately as
possible. Accuracy might be an issue for self-recalled measures in SHARE such as
wages, especially when they were earned a long time ago. Our life course



4 Our analysis here includes what we call job-tied health measures including gaps in work or

retirement. While these can occur for multiple reasons, our discussion assumes health-related
reasons are a primary factor, but the reader may wish to skip these measures and focus on those
that more directly measure later health.
5 Wave 7 has also a regular panel, which includes question PH006 but not question PH009. This

prevents us from using the eight newly added countries in this wave (Finland, Lithuania, Latvia,
Slovakia, Romania, Bulgaria, Malta and Cyprus) in our analysis.

                                               5
analyses focus on measures of health tied to employment, which are likely less
subject to recall problems than earnings measures.6

Our analysis sample includes men and women from 21 SHARE countries.7 Our
initial sample consists of 65,178 respondents aged 50 and over in the interview
year of SHARELIFE (in Wave 3 or 7). Our final sample includes 93% of these
respondents, 26,741 men and 34,151 women. We drop those with missing values
in childhood health variables and other childhood SES controls, reducing our
sample by 1,186 and 2,791 values, respectively. We also exclude 309
respondents with missing values for regular dental care since childhood.

Measures of Early Health 

In this research, we use retrospective self-assessed data on general, physical,
mental health, and severe headaches or migraines that refer to the period before
an individual attained age 16. This categorization is fairly typical in studies of
health status: physical health is based on reports of experiencing a set of
illnesses that are primarily physical in nature; mental health is based on a set of
severe mental illnesses; and general health is based on a more subjective overall
assessment of health (Smith, 2009a, 2009b). Our measures attempt to make full
use of the rich data that were collected. Our measure of general health is the
commonly used self-reported five-point scale, excellent to poor, which we
convert to a binary variable identifying the two lowest categories of health, poor
or fair health.8 Our measure of physical health is created from a polychoric
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Kolenikov and Angeles, 2009) and includes
count variables for the following: respiratory problems (asthma, other
respiratory problems, and allergies); infectious diseases (polio, severe diarrhea,
meningitis/encephalitis, appendicitis and other infectious diseases);
cardiovascular diseases (diabetes or high blood sugar and heart troubles);
disorders of the sense organs (chronic ear problems, speech impairment, and
difficulty in seeing even with eyeglasses); and other serious health conditions an
individual suffered before age 16. Polychoric PCA is applied to the pooled
samples of men and women, respectively, and we keep the first principal
component (PC), which explains the largest proportion of the total variance
(30% for men and 32% for women). All the factor loadings on the first PC have
an expected sign in determining childhood physical health (results available

6 The retrospective data on our job-tied health measures is taken from the third release of the
retrospective SHARE Job Episodes Panel (JEP) (Brugiavini etal., 2019). JEP contains cleaned
information on the start and end dates of all job spells that SHARELIFE respondents had during
their working life, a measure of the intensity of hours worked in each job spell, and additional
information on their year of retirement and non-employment spells.
7 In JEP, from the initial 90,999 respondents, we drop 4,638 with missing hours worked in a job

spell. We further lose 20,349 respondents when retrieving health histories from Waves 1,2,4,5
and 6 for allrespondents in JEP. However, around 70% of these respondents we lose are from
the newly added eight SHARELIFE countries in Wave 7, which we cannot use in our analysis (see
fn. 5). We then also drop 834 respondents that are below age 50.
8 Childhood self-reported health in SHARELIFE contains a sixth category "changing," which

includes 0.4 percent of the sample and is recorded only if the respondent spontaneously answers
that his childhood health varied a great deal. We also include this group in our measure of
poor/fair health.

                                               6
upon request). We then create a dummy variable indicating whether an
individual is one standard deviation below the mean in the distribution of this
first PC and call this our index of childhood physical health. Our measure of
mental health is based on responses to questions of whether the individuals
experienced emotional, nervous, or psychiatric problems, or epilepsy fits or
seizures before age 16. The values for these health variables, along with average
background measures, are available for men and women in Table 1.

We also have information on severe headaches or migraines. Since it is not clear
whether to call these physical or mental health, or both in some sense, we
instead use the response as an additional measure of childhood health. The last
early health variable is an incomplete measure of access to health care or
preventive use including adulthood: whether or not they report having had
regular dental care since childhood (also, a 0-1 variable). We caution that this
latter measure may partly measure SES rather than serve purely as a measure of
access or use of preventive health care.

The four plus one measures of health we use are largely independent. The
correlations between any two of them, overall, are quite low, as shown in
appendix Table A-1 (the correlations for men (women) are .06 (.08) for mental
and physical health, .13(.13) for mental and poor health, .21 (.24) for physical
and poor health, .09 (.10-.12) between severe headaches and mental, poor or
physical health, and -.01-.09 (-.01-.08) between mental, poor or physical health
and regular dental care since childhood.

Later Measures of Health  

Our later measures of health include two types of measures; a set of aggregate
measures over working years or to the age of interview in SHARELIFE (Wave 3
or 7) and then a set of measures reported by five-year intervals over ages 16-20
and going to age 60-64 for job-tied health or to age 76-80 for health conditions
(see fn. 4).

In the first set of aggregate measures, we include 1) whether an individual ever
reported one or 2) two or more periods of poor health in adulthood or 3) retired
due to health problems. Next, we explore 4) the fraction of years worked in total
and 5) the fraction of years worked full-time, both over years 20 and 64 or the
age of interview in SHARELIFE if below age 64.

In terms of outcome measures reported over five-year intervals, we include: 6)
whether an individual had a gap in their employment. We use five-year intervals
over ages 21 to 64 (or the age of interview in SHARELIFE if below age 64) where
the responses are cumulative. Related to the gap measure, we have 7) whether
or not an individual had retired, another cumulative measure also over ages 25
to 64. Finally, we include a measure built up from reports of particular health
conditions and measured in five-year intervals from age 16-20 to 76-80. The
aggregate conditions reported here include five CVDs. These comprise a heart
attack or other heart problems, high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, a
stroke or cerebral vascular disease, and diabetes. We also did sensitivity checks

                                        7
on single CVDs or adding step-wise chronic lung disease and cancer to the
overall set of CVDs (in the appendix we show the results for the five CVDs along
with lung disease; all other ones are available upon request). The respondents
are asked if they ever had each of these conditions and if so, the age they first
had the condition. We think of these reports as a measure of incidence.

The full sample of 26,741 men and 34,151 women report these outcome
measures through age 50, but the sample then becomes smaller because not all
are yet in that age bracket, there is slight attrition, and mortality further reduces
the sample. The smallest number report if they retired due to health, 16,975 men
and 17,685 women (this excludes those that have not yet retired).

Table 1 provides the means, standard deviations (SDs) and number of
observations for all of these, except for the health conditions, whose incidence
rate by age is shown in Figure 1. We note that the pattern observed of a rapid
increase in incidence of a health condition, i.e. a CVD, is likely dominated by
hypertension (high blood pressure), which is the most common of these
diseases, which tends to be rare until middle age or the mid forties. McGrath et
al. (2019) find that hypertension accounted for the greatest burden in terms of
Disability Adjusted Life Years among middle and older age adults in the US.
Because of this established pattern we highlight CVD in our analysis below.9

Other variables 

Given the multi-country and multi-cohort nature of the data, in all estimates we
add fixed effects for country of residence and year of birth in five-year intervals.
The mean age of the sample is 67.1 (66.8) for men (women). The oldest in the
sample were born before WWI (0.08% of the sample). We also include measures
of the socio-economic status of the family when the individual was age 10
including number of rooms per person, number of facilities and number of books
in their home. In addition, we control for whether or not the individual was born
in an urban area.

We also have a set of non-health outcomes, which we explore in their own right,
and which we explore as potentially part of the life-course that mediate the
relationship between early health and later health. These include years in full-
time education, whether final education in ISCED units was <3, 3-4 or 5-6,
whether they ever married, and, whether they ever had a natural child. The
average number of years of schooling for our sample is 14.2 (13.3) for men
(women). Means, SDs and number of observations for all these variables are
reported in Table 1 by gender.

Results 


9For example, Hardy, Lawlor and Kuh in a frequently referenced article stated "Coronary heart
disease (CHD) and stroke are rare until middle age, but the pathophysiological process of
atherosclerosis, which ultimately leads to cardiovascular disease (CVD), is initiated in early life."
(Hardy etal., 2015). This life course perspective is fully consistent with our exploration.

                                                  8
Descriptive analysis 

We begin our discussion with our descriptive results. At its core, we look at the
six later health outcomes one at a time as a function of either all four early health
measures or those we term our core early health measures: mental health,
physical health and poor/fair health. Next we estimate reduced form equations
which control for birth cohort and country fixed effects and measures of SES as a
child: born in an urban area, facilities, books and rooms per person in the home
at the age of 10 and regular dental care since childhood.

First, we look at the age patterns of three of our later health outcome measures.
We begin with CVD health conditions and compare the age-specific incidence of
those with early mental health, physical health or poor/fair health to those
without any of these three early conditions, and we do so separately for men and
women. Figure 1 has four graphs. Those on the left show the first incidence of
the included conditions, while those on the right show the accumulated
probabilities of having these conditions, or prevalence, the top ones for men and
bottom ones for women. All are from ages 16-20 until ages 76-80. The graphs
include responses based on the following question which also lists the
conditions: `About how old were you when you were first told by a doctor that
you had a heart attack or any other heart problem/high blood pressure/high
blood cholesterol/a stroke or cerebral vascular disease/diabetes?'

The overall first incidence pattern for these combined serious conditions
increases by age hitting a maximum at ages 46-50, except for women who had
poor/fair early health and men with no childhood health problems who hit this
maximum a decade later. But the difference for those that had a childhood
condition suggests that for men, the highest incident rates up to age 46-50 is for
those who had a childhood mental illness followed by those with a childhood
physical illness and those with poor/fair general health. The pattern changes at
46-50 years, where those with poor general health as a child now show the
greatest incidence over the older years. Those with early mental illness actually
have the lowest incidence beginning at 56-60, perhaps because they are the most
likely to have already experienced these conditions. The graph on the right
showing the cumulative probabilities (once a person reports they had an illness,
they have a one for that indicator) suggests that those who had an early mental
condition have the highest prevalence to age 60 but beyond age 60, those who
had poor/fair general health as a child gradually overtake them in terms of
reports of these serious conditions. At all times, those males who did not report
one of these conditions as a child report the lowest prevalence rate.

Women show a similar pattern but with slight differences from men. As noted,
again incidence rates are highest at ages 46-50, except for women with early
poor health, but it is less clear that the rate is consistently highest for those who
had an early mental health condition. After 46-50, the incidence rate is greatest
for those who reported early poor/fair health, a group whose incidence of CVD
peaks at ages 56-60. Again, those with early mental illness actually have the
lowest incidence for women at older ages (after 51-55), perhaps because they
are the most likely to have already experienced these conditions, but the

                                          9
differences are small enough early on that the overall incidence appears greatest
for those with early poor health. After age 66-70, there is no noticeable
difference in the cumulative probability of having one or more of these serious
diseases for those who had a physical or mental condition or did not report
having an early health condition.

Turning to our next measure of later health, in Figure 2 we first look at those
who report gaps in work over ages 25-64.10 The top graph is for men, the bottom
for women. Here, we see that those who had an early mental health condition
report the greatest number of gaps for both genders, but the pattern is far
starker for men.

Among men, by age 35, on average, those who reported an early mental health
condition report more than one gap; the average number for them increases to
2.4 by age 45 and to nearly 6 by age 60. Those with poor/fair health as a child
report the second highest number of gaps, but they are far below those reported
by men with an early mental health condition. Men with a childhood physical
health problem appear to not differ from those with no childhood health
problem.

Turning to women, first we note the much larger number of gaps in working
than for men. This difference may be tied to both norms and childbearing. Still,
up until age 56-60, women who had an early mental health condition report the
greatest number of work gaps. Interestingly, there is a suggestion that those with
early physical health problems had fewer gaps that those with no early health
condition, but the differences are small. A possible insight for this is discussed
below where we find increased schooling for women with early physical health
problems, and also a slightly lower probability of marrying and having a child.

Our last measure of later health is the pattern of retiring by age shown in Figure
3, again for men (top) and women (bottom). For men we find that by age 60
close to 60% of these European men retire, but the rate at earlier ages is greatest
for those who had an early mental health condition. The difference is starkest at
age 50. The pattern for women is similar although the rate of retirement is
slightly higher than for men at nearly every age. Again, for women, those who
had an early mental health condition are more likely to retire at every age but
particularly so at ages 41-50.

Ties to later health 

The pattern of descriptive results suggests that, for all three health outcomes
(CVDs, gaps and retirement), men and women with early mental health problems
had earlier health problems as adults than those with other early conditions or
who were healthy as children. Those who reported poor/fair health as children
had more health issues than others of their age except as noted, for those with


10As discussed above, gaps in work can occur for multiple reasons; our discussion assumes
health related reasons are a primary factor but the reader may wish to skip this measure and
focus on those that more directly measure later health.

                                              10
mental health issues. In most cases, for these individuals, their health problems
came later in life than those with early mental health conditions. For retirement,
differences remain until about age 60.

But, what of our broader indicators of later health, does the same overall results
hold? Here we turn to regressions in which we control for country of residence
and cohort fixed effects, SES as a child, as well as our measure of health care
utilization. In Table 2, when we look at those who everworked we find a strong
negative influence of early mental health among men (a negative coefficient
suggesting a reduction of 3.9% points). Among women, an early physical health
problem is statistically significantly tied to ever worked and for them, the
coefficient is positive and significant. Next, we look at numberofcareergaps for
men; here again it is those with mental health issues that have the largest
number of gaps (an increase greater than 3 gaps). Men with early poor health
have nearly one additional gap while those with severe headaches as a child have
about a half gap more on average than those with no such health conditions.
Among women it is those who reported poor/fair health and then those who
reported early mental health conditions that have an increased number of gaps,
nearly 2 for those with poor early health and nearly 1.5 for those for early
mental health issues. Women who had early physical problems have about a half
gap less than otherwise healthy women. Two related alternative measure of life
course health in Table 2 are the fractionofyearsworked and the fractionofyears
workedfulltime. Once again we see the far stronger tie from early mental health
(-.12 and -.13) and to a lesser extent early poor/fair (-.03 and -.04) than physical
health among men. The results are quite similar for both outcomes. Early severe
headaches or migraines also appear tied to reduced years working and working
full time though the coefficients are smaller (-.014 and -.02). The results for
women are quite similar although the coefficients are only about a third of those
for men.

Finally, for this phase of our analysis we look at three more direct later health
outcomes; reported one or more significant periods of ill health during
adulthood, two or more significant periods of ill health during adulthood and
retired due to poor health. For men, the regressions show that those with early
mental health conditions are most likely to report all three of these, followed by
those with poor/fair health, except in the case of retirement due to poor health
where those with severe headaches as a child are about as likely to retire early
due to poor health as those with poor/fair early health. Most of these results are
statistically significant at .05 levels of significance. For women the pattern also
shows a higher probability for all three later health outcomes among those who
had early mental health conditions; followed by who had early poor/fair health.
Thus, all of these later health outcomes suggest a far larger tie from early mental
health problems to later health problems than for overall poor/fair health,
physical health or severe headaches. We note here that our indicator of health
care utilization, dental care, is tied to better long-term health as captured by ever
worked, career gaps and a single period of ill health in adulthood, but not by
(not) retired due to health or (not having) multiple periods of ill health. Perhaps
these latter make receiving dental care more difficult.


                                         11
Ties to additional aspects of wellbeing and human capital 

As part of our exploration of the influence of early health on later health, we also
briefly address the influence of early health on human capital accumulation and
then on measures of wellbeing such as if the person ever married and ever had a
natural child (see Table 3). For education, we include years in full-time schooling
(Columns 1) and three indicators of levels as used by many European countries ­
low or ISCED 0-2, medium or ISCED 3-4 and high or ISCED 5-6 (Columns 2 to 4,
respectively). For both men and women, we find a similar and what we view as
very interesting pattern: those who reported earlyphysicalhealthconditions
receivemoreschoolingthanothers, controlling for family SES, cohort and country
of residence. For males the coefficient on years of schooling is .36 while for
females it is slightly greater at .42. This suggests that parents may invest more in
education for children with physical health problems, perhaps with a view they
require added schooling to succeed in the labor market. In contrast to the
findings for those with physical health problems, among females those with
poor/fair health receive somewhat less schooling with a coefficient of -.31.
Dental care is strongly and positively tied to years of schooling for men and
women.

Turning to the regressions using the three categories of completed schooling we
find that men with early mental health conditions are more likely to have
completed just a low level of education and less likely to have medium or high
completed schooling. In contrast and consistent with the results for years of
schooling, men with early physical health conditions are less likely to have low
education and somewhat more likely to have medium or high years of schooling.
For women, the results are again consistent where those with early physical
health problems are less likely to have low education and more likely to have
medium and especially high education. In the case of women, we find no
consistent pattern of a tie between mental health and schooling but do find that
those with poor/fair health are more likely to have less schooling (ISCED 0-2)
and less likely to have a medium or high education level, and more years of
education. Women who had severe headaches also are more likely to have low
levels of schooling but the point estimates are smaller than for those with
poor/fair health. Overall then we find a consistent finding that those children
who had an early physical health condition were likely on average to accumulate
more human capital in the form of years of schooling than those with other
conditions or who were healthy as children.

Turning to our estimates for measures of wellbeing we have only two: ever
married (Columns 5) and ever had a natural child (Columns 6). The ties between
early health and ever married or having a natural child are stronger for men than
for women. Women with early mental health problems are slightly less likely to
ever marry (-.03) or have a natural child (-.04). For men, these coefficients are
equal to -.09, that is, 2-3 times as large in absolute terms. Men with early
poor/fair health are also less likely to marry (-.03), and are less likely to have a
natural child (-.04). The latter difference is only slightly lower in absolute terms
for women (-.03). No significant differences are found for men and women with
severe headaches during childhood, but women with early physical health

                                         12
problems are slightly less likely to have ever married and ever had had a natural
child (-0.01). Thus, for our two measures of wellbeing, the ties to early life, while
relatively small, are larger for men, and in particular for those who had early
mental health problems.

Ties to life course health 

We now turn to our regression analysis where each of our later health outcomes
serve as a dependent variable, our four early health variables are the right-hand
side variables of primary interest and we include controls for birth cohort,
country of residence, childhood SES variables and regular use of dental care. As a
test of robustness, we also include the additional mediators that were found to
be significantly influenced by our early health measures, namely years of full-
time schooling, ever married and having a natural child. In addition, we assess
the importance of omitted variables using a test proposed by Oster (2019). The
results from these sensitivity checks are included in the appendix. None of the
robustness checks change the main results or the conclusions from our paper.

We already looked at our broader indicators of later health in the results
presented above so, here, we look at indicators of later health by five-year
intervals beginning with the tie to serious health conditions as an adult. We focus
on initial incidence of CVDs. These are shown in Figure 4 for men in Panel A and
women in Panel B (the full set of estimates is given in appendix tables A-3 and A-
4). We calculated heteroskedasiticty-robust standard errors and show the 95%
confidence intervals on the figures. Among men, the results suggest that those
who had an overall poor/fair health and to a lesser extent a physical health
problem as a child are slightly more likely (about 1 p.p.) to incur a CVD early in
adulthood, from age 16 to 40. For those with childhood mental health problems
there is limited evidence of a significant association with CVDs over men's life
course, except for a marginally significant increase in the early 30s (about 2 p.p.)
and decline in the late 50s (3 p.p.). Importantly, the spike in CVDs at ages 46-50
shown in Figure 1 is driven entirely by those with poor/fair health as a child. The
actual coefficient is close to 3 p.p. and significant at a 1% level. As shown in
appendix figure A-2, the differences across these childhood health indicators are
statistically significant at ages 46-50 (and again at 76-80). These results suggest
a much higher likelihood of CVDs among middle age men who had poor/fair
health as a child. In contrast to men, among women those with a mental
condition by age 15 are about 2 p.p. more likely to experience an initial CVD at
age 16-20 and 21-25 and again at 36-40. The first two age periods are
significantly different from those who had a physical or overall poor/fair health.
A finding not shown in the figure is the higher probability of women who
experienced severe headaches as a child having an initial CVD at ages 46-50
(with a coefficient of +.025) continuing throughout their 50s. Thus we find quite
different patterns by gender where men with early poor/fair health are at
increased risk of a CVD especially at ages 46-50 while women with early mental
health problems are at greater risk in their late teens, early twenties and 36-40.
Women with severe headaches are more likely to experience an initial CVD at
ages 46-50, the age at which men with poor health appeared at greater risk.


                                         13
In appendix figure A-3 we show a similar analysis where we extend the health
conditions studied to include lung conditions. The pattern essentially replicates
the analysis described above that focuses only on CVDs. Then in appendix figure
A-7 we extend the right-hand side variables to include years of full-time
schooling, whether ever married and whether the individual had a natural child.
The inclusion of these variables does not change the results for men or women.
Finally, in appendix figures A-13 and A-16, we show the main estimates from
Figure 4 (where we added severe headaches or migraines) along with Oster's
(2019) identified set of estimates using different thresholds for the key
parameters in this test (see Appendix A.1 for details). Importantly, the main
results, as discussed above, regarding e.g. the increased risk of a CVD at ages 46-
50 for men with early poor/fair health and women with severe headaches,
remain robust. The identified sets we obtain exclude the zero suggesting that
there is a small positive causal effect of these childhood health variables on life
course onset of a CVD. This effect is not at all negligible for childhood mental
health problems. Thus, these three tests of robustness provide additional
evidence of the pattern by which our four early health conditions are tied to the
future pattern of CVDs, or important health conditions over the life course.

Our next later health indicator that we measure over the life course is gaps in
one's career measured only for those who ever worked. In this case we measure
accumulated gaps so once you have a gap, that gap remains as a measure of your
health as you age. The results are shown in figure 5 (the full set of estimates is
given in appendix tables A-5 for men and A-6 for women). We measure this
outcome only over ages 21-25 to 61-64. Men show a very clear pattern in which
those who had early mental health problems have a higher number of gaps at
every age beginning at 21-25 and continuing through 61-64. The average
number of gaps reaches 3 for these men by the time they reach 56-60. The
second group of men with higher numbers of gaps are those who had poor/fair
health as a child but this pattern does not really begin until the early 30s and
only reaches nearly one gap by age 61-64. These differences in estimates are
statistically significant comparing mental to physical, poor/fair health and across
all three of these early health conditions for all of our included ages. These
results are shown in figure A-5. If we add years of full-time schooling, ever
married and ever had a child to the right-hand side variables, the patterns
remain although there is a slight dampening of the ties with a maximum of about
2.6 rather than 3 at ages 56-60 (see figure A-8). Performing Oster's (2019) test
for omitted variables provides evidence that our estimates of childhood mental
health problems and poor/fair health are robust to taking unobserved factors
into account (see figures A-14 and A-17).

For women, we see a quite different pattern where those with poor/fair health
as a child have more career gaps beginning at age 21-25, and eventually reaching
nearly two additional gaps by 61-64. Women who experienced early mental
health problems show an increase in gaps but they only begin at ages 51-55 at
about one gap and increase to about 1.3 gaps by 61-64. Women who experienced
early physical problems are slightly less likely to have a gap than those who were
healthy, or had these other early conditions (0.4 gaps less by age 61-64), a
finding consistent with our other findings on the pattern of work related

                                        14
outcomes for women. The observed differences are statistically significant as
shown in figure A-5 comparing women with mental, poor or physical health over
the entire studied life course, as well as those with poor early health compared
to those with an early physical health problem. For women this pattern remains
without any dampening when we add schooling, marriage and birth of a natural
child as right-hand side controls (figure A-8) and when we take unobserved
factors into account (figures A-14 and A-17).

Our final later life course health outcome is age of retirement. As shown in figure
6, the pattern for men and women is similar (the full set of estimates is given in
appendix tables A-7 for men and A-8 for women). Men with early mental health
problems are more likely to retire early than other men. By ages 41-45 the gap in
probability of a man who had an early mental health problem is .05 which
increases to about .07 at 46-50. In contrast, men with poor/fair health as a child
are also more likely to retire early than other men but the difference is less than
half that of men with a mental health condition. Their pattern increases as they
age reaching a maximum at 56-60. These observed differences are statistically
significant comparing men with the three early health conditions over ages 36-
40 through 56-60 (see figure A-6). The pattern remains when we add schooling,
ever married and ever had a natural child to the control variables (figures A-9
and A-12) and when we use Oster's method to take unobserved factors into
account (figures A-15 and A-18). Women who had an early mental health
condition are also the most likely to retire at nearly every age studied. At ages
51-55, the difference in probability reaches .1. Those who had early poor/fair
health are also more likely to retire over the period studied but the differences
are about one-third of women with an early mental health problem. The
differences comparing the three groups of women with early health problems
are statistically significant over ages 36-40 through 60-64 (see figure A-6). This
pattern is replicated when we add schooling, ever married and ever had a
natural child as controls (figures A-9 and A-12) and when we compute Oster's
identified set of estimates using different thresholds for the key parameters in
this test (see figures A-15 and A-18 and Appendix A.1 for details).

Discussion and Conclusion 

In this paper, we explored the influence of fourspecificdimensions of early-life
health on the onset of specific health conditions and permanent or temporary
withdrawals from the labor market over the life course. The four specific
dimensions of early life are mental health issues, physical health problems, poor
or fair general health and severe headaches or migraines, all by age 15. The life
course health related outcomes we explored included 1) the probability of
having an onset of cardiovascular related health conditions (and then adding
chronic lung disease) in five-year intervals over ages 16-80; 2) the probability of
having 1+ or 2+ episodes of ill health during adulthood; 3) the fraction of years
employed and those worked full-time; 4) the accumulated number of career gaps
in employment in five-year intervals over ages 25-64; 5) the probability of
leaving the labor force in five-year intervals over ages 25-64; and 6) the
probability of having retired from a job because of own ill health. We conducted
the analysis separately by gender and controlled for cohort and country of

                                        15
residence fixed effects, childhood SES indicators and use of dental care since
childhood. We then tested the robustness of our results to the inclusion of
possible mediating factors (schooling, ever married and ever had a natural child)
and more generally by implementing an omitted variables test proposed by
Oster (2019). None of the robustness checks changed the main results or the
conclusions from our paper.

We see our primary contributions as our focus on the links between different
dimensions of childhood health and multiple life course outcomes including the
age of onset of serious cardiovascular conditions and job-related health
outcomes. This is unique in our knowledge of the literature. We found that the
different dimensions of childhood health have unique ties to later outcomes. This
is best illustrated for men.

For men, early mental problems play a stronger role for all life course job-related
health outcomes, but early poor or fair general health is more strongly linked to
the onset of CVDs. In particular, the spike in CVDs in the late 40s, shown in the
descriptive analysis, is driven entirely by men with poor or fair general health as
a child. For included work-related measures of life course health, it is men with
early mental health problems who do worst. They have the lowest probability of
having ever worked (about 4 p.p. less), and when they work, they accumulate the
greatest number of work gaps; the average number of gaps for them rose to 2 by
age 45 and to 3 by age 60. We also found this pattern when we looked at the
fraction of years worked and the fraction of years worked full-time,where again
we found a far stronger tie from early mental health (-12 and -13 p.p.) than for
men with other early health conditions. Finally, men with early mental health
conditions were also the most likely to retire early due to health (+8 p.p.). These
differences where often only about one third as large for those with early poor or
fair general health and mostly insignificant for those with early physical health
problems as a child.

For women, the links between the different dimensions of childhood health and
the multiple life course outcomes are less clear-cut than for men. Differently than
for men, women who had a mental health condition early in life are more likely
than others to experience an onset of a CVD in their early to mid-adult years but
not thereafter, and the initial and largest spike in the onset of a CVD at ages 46-
50 is driven by women who had severe headaches by age 15. Turning to life
course work-tied measures, we first found a seemingly surprising outcome: early
physical health problems are generally tied to better work-related outcomes.
Women with early physical problems are more likely to work (+ 2.5 p.p.) than
other women and when they work, they accumulate slightly fewer gaps than
women without physical health problems (about 0.4 gaps less by age 60).
Instead, women who reported poor/fair health and early mental health
conditions have an increased number of gaps, nearly 1.7 for those with poor
early health and 1.3 for those for early mental health issues by age 60. Our last
measure of work-tied health, age at retirement, again finds no negative tie to
physical health but instead that women who had an early mental health
condition are also the most likely to retire at nearly every age studied followed


                                        16
by those who had early poor/fair health but the differences are about one-third
of women with an early mental health problem.

What might explain this seeming puzzle? We looked at intermediary outcomes
such as schooling as well as whether an individual ever married or had a natural
child. For both men and women, we find those who reported early physical
health conditions receive more schooling than others, controlling for family SES,
cohort and country of residence fixed effects. For females, the tie is slightly
stronger than for males This suggests that parents, especially parents of
daughters may invest more in education for children with physical health
problems, perhaps with a view they require added schooling to succeed in the
labor market. The ties between early health and ever married or having a natural
child are, somewhat surprisingly, larger for men than for women. Women with
early mental health problems are slightly less likely to ever marry (-3 p.p.) or
have a natural child (-4 p.p.). For men, these coefficients are 2-3 times as large in
absolute terms. Men with early poor/fair health are also slightly less likely to
marry. For both men and women we find no such negative ties for those with
early physical health problems.

These findings provide both part of an explanation for our results and add
evidence that it is important to distinguish by type of early health problem (and
gender) to predict (and counter) life cycle health consequences. But more
generally, our study shows that investigating the links between multiple
different dimensions of childhood health and multiple health-related life course
outcomes enables a better understanding of how health inequalities originate
and are shaped over people's lives.




                                         17
References 

Almond, D. (2006). `Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic over? Long-term effects of in
utero influenza exposure in the post-1940 U.S. population', JournalofPolitical
Economy, Vol. 114, pp. 672­712.

Almond, D. and Currie, J. (2011a). `Human capital development before age five',
in Ashenfelter O. and Card D. (eds), HandbookofLaborEconomics, Vol. 4B, chap.
15. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V., pp. 1315­1486.

Almond, D. and Currie, J. (2011b). `Killing me softly: The Fetal Origins
Hypothesis', JournalofEconomicPerspectives, Vol. 25, pp. 153­172.

Almond, D., Currie, J. and Duque, V. (2018). `Childhood circumstances and adult
outcomes: Act II', JournalofEconomicLiterature, Vol. 56, pp. 1360­1446.

Almond, D. and Mazumder, B. (2005). `The 1918 Influenza Pandemic and
subsequent health outcomes: an analysis of SIPP data', AmericanEconomic
Review:Papers&Proceedings, Vol. 95, pp. 258­262.

Altonji, J., Elder, T. and Taber, C. (2005). `Selection on observed and unobserved
variables: Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools', JournalofPolitical
Economy, Vol. 113, pp. 151­184.

Barker, D. J. P. (1995). `Fetal origins of coronary heart disease', BritishMedical
Journal, Vol. 311, pp. 171­174.

Barker, D. J. (1998). `In utero programming of chronic disease', ClinicalScience
(London), Vol. 95, pp. 115­28.

Barreca, A. I. (2010). `The long-term economic impact of in utero and postnatal
exposure to malaria', JournalofHumanResources, Vol. 45, pp. 865­892.

Ben-Shlomoadler, Y. and Kuh, D. (2002). `A life course approach to chronic
disease epidemiology: conceptual models, empirical challenges and
interdisciplinary perspectives', InternationalJournalofEpidemiology, Vol. 31, pp.
285­93.

Bhalotra, S. and Venkataramani, A. (2015). ShadowsoftheCaptainoftheMenof
Death:HealthInnovation,HumanCapitalInvestment,andInstitutions,
Unpublished.

Bharadwaj, P., Eberhard, J. P. and Neilson, C. A. (2018). `Health at Birth, Parental
Investments, and Academic Outcomes', JournalofLaborEconomics, Vol. 36, pp.
349­94.

Bharadwaj, P., Lundborg, P. and Rooth, D. O. (2014). TheEffectsofBirthWeight
overtheLifeCycle, Working Paper.


                                         18
Black, S. E. and Devereux, P.J. (2011). `Recent developments in intergenerational
mobility', in Ashenfelter O. and Card D. (eds), HandbookofLaborEconomics, Vol.
4B, chap. 16. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V., pp. 1487­1541.

Börsch-Supan, A., Brandt, M., Hunkler, C., Kneip, T., Korbmacher, J., Malter, F.,
Schaan, B., Stuck, S. and Zuber, S. (2013). `Data Resource Profile: The Survey of
Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe (SHARE)', InternationalJournalof
Epidemiology, Vol. 42, pp. 992­1001.

Brugiavini, A., Orso, C. E., Genie, M. G., Naci, R. and Pasini, G. (2019). Combining
theretrospectiveinterviewsofwave3andwave7:thethirdreleaseoftheSHARE
JobEpisodesPanel,SHARE Working Paper Series (36-2019). Munich: Munich
Center for the Economics of Aging (MEA).

Case, A., Fertig, A. and Paxson, C. (2005). `The Lasting Impact of Childhood Health
and Circumstance', JournalofHealthEconomics, Vol. 24, pp. 365­89.

Case, A., Lubotsky, D. and Paxson, C. (2002). `Economic status and health in
childhood: the origins of the gradient', AmericanEconomicReview, Vol. 92, pp.
1308­1334.

Case, A. and Paxson, C. (2008). `Height, health and cognitive function at older
ages', AmericanEconomicReview:Papers&Proceedings, Vol. 98, pp. 463­467.

Chen, Y. and Zhou, L. A. (2007). `The long-term health and economic
consequences of the 1959­1961 famine in China', Journal of Health Economics,
Vol. 26, pp. 659­681.

Currie, J. (2020). `Child health as human capital', HealthEconomics, Vol. 29, pp.
452­463.

Currie, J. and Stabile, M. (2003). `Socioeconomic status and health: why is the
relationship stronger for older children?', AmericanEconomicReview, Vol. 93, pp.
1813­1823.

Currie, J. and Stabile, M. (2006). `Child mental health and human capital
accumulation: The Case of ADHD', JournalofHealthEconomics, Vol. 25, pp. 1094­
1118.

Currie, J. and Stabile, M. (2009). `Mental health in childhood and human capital',
in Gruber J. (ed), AnEconomicPerspectiveontheProblemsofDisadvantaged
Youth. University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research,
Chicago, IL.

Currie, J., Stabile, M., Manivong, P. and Roos, L. (2010). `Child health and young
adult outcomes', JournalofHumanResources, Vol. 45, pp. 517­548.




                                         19
Figlio, D., Guryan, J., Karbownik, K. and Roth, J. (2014). `The Effects of Poor Neo-
natal Health on Children's Cognitive Development', AmericanEconomicReview,
Vol. 104, pp. 3921­55.

Fletcher, J. and Wolfe, B. (2009). `Long-Term Consequences of Childhood ADHD
on Criminal Activities', TheJournalofMentalHealthPolicyandEconomics, Vol.
12, pp. 119­38.

Fletcher, J. and Wolfe, B. (2008). `Child Mental Health and Human Capital
Accumulation: The Case of ADHD Revisited', JournalofHealthEconomics, Vol. 27,
pp. 794­800.

Guo, G. and Harris, K. M. (2000). `The mechanisms mediating the effects of
poverty on children's intellectual development', Demography, Vol. 37, pp. 431­
47.

Hardy, R., Lawlor, D. and Kuh, D. (2015). `A life course approach to
cardiovascular aging', FutureCardiology, Vol. 11, pp. 101­113.

Kesternich, I., Siflinger, B., Smith, J. P. and Winter, J. K. (2014). `The effects of
World War II on economic and health outcomes across Europe', Reviewof
EconomicsandStatistics, Vol. 96, pp. 103­118.

Kolenikov, S. and Angeles, G. (2009). `Status measurement with discrete proxy
variables: Is principal component analysis a reliable answer?', ReviewofIncome
andWealth, Vol. 55, pp. 128­165.

Kuh, D. J. L. and Wadsworth, M. E. J. (1993). `Physical health status at 36 years in
a British national birth cohort', SocialScience&Medicine, Vol. 37, pp.905­916.

Marmot, M., Allen, J., Bell, R., Bloomer, E. and Goldblatt, P. on behalf of the
Consortium for the European Review of Social Determinants of Health and the
Health Divide (2012). `WHO European review of social determinants of health
and the health divide', Lancet, Vol. 380, pp. 1011­1029.

Marmot, M. G., Brunner, S. and Hemingway, S. (2001). `Relative contributions of
early life and adult socioeconomic factors to adult morbidity in the Whitehall II
study', JournalofEpidemiology&CommunityHealth, Vol. 55, pp. 301­307.

McGrath, R., Al Snih, S., Markides, K., Hall, O. and Peterson, M. (2019). `The
burden of health conditions for middle-aged and older adults in the United
States: disability-adjusted life years', BMCGeriatrics, Vol. 19, No. 100.

Mian, A. and Sufi, A. (2014). `What explains the 2007­2009 drop in
employment?', Econometrica, Vol. 82, pp. 2197­2223.

Nelson, R. E. (2010). `Testing the fetal origins hypothesis in a developing country:
evidence from the 1918 Influenza Pandemic', HealthEconomics, Vol. 19, pp.
1181­1192.

                                            20
Oster, E. (2019). `Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and
evidence', JournalofBusiness&EconomicStatistics, Vol. 37, pp. 187­204.

Painter, R. C., Roseboom, T. J. and Bleker, O. P. (2005). `Prenatal exposure to the
Dutch famine and disease in later life: an overview', ReproductiveToxicology, Vol.
20, pp. 345­352.

Roseboom, T. J., van der Meulen, J. H. P., Ravelli, A.C. J., Osmond, C., Barker, D. J. P.
and Bleker, O. P. (2001). `Effects of prenatal exposure to the Dutch famine on
adult disease in later life: an overview',MolecularandCellularEndocrinology, Vol.
185, pp. 93­98.

Roseboom, T., de Rooij, S. and Painter, R. (2006). `The Dutch famine and its long-
term consequences for adult health', EarlyHumanDevelopment, Vol. 82, pp. 485­
491.

Smith, J. P. (2009a). `Reconstructing childhood health histories', Demography,
Vol. 46, pp. 387­403.

Smith, J. P. (2009b). `The impact of childhood health on adult labor market
outcomes', ReviewofEconomicsandStatistics, Vol. 91, pp. 478­489.

Smith, J. P., Shen, Y., Strauss, J., Zhe, Y. and Zhao, Y. (2012). `The Effects of
Childhood Health on Adult Health and SES in China', EconomicDevelopmentand
CulturalChange, Vol. 61, pp. 127­156.

van den Berg, G. J., Lindeboom, M. and Portrait, F. (2006). `Economic conditions
early in life and individual mortality', AmericanEconomicReview, Vol. 96, pp.
290­302.

Yang, Y. C., Gerken, K., Schorpp, K., Boen, C. and Harris, K. M. (2017). `Early-Life
Socioeconomic Status and Adult Physiological Functioning: A Life Course
Examination of Biosocial Mechanisms', BiodemographyandSocialBiology, Vol.
63, pp. 87­103.




                                           21
Figures and Tables 
Figure 1: Probability of Having a Cardiovascular Disease by Age and Childhood Health for Men and Womena
                Panel A. Probability of onset                            Panel B. Cumulative probability




a
  CVDs include a heart attack or other heart problems, high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, a stroke or cerebral vascular disease, and diabetes. Physical includes
individuals one standard deviation below the mean in an index of childhood physical health and Poor/fair those with "Poor, fair or changing childhood SRH". The numbers of
respondents used are given in Table A-2.



                                                                                   22
Figure 2: Accumulated Career Gaps since Career Start by Age and Childhood Health for Men
and Womena




a
  Physical includes individuals one standard deviation below the mean in an index of childhood
physical health and Poor/fair those with "Poor, fair or changing childhood SRH". The sample includes
people below age 64.




                                                 23
Figure 3: Cumulative Probability of Retiring by Age and Childhood Health for Men and
Womena




a
  Physical includes individuals one standard deviation below the mean in an index of childhood
physical health and Poor/fair those with "Poor, fair or changing childhood SRH". The figure refers to
people who report having retired from a job.




                                                  24
Figure 4: Estimates of mental and physical health problems and poor self-reported health prior to age 16 from linear regressions on CVDs (0-1) for men
and women over ages 16 to 80 years in Europea




a
                                                                                                                                      
  The figure shows OLS estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH (0-1) obtained from estimating
linear models on the probability of having a CVD (0-1) at five-year intervals over ages 16 to 80 years, separately for men and women in Europe. Physical
includes those one standard deviation below the mean in an index of childhood physical health and Poor those with "Poor, fair or changing childhood SRH". All
models include all the variables listed in Table 1, except age and the mediating factors, plus country dummies and five-year cohort dummies. 95% confidence
intervals are based on robust standard errors. The full set of estimates are shown in Tables A-3 and A-4.



                                                                            25
Figure 5: Estimates of mental and physical health problems and poor self-reported health prior to age 16 from linear regressions on accumulated career
gaps since career start from age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed for men and women in Europea




a
                                                                                                                                       
  The figure shows OLS estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH (0-1) obtained from estimating
linear models on accumulated career gaps between age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed, separately for men and women in Europe. Physical includes those one
standard deviation below the mean in an index of childhood physical health and Poor those with "Poor, fair or changing childhood SRH". All models include all
the variables listed in Table 1, except age and the mediating factors, plus country dummies and five-year cohort dummies. 95% confidence intervals are based on
robust standard errors. The full set of estimates are shown in Tables A-5 and A-6.



                                                                             26
Figure 6: Estimates of mental and physical health problems and poor self-reported health prior to age 16 from linear regressions on the probability of
retiring from a job from age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed for men and women in Europea




a
                                                                                                                                      
  The figure shows OLS estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH (0-1) obtained from estimating
linear models on the probability of retiring from a job between age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed, separately for men and women in Europe. Physical
includes those one standard deviation below the mean in an index of childhood physical health and Poor those with "Poor, fair or changing childhood SRH". All
models include all the variables listed in Table 1, except age and the mediating factors, plus country dummies and five-year cohort dummies. 95% confidence
intervals are based on robust standard errors. The full set of estimates are shown in Tables A-7 and A-8.



                                                                            27
Table 1: Sample means and standard deviations of childhood and adulthood variables for men and women in Europea
                                                                           Men                                          Women
                                                                           Mean           SD             N              Mean           SD             N
Childhood health variables (0-15 years)
Emotional problems or epilepsy (0-1) (Mental)                              0.012          0.109          26741          0.017          0.129          34151
Physical health index (those 1SD below the mean) (0-1) (Physical)          0.180          0.384          26741          0.130          0.336          34151
Poor, fair or changing self-reported health (0-1) (Poor/fair)              0.090          0.287          26741          0.107          0.309          34151
Severe headaches or migraines when 0-15 years (0-1)                        0.035          0.185          26741          0.055          0.228          34151
Childhood SES (at age of 10) and health care (0-15 years)
Rooms per person when 10 years oldb                                        0.727          0.423          26741          0.704          0.416          34151
Bookcase at home when 10 years old (0-1) (1 = >25 books)c                  0.372          0.483          26741          0.388          0.487          34151
Number of facilities at home when 10 years old (0-5)d                      2.221          1.842          26741          2.181          1.841          34151
Born in an urban area (0-1)                                                0.350          0.477          26741          0.344          0.475          34151
Regular dental care since childhood (0-1)                                  0.470          0.499          26741          0.550          0.498          34151
Other control variables
Age (in years)                                                             67.1           9.2            26741          66.8           9.8            34151
Mediating factors
Years in full-time education                                               14.2           5.4            26741          13.3           5.5            34151
Low education (0-1)                                                        0.355          0.479          26646          0.430          0.495          34040
Medium education (0-1)                                                     0.395          0.489          26646          0.365          0.482          34040
High education (0-1)                                                       0.250          0.433          26646          0.204          0.403          34040
Ever married (0-1)                                                         0.924          0.266          26741          0.938          0.242          34151
Ever had a natural child (0-1)                                             0.857          0.350          26741          0.885          0.318          34151
Life course health outcomes
1+ periods of ill health in adulthood (0-1)                                0.177          0.382          26727          0.187          0.390          34128
2+ periods of ill health in adulthood (0-1)                                0.048          0.215          26727          0.060          0.237          34128
Retired because of bad health (0-1)                                        0.123          0.328          16975          0.125          0.331          17685
Ever worked (0-1)                                                          0.988          0.109          26741          0.889          0.314          34151
Fraction of years worked (25-64 or latest age)                             0.877          0.183          26741          0.615          0.369          34151
Fraction of years worked FT always (25-64 or latest age)                   0.857          0.212          26741          0.495          0.396          34151
Number of career gaps (since career start)                                 4.2            5.9            26404          11.5           12.6           30322
a
  This table depicts the final sample of all men. The first three rows show childhood mental, physical and self-reported health. b The number of rooms include bedrooms, but
exclude kitchen, bathrooms, and hallways. c Bookcase measures the number of books at home when 10 years old. It is = 1 if there were enough books to fill one bookcase
(26-100 books), two bookcases (101-200 books) or two or more bookcases (>200 books), and = 0 if there were none or very few books (0-10 books) or enough to fill one
shelf only (11-25 books). d Includes fixed bath, cold and hot running water supply, inside toilet and central heating.



                                                                                     28
Table 2: Marginal effects of childhood health variables on health during adulthood in Europea
                                                     Ever worked N. of career    Fraction       Frac. worked   1+ ill health   2+ ill health   Retired due to own ill health
Men                                                  (0-1)        gaps           worked         full time      (0-1)           (0-1)           (0-1)
                                                     (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)
Mental (0-1)                                         -0.039***    3.153***       -0.120***      -0.128***      0.140***        0.072***        0.052*
                                                     (0.012)      (0.533)        (0.017)        (0.018)        (0.026)         (0.017)         (0.029)
Physical (1SD below the mean) (0-1)                  -0.000       0.019          0.000          -0.005         0.039***        0.018***        0.012*
                                                     (0.002)      (0.093)        (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.007)         (0.004)         (0.007)
Poor/fair/changing SRH (0-1)                         -0.008**     0.839***       -0.029***      -0.035***      0.097***        0.044***        0.033***
                                                     (0.003)      (0.144)        (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.010)         (0.006)         (0.009)
Severe headaches or migraines (0-1)                  -0.004       0.427**        -0.014**       -0.020***      0.029**         0.017**         0.038**
                                                     (0.004)      (0.202)        (0.006)        (0.008)        (0.013)         (0.008)         (0.015)
Rooms (an increase of one room)                      -0.004***    -0.355***      0.002          0.002          -0.031***       -0.006          -0.027***
                                                     (0.001)      (0.099)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.007)         (0.004)         (0.008)
Bookcase (0-1) (1 = >25 books)                       0.007***     -0.564***      0.014***       0.007**        -0.016***       -0.006*         -0.024***
                                                     (0.001)      (0.086)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.006)         (0.003)         (0.006)
Number of facilities at home when 10 years old (0-4) -0.000       -0.221***      0.005***       0.005***       -0.005***       -0.002**        -0.005***
                                                     (0.000)      (0.027)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.002)         (0.001)         (0.002)
Born in urban area (0-1)                             -0.001       0.234***       -0.009***      -0.007**       -0.012**        -0.001          -0.010*
                                                     (0.002)      (0.079)        (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.005)         (0.003)         (0.006)
Regular dental care since childhood (0-1)            0.001        -0.485***      0.012***       0.011***       -0.013**        -0.004          -0.008
                                                     (0.002)      (0.085)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.005)         (0.003)         (0.006)
R-squared                                                         0.089          0.062          0.038
Pseudo R-squared                                     0.116                                                     0.038           0.044           0.066
Observations                                         26741        26404          26741          26741          26727           26727           16975




                                                                               29
Table 2: Continued
                                                     Ever worked N. of career        Fraction        Frac. worked 1+ ill health 2+ ill health Retired due to own ill health
Women                                                (0-1)          gaps             worked          full time      (0-1)          (0-1)         (0-1)
                                                     (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)
Mental (0-1)                                         0.008          1.304***         -0.039***       -0.044***      0.136***       0.083***      0.077***
                                                     (0.014)        (0.491)          (0.013)         (0.015)        (0.019)        (0.014)       (0.024)
Physical (1SD below the mean) (0-1)                  0.025***       -0.438**         0.021***        0.000          0.048***       0.024***      0.014*
                                                     (0.005)        (0.187)          (0.005)         (0.006)        (0.007)        (0.004)       (0.008)
Poor/fair/changing SRH (0-1)                         -0.001         1.781***         -0.041***       -0.033***      0.113***       0.056***      0.067***
                                                     (0.006)        (0.224)          (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.008)        (0.005)       (0.009)
Severe headaches or migraines (0-1)                  -0.007         0.428            -0.013*         -0.021**       0.040***       0.017***      0.034***
                                                     (0.007)        (0.292)          (0.008)         (0.009)        (0.010)        (0.006)       (0.012)
Rooms (an increase of one room)                      -0.012***      -1.294***        0.018***        0.017***       -0.037***      -0.012***     -0.018**
                                                     (0.004)        (0.188)          (0.005)         (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.004)       (0.009)
Bookcase (0-1) (1 = >25 books)                       0.037***       -1.737***        0.057***        0.052***       -0.003         -0.007**      -0.010*
                                                     (0.004)        (0.150)          (0.004)         (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.003)       (0.006)
Number of facilities at home when 10 years old (0-4) 0.005***       -0.425***        0.013***        0.008***       -0.009***      -0.004***     -0.006***
                                                     (0.001)        (0.048)          (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.002)        (0.001)       (0.002)
Born in urban area (0-1)                             0.010***       0.082            0.002           0.013***       0.009*         0.007**       -0.002
                                                     (0.003)        (0.146)          (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.005)        (0.003)       (0.006)
Regular dental care since childhood (0-1)            0.033***       -1.247***        0.052***        0.051***       -0.018***      -0.003        -0.006
                                                     (0.003)        (0.159)          (0.004)         (0.005)        (0.005)        (0.003)       (0.006)
R-squared                                                           0.202            0.256           0.215
Pseudo R-squared                                     0.264                                                          0.043          0.051         0.058
Observations                                         34151          30322            34151           34151          34128          34128         17685
a
  All models include also dummies for country and 5-year birth cohorts. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01 ** p<0.05 * p<0.10.




                                                                                   30
Table 3: Marginal effects of childhood health variables on measures of human capital and wellbeing during adulthood in Europea
                                                                    Education level                                              Ever        Ever had a natural
Men                                          Years in full-time     Low educ. (ISCED Medium educ. (ISCED High educ. (ISCED       married     child
                                             education              0-2)               3-4)                   5-6)               (0-1)       (0-1)
                                             (1)                    (2)                (3)                    (4)                (5)         (6)
Mental (0-1)                                 -0.179                 0.045**            -0.007**               -0.038**           -0.093***   -0.093***
                                             (0.330)                (0.021)            (0.003)                (0.018)            (0.020)     (0.023)
Physical (1SD below the mean) (0-1)          0.363***               -0.031***          0.005***               0.026***           0.001       0.005
                                             (0.077)                (0.006)            (0.001)                (0.005)            (0.004)     (0.006)
Poor/fair/changing SRH (0-1)                 -0.051                 0.006              -0.001                 -0.005             -0.031***   -0.041***
                                             (0.113)                (0.008)            (0.001)                (0.007)            (0.007)     (0.008)
Severe headaches or migraines (0-1)          -0.217                 -0.001             0.000                  0.001              0.007       0.004
                                             (0.157)                (0.012)            (0.002)                (0.010)            (0.008)     (0.011)
Rooms (an increase of one room)              0.880***               -0.078***          0.012***               0.067***           -0.011***   -0.028***
                                             (0.088)                (0.007)            (0.001)                (0.006)            (0.004)     (0.005)
Bookcase (0-1) (1 = >25 books)               2.012***               -0.156***          0.023***               0.133***           0.014***    0.005
                                             (0.070)                (0.005)            (0.001)                (0.004)            (0.004)     (0.005)
Number of facilities at home when 10 years
old (0-4)                                    0.342***               -0.027***          0.004***               0.023***           0.001       -0.002
                                             (0.022)                (0.002)            (0.000)                (0.001)            (0.001)     (0.002)
Born in urban area (0-1)                     0.714***               -0.072***          0.011***               0.061***           0.005       -0.014***
                                             (0.067)                (0.005)            (0.001)                (0.004)            (0.004)     (0.005)
Regular dental care since childhood (0-1)    0.792***               -0.073***          0.011***               0.062***           0.013***    0.015***
                                             (0.069)                (0.005)            (0.001)                (0.004)            (0.004)     (0.005)
R-squared                                    0.214
Pseudo R-squared                                                    0.137                                                        0.039       0.020
Observations                                 26741                  26646                                                        26741       26741




                                                                             31
Table 3: Continued
                                                                       Education level                                                     Ever        Ever had a natural
                                              Years in full-time       Low educ. (ISCED      Medium educ. (ISCED      High educ. (ISCED    married     child
Women                                         education                0-2)                  3-4)                     5-6)                 (0-1)       (0-1)
                                              (1)                      (2)                   (3)                      (4)                  (5)         (6)
Mental (0-1)                                  0.104                    -0.007                0.002                    0.005                -0.029**    -0.040***
                                              (0.235)                  (0.016)               (0.004)                  (0.012)              (0.012)     (0.015)
Physical (1SD below the mean) (0-1)           0.422***                 -0.042***             0.011***                 0.031***             -0.008*     -0.010*
                                              (0.081)                  (0.006)               (0.002)                  (0.004)              (0.004)     (0.005)
Poor/fair/changing SRH (0-1)                  -0.314***                0.041***              -0.011***                -0.030***            -0.007      -0.032***
                                              (0.087)                  (0.007)               (0.002)                  (0.005)              (0.005)     (0.006)
Severe headaches or migraines (0-1)           -0.151                   0.021**               -0.006**                 -0.015**             0.005       0.009
                                              (0.109)                  (0.009)               (0.002)                  (0.006)              (0.005)     (0.007)
Rooms (an increase of one room)               1.092***                 -0.087***             0.023***                 0.064***             -0.005      -0.020***
                                              (0.122)                  (0.007)               (0.002)                  (0.005)              (0.004)     (0.004)
Bookcase (0-1) (1 = >25 books)                1.807***                 -0.179***             0.048***                 0.131***             -0.005      -0.011***
                                              (0.064)                  (0.004)               (0.001)                  (0.003)              (0.003)     (0.004)
Number of facilities at home when 10 years
old (0-4)                                     0.378***                 -0.032***             0.009***                 0.023***             -0.004***   -0.007***
                                              (0.021)                  (0.001)               (0.000)                  (0.001)              (0.001)     (0.001)
Born in urban area (0-1)                      0.423***                 -0.058***             0.015***                 0.042***             -0.006*     -0.022***
                                              (0.062)                  (0.004)               (0.001)                  (0.003)              (0.003)     (0.004)
Regular dental care since childhood (0-1)     0.725***                 -0.087***             0.023***                 0.063***             0.001       -0.007*
                                              (0.061)                  (0.005)               (0.001)                  (0.003)              (0.003)     (0.004)
R-squared                                     0.252
Pseudo R-squared                                                        0.179                                                                0.029      0.033
Observations                                  34151                     34040                                                                34151      34151
a
  All models include also dummies for country and 5-year birth cohorts. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01 ** p<0.05 * p<0.10.




                                                                                    32
Appendix  
This appendix provides additional analyses and results to the main paper.

A.1 Assessing omitted variables bias 

As discussed in the main text, several studies using siblings (Currie et al., 2010;
Smith, 2009b) have shown that the positive association between childhood health and
later life health and labor market outcomes remains robust to siblings fixed effects
(FE) approaches that account for, possibly many, unobserved family and
neighborhood effects. The SHARE data is not suited to implement a siblings FE
approach, as siblings are not part of the target population unless when they live in the
same household, which is very rare for persons aged 50+. Therefore, to gauge the
importance of unobserved characteristics in our analysis, we implement Oster's
(2019) test of coefficient stability when there is omitted variable bias. This testbased
on earlier work by Altonji et al. (2005)uses the information contained in the
changes in coefficient and in R-squared when moving from an uncontrolled to a
controlled regression. Selection on observables is assumed to be informative about
selection on unobservables. There are two key parameters in this test,            and  ;
given bounding values for both, one can calculate an identified set for the effect of
interest (in our study, we are interested in the coefficients of childhood Mental,
Physical, Poor, fair or changing health and Severe headaches or migraines which we
denote as  , where i=Mental, Physical, Poor or Migraines).  represents the value
for the relative degree of selection on observed and unobserved variables, and Rmax is
the R-squared that would result from a hypothetical regression of the outcome on our
variable of interest and both observed and unobserved controls. Oster argues that
equal selection (i.e.,  1, meaning that observables are as important as the
unobservables) is an appropriate upper bound on  because empirical studies typically
include the regression controls that are believed ex-ante to be the most important
ones. In our study,           1 for at least two reasons: (1) life course health results to
a large extent from decisions that are taken after childhood, and (2) there is
measurement error in our measures of life course health. Oster suggests using 
  with  1.3 as cutoff, where  is the R-squared from the regression with all
observed controls (more precisely,              1,   ). The value for  is taken
from randomized studies. The logic is that in (correctly) randomized studies,
including controls does not change the coefficient of interest because there is no
confounding. Hence, the effects estimated in randomized data are causal and should
survive an omitted variable test. It turns out that 90% of the randomized studies
published in top journals that Oster considers pass her test when  1.3. We thus
compute Oster's recommended identified set for Mental, Physical, Poor and
                                                                    .
Migraines  ,  1.3, 1 , where   1.3 , 1                                    , with  being
the coefficient from the short regression of the outcome on, correspondingly, Mental,
Physical, Poor or Migraines and a constant term, and  being the R-squared from
that regression (see Oster (2019) for details). The original estimates with the
corresponding recommended sets that we obtain are shown for life course onset of a
CVD in Figure A-13, for accumulated career gaps in Figure A-14 and for the
probability of retiring in Figure A-15, for both men and women. As discussed in the

                                            33
main text in section "Ties to life course health", the recommended sets concerning our
main results exclude all the zero suggesting that there is a (small) causal effect of our
childhood health variables on these life course health outcomes. This holds for
instance for the increased risk of a CVD at ages 46-50 for men with early
poor/fair health and women with severe headaches in figures A-13, for the
increasing number of career gaps over the life course for men and women with
mental health problems and poor/fair health in figure A-14, and for the concave
retirement profiles over the life course also for men and women with mental
health problems and poor/fair health in figure A-15. Using other cutoffs for              ,
for instance          2.2 as in Mian and Sufi (2014), gives identified set values for
our childhood health variables as shown in Figures A-16 to A-18. They do not
change the main results leading to the same conclusions, as discussed in the main
text.




                                            34
A.2. Additional figures and tables 
Figure A-1: Probability of Having CVDs or a Lung Disease by Age and Childhood Health for Men and Womena
                Panel A. Probability of onset                                  Panel B. Cumulative probability




a
  CVDs include a heart attack or other heart problems, high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, a stroke or cerebral vascular disease, and diabetes. Physical
includes individuals one standard deviation below the mean in an index of childhood physical health and Poor/fair those with "Poor, fair or changing childhood
SRH". The numbers of respondents used are given in Table A-2.




                                                                                35
Figure A-2: Tests for homogeneous childhood health effects on CVDs (0-1) over ages 16 to 80 years for men and women in Europea




a
                                                                                                                                            
 The figure shows p-values from homogeneity tests on the estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH
(0-1) that are obtained in Figure 4. All possible comparisons are tested. The specific null hypothesis that is tested is shown in the legend. The alternative
hypothesis is always that the null hypothesis is not true.




                                                                            36
Figure A-3: Estimates of mental and physical health problems and poor self-reported health prior to age 16 from linear regressions on CVDs or lung
disease (0-1) for men and women over ages 16 to 80 years in Europea




a
                                                                                                                                        
  The figure shows OLS estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH (0-1) obtained from estimating
linear models on the probability of having a serious health condition (0-1) for men at five-year intervals over ages 16 to 80 years in Europe. Physical includes
those one standard deviation below the mean in an index of childhood physical health and Poor those with "Poor, fair or changing childhood SRH". CVDs
include a heart attack or other heart problems, high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, a stroke or cerebral vascular disease, and diabetes. All models include
all the variables listed in Table 1, except age and the mediating factors, plus country dummies and five-year cohort dummies. 95% confidence intervals are based
on robust standard errors.


                                                                                37
Figure A-4: Tests for homogeneous childhood health effects on CVDs or lung disease (0-1) for men and women over ages 16 to 80 years in Europea




a
                                                                                                                                              
 The figure shows p-values from homogeneity tests on the estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH
(0-1) that are obtained in Figure A-3. All possible comparisons are tested. The specific null hypothesis that is tested is shown in the legend. The alternative
hypothesis is always that the null hypothesis is not true.




                                                                             38
Figure A-5: Tests for homogeneous childhood health effects on accumulated career gaps since career start from age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed
for men and women in Europea




a
                                                                                                                                            
 The figure shows p-values from homogeneity tests on the estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH
(0-1) that are obtained in Figure 5. All possible comparisons are tested. The specific null hypothesis that is tested is shown in the legend. The alternative
hypothesis is always that the null hypothesis is not true.



                                                                            39
Figure A-6: Tests for homogeneous childhood health effects on the probability of retiring from a job from age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed for
men and women in Europea




a
                                                                                                                                            
 The figure shows p-values from homogeneity tests on the estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH
(0-1) that are obtained in Figure 6. All possible comparisons are tested. The specific null hypothesis that is tested is shown in the legend. The alternative
hypothesis is always that the null hypothesis is not true.



                                                                            40
Figure A-7: Estimates of mental and physical health problems and poor self-reported health prior to age 16 from linear regressions on CVDs (0-1) for
men and women over ages 21 to 80 years in Europe with controls for mediating factorsa




a
                                                                                                                                   
  The figure shows OLS estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH (0-1) obtained from estimating
linear models on the probability of having a CVD (0-1) at five-year intervals over ages 16 to 80 years, separately for men and women in Europe. Physical
includes those one standard deviation below the mean in an index of childhood physical health and Poor those with "Poor, fair or changing childhood SRH". All
models include all the variables listed in Table 1, except age, plus country dummies and five-year cohort dummies. Included mediating factors are years in full-
time education and being married (0-1) or have a natural child (0-1) in the corresponding age interval. 95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard
errors. The full set of estimates are available upon request.



                                                                              41
Figure A-8: Estimates of mental and physical health problems and poor self-reported health prior to age 16 from linear regressions on accumulated
career gaps since career start from age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed for men and women in Europe with controls for mediating factorsa




a
                                                                                                                                     
  The figure shows OLS estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH (0-1) obtained from estimating
linear models on accumulated career gaps between age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed, separately for men and women in Europe. Physical includes those one
standard deviation below the mean in an index of childhood physical health and Poor those with "Poor, fair or changing childhood SRH". All models include all
the variables listed in Table 1, except age, plus country dummies and five-year cohort dummies. Included mediating factors are years in full-time education and
being married (0-1) or have a natural child (0-1) in the corresponding age interval. 95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard errors. The full set of
estimates are available upon request.



                                                                               42
Figure A-9: Estimates of mental and physical health problems and poor self-reported health prior to age 16 from linear regressions on the probability
of retiring from a job from age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed for men and women in Europe with controls for mediating factorsa




a
                                                                                                                                   
  The figure shows OLS estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH (0-1) obtained from estimating
linear models on the probability of retiring from a job between age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed, separately for men and women in Europe. Physical
includes those one standard deviation below the mean in an index of childhood physical health and Poor those with "Poor, fair or changing childhood SRH". All
models include all the variables listed in Table 1, except age, plus country dummies and five-year cohort dummies. Included mediating factors are years in full-
time education and being married (0-1) or have a natural child (0-1) in the corresponding age interval. 95% confidence intervals are based on robust standard
errors. The full set of estimates are available upon request.



                                                                              43
Figure A-10: Tests for homogeneous childhood health effects on CVDs (0-1) over ages 21 to 80 years for men and women in Europe after accounting for
mediating factorsa




a
                                                                                                                                        
 The figure shows p-values from homogeneity tests on the estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH
(0-1) that are obtained in Figure A-7. All possible comparisons are tested. The specific null hypothesis that is tested is shown in the legend. The alternative
hypothesis is always that the null hypothesis is not true.




                                                                             44
Figure A-11: Tests for homogeneous childhood health effects on accumulated career gaps since career start from age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed
for men and women in Europe after accounting for mediating factorsa




a
                                                                                                                                        
 The figure shows p-values from homogeneity tests on the estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH
(0-1) that are obtained in Figure A-8. All possible comparisons are tested. The specific null hypothesis that is tested is shown in the legend. The alternative
hypothesis is always that the null hypothesis is not true.




                                                                             45
Figure A-12: Tests for homogeneous childhood health effects on the probability of retiring from a job from age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed for
men and women in Europe after accounting for mediating factorsa




a
  The figure shows p-values from homogeneity tests on the estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1) and Poor childhood SRH
(0-1) that are obtained in Figure A-9. All possible comparisons are tested. The specific null hypothesis that is tested is shown in the legend. The alternative
hypothesis is always that the null hypothesis is not true.




                                                                             46
Figure A-13: Estimates of childhood health variables from linear regressions on CVDs (0-1) for men and women over ages 21 to 80 years in Europe with
Oster's recommended identified set of estimatesa




                                            .1




                                                                                                      .1
                                            .05




                                                                                                      .05
                        Percentage points




                                                                                  Percentage points
                                            0




                                                                                                      0
                                            -.05




                                                                                                      -.05
                                                  -.1




                                                                                                            -.1
                                            21 0
                                            26 5
                                            31 0
                                            36 5
                                            41 0
                                            46 5
                                            51 0
                                            56 5
                                            61 0
                                            66 5
                                            71 0
                                            76 5
                                                0




                                                                                                      21 0
                                                                                                      26 5
                                                                                                      31 0
                                                                                                      36 5
                                                                                                      41 0
                                                                                                      46 5
                                                                                                      51 0
                                                                                                      56 5
                                                                                                      61 0
                                                                                                      66 5
                                                                                                      71 0
                                                                                                      76 5
                                                                                                          0
                                              -2
                                              -2
                                              -3
                                              -3
                                              -4
                                              -4
                                              -5
                                              -5
                                              -6
                                              -6
                                              -7
                                              -7
                                              -8




                                                                                                        -2
                                                                                                        -2
                                                                                                        -3
                                                                                                        -3
                                                                                                        -4
                                                                                                        -4
                                                                                                        -5
                                                                                                        -5
                                                                                                        -6
                                                                                                        -6
                                                                                                        -7
                                                                                                        -7
                                                                                                        -8
                                            16




                                                                                                      16




a
                                                                                                                                         
 The figure shows OLS estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1), Poor childhood SRH (0-1) and Severe headaches or
migraines (0-1) obtained from estimating linear models on the probability of having a CVD (0-1) at five-year intervals over ages 16 to 80 years, separately for
men and women in Europe (see Figure 4 and Tables A-3 and A-4 for details). The vertical bars show Oster's (2019) recommended identified set of estimates
when using R2-max = 1.3 x R2 and delta = 1 (see section A.1 for details).



                                                                             47
Figure A-14: Estimates of childhood health variables from linear regressions on accumulated career gaps since career start from age 21 to 64 or the
latest age observed for men and women in Europe with Oster's recommended identified set of estimatesa




                                        4




                                                                                                 4
                                        3




                                                                                                 3
                       Change in gaps




                                                                                Change in gaps
                                        2




                                                                                                 2
                                        1




                                                                                                 1
                                        0




                                                                                                 0
                                        -1




                                                                                                 -1
                                                 5

                                                 0

                                                 5

                                                 0

                                                 5

                                                 0

                                                 5

                                                 0

                                                 4




                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                          4
                                               -2

                                               -3

                                               -3

                                               -4

                                               -4

                                               -5

                                               -5

                                               -6

                                               -6




                                                                                                        -2

                                                                                                        -3

                                                                                                        -3

                                                                                                        -4

                                                                                                        -4

                                                                                                        -5

                                                                                                        -5

                                                                                                        -6

                                                                                                        -6
                                             21

                                             26

                                             31

                                             36

                                             41

                                             46

                                             51

                                             56

                                             61




                                                                                                      21

                                                                                                      26

                                                                                                      31

                                                                                                      36

                                                                                                      41

                                                                                                      46

                                                                                                      51

                                                                                                      56

                                                                                                      61
a
                                                                                                                                      
 The figure shows OLS estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1), Poor childhood SRH (0-1) and Severe headaches or
migraines (0-1) obtained from estimating linear models on accumulated career gaps between age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed, separately for men and
women in Europe (see Figure 5 and Tables A-5 and A-6 for details). The vertical bars show Oster's (2019) recommended identified set of estimates when using
R2-max = 1.3 x R2 and delta = 1 (see section A.1 for details).



                                                                           48
Figure A-15: Estimates of childhood health variables from linear regressions the probability of retiring from a job from age 21 to 64 or the latest age
observed for men and women in Europe with Oster's recommended identified set of estimatesa




                                            .15




                                                                                                       .15
                                            .1




                                                                                                       .1
                        Percentage points




                                                                                   Percentage points
                                            .05




                                                                                                       .05
                                            0




                                                                                                       0
                                            -.05




                                                                                                       -.05
                                                       5

                                                       0

                                                       5

                                                       0

                                                       5

                                                       0

                                                       5

                                                       0

                                                       4




                                                                                                                  5

                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                  5

                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                  5

                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                  5

                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                  4
                                                     -2

                                                     -3

                                                     -3

                                                     -4

                                                     -4

                                                     -5

                                                     -5

                                                     -6

                                                     -6




                                                                                                                -2

                                                                                                                -3

                                                                                                                -3

                                                                                                                -4

                                                                                                                -4

                                                                                                                -5

                                                                                                                -5

                                                                                                                -6

                                                                                                                -6
                                                   21

                                                   26

                                                   31

                                                   36

                                                   41

                                                   46

                                                   51

                                                   56

                                                   61




                                                                                                              21

                                                                                                              26

                                                                                                              31

                                                                                                              36

                                                                                                              41

                                                                                                              46

                                                                                                              51

                                                                                                              56

                                                                                                              61
a
                                                                                                                                          
 The figure shows OLS estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1), Poor childhood SRH (0-1) and Severe headaches or
migraines (0-1) obtained from estimating linear models on the probability of retiring from a job between age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed, separately for
men and women in Europe (see Figure 5 and Tables A-5 and A-6 for details). The vertical bars show Oster's (2019) recommended identified set of estimates
when using R2-max = 1.3 x R2 and delta = 1 (see section A.1 for details).



                                                                              49
Figure A-16: Estimates of childhood health variables from linear regressions on CVDs (0-1) for men and women over ages 21 to 80 years in Europe with
Oster's identified set of estimatesa




                                            .1




                                                                                                      .1
                                            .05




                                                                                                      .05
                        Percentage points




                                                                                  Percentage points
                                            0




                                                                                                      0
                                            -.05




                                                                                                      -.05
                                                  -.1




                                                                                                            -.1
                                            21 0
                                            26 5
                                            31 0
                                            36 5
                                            41 0
                                            46 5
                                            51 0
                                            56 5
                                            61 0
                                            66 5
                                            71 0
                                            76 5
                                                0




                                                                                                      21 0
                                                                                                      26 5
                                                                                                      31 0
                                                                                                      36 5
                                                                                                      41 0
                                                                                                      46 5
                                                                                                      51 0
                                                                                                      56 5
                                                                                                      61 0
                                                                                                      66 5
                                                                                                      71 0
                                                                                                      76 5
                                                                                                          0
                                              -2
                                              -2
                                              -3
                                              -3
                                              -4
                                              -4
                                              -5
                                              -5
                                              -6
                                              -6
                                              -7
                                              -7
                                              -8




                                                                                                        -2
                                                                                                        -2
                                                                                                        -3
                                                                                                        -3
                                                                                                        -4
                                                                                                        -4
                                                                                                        -5
                                                                                                        -5
                                                                                                        -6
                                                                                                        -6
                                                                                                        -7
                                                                                                        -7
                                                                                                        -8
                                            16




                                                                                                      16




a
                                                                                                                                         
 The figure shows OLS estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1), Poor childhood SRH (0-1) and Severe headaches or
migraines (0-1) obtained from estimating linear models on the probability of having a CVD (0-1) at five-year intervals over ages 16 to 80 years, separately for
men and women in Europe (see Figure 4 and Tables A-3 and A-4 for details). The vertical bars show Oster's (2019) identified set of estimates when using R2-
max = 2.2 x R2 and delta = 1 as in Mian and Sufi (2014) (see section A.1 for details).



                                                                             50
Figure A-17: Estimates of childhood health variables from linear regressions on accumulated career gaps since career start from age 21 to 64 or the
latest age observed for men and women in Europe with Oster's identified set of estimatesa




                                         4




                                                                                                   4
                                         3




                                                                                                   3
                        Change in gaps




                                                                                  Change in gaps
                                         2




                                                                                                   2
                                         1




                                                                                                   1
                                         0




                                                                                                   0
                                         -1




                                                                                                   -1
                                                  5

                                                  0

                                                  5

                                                  0

                                                  5

                                                  0

                                                  5

                                                  0

                                                  4




                                                                                                            5

                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                            5

                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                            5

                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                            5

                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                            4
                                                -2

                                                -3

                                                -3

                                                -4

                                                -4

                                                -5

                                                -5

                                                -6

                                                -6




                                                                                                          -2

                                                                                                          -3

                                                                                                          -3

                                                                                                          -4

                                                                                                          -4

                                                                                                          -5

                                                                                                          -5

                                                                                                          -6

                                                                                                          -6
                                              21

                                              26

                                              31

                                              36

                                              41

                                              46

                                              51

                                              56

                                              61




                                                                                                        21

                                                                                                        26

                                                                                                        31

                                                                                                        36

                                                                                                        41

                                                                                                        46

                                                                                                        51

                                                                                                        56

                                                                                                        61
a
                                                                                                                                        
 The figure shows OLS estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1), Poor childhood SRH (0-1) and Severe headaches or
migraines (0-1) obtained from estimating linear models on accumulated career gaps between age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed, separately for men and
women in Europe (see Figure 5 and Tables A-5 and A-6 for details). The vertical bars show Oster's (2019) identified set of estimates when using R2-max = 2.2 x
R2 and delta = 1 as in Mian and Sufi (2014) (see section A.1 for details).



                                                                             51
Figure A-18: Estimates of childhood health variables from linear regressions the probability of retiring from a job from age 21 to 64 or the latest age
observed for men and women in Europe with Oster's identified set of estimatesa




                                            .15




                                                                                                       .15
                                            .1




                                                                                                       .1
                        Percentage points




                                                                                   Percentage points
                                            .05




                                                                                                       .05
                                            0




                                                                                                       0
                                            -.05




                                                                                                       -.05
                                                       5

                                                       0

                                                       5

                                                       0

                                                       5

                                                       0

                                                       5

                                                       0

                                                       4




                                                                                                                  5

                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                  5

                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                  5

                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                  5

                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                  4
                                                     -2

                                                     -3

                                                     -3

                                                     -4

                                                     -4

                                                     -5

                                                     -5

                                                     -6

                                                     -6




                                                                                                                -2

                                                                                                                -3

                                                                                                                -3

                                                                                                                -4

                                                                                                                -4

                                                                                                                -5

                                                                                                                -5

                                                                                                                -6

                                                                                                                -6
                                                   21

                                                   26

                                                   31

                                                   36

                                                   41

                                                   46

                                                   51

                                                   56

                                                   61




                                                                                                              21

                                                                                                              26

                                                                                                              31

                                                                                                              36

                                                                                                              41

                                                                                                              46

                                                                                                              51

                                                                                                              56

                                                                                                              61
a
                                                                                                                                          
 The figure shows OLS estimates for Mental health problems (0-1), Physical health problems (0-1), Poor childhood SRH (0-1) and Severe headaches or
migraines (0-1) obtained from estimating linear models on the probability of retiring from a job between age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed, separately for
men and women in Europe (see Figure 5 and Tables A-5 and A-6 for details). The vertical bars show Oster's (2019) identified set of estimates when using R2-
max = 2.2 x R2 and delta = 1 as in Mian and Sufi (2014) (see section A.1 for details).



                                                                              52
Table A-1: Correlations of Childhood Variablesa
Men                                                                             Mental     Physical Poor         Head         Rooms      Bookcase Facilities Urban      Dental
Emotional problems or epilepsy (0-1) (Mental)                                   1
Physical health index (those 1SD below the mean) (0-1) (Physical)               0.059      1
Poor, fair or changing self-reported health (0-1) (Poor/fair)                   0.131      0.205     1
Severe headaches or migraines when 0-15 years (0-1)                             0.089      0.091     0.087       1
Rooms per person when 10 years oldb                                             0.028      0.080     -0.010      0.032        1
Bookcase at home when 10 years old (0-1) (1 = >25 books)c                       0.023      0.111     0.000       0.051        0.252      1
Number of facilities at home when 10 years old (0-5)d                           0.029      0.119     -0.038      0.048        0.356      0.447      1
Born in an urban area (0-1)                                                     0.007      0.056     0.005       0.021        0.080      0.203      0.290     1
Regular dental care since childhood (0-1)                                       0.012      0.085     -0.011      0.028        0.157      0.319      0.331     0.117     1
Women                                                                           Mental     Physical Poor         Head         Rooms      Bookcase Facilities Urban      Dental
Emotional problems or epilepsy (0-1) (Mental)                                   1
Physical health index (those 1SD below the mean) (0-1) (Physical)               0.083      1
Poor, fair or changing self-reported health (0-1) (Poor/fair)                   0.125      0.238     1
Severe headaches or migraines when 0-15 years (0-1)                             0.097      0.112     0.119       1
Rooms per person when 10 years oldb                                             0.038      0.049     -0.030      0.023        1
Bookcase at home when 10 years old (0-1) (1 = >25 books)c                       0.014      0.091     -0.013      0.029        0.259      1
Number of facilities at home when 10 years old (0-5)d                           0.042      0.082     -0.059      0.025        0.364      0.450      1
Born in an urban area (0-1)                                                     0.020      0.051     -0.008      0.007        0.090      0.201      0.306     1
Regular dental care since childhood (0-1)                                       0.009      0.075     -0.008      0.017        0.166      0.329      0.326     0.107     1
a
  This table depicts the sample correlations between childhood variables. The first three rows show childhood mental, physical and self-reported health. b The number of
rooms include bedrooms, but exclude kitchen, bathrooms, and hallways. c Bookcase measures the number of books at home when 10 years old. It is = 1 if there were enough
books to fill one bookcase (26-100 books), two bookcases (101-200 books) or two or more bookcases (>200 books), and = 0 if there were none or very few books (0-10
books) or enough to fill one shelf only (11-25 books). d Includes fixed bath, cold and hot running water supply, inside toilet and central heating.




                                                                                     53
Table A-2: Number of male and female respondents used to construct life course health variables by age and childhood healtha
                Men                                                    Women
Age             Healthy       Mental       Physical      Poor          Healthy       Mental         Physical      Poor
16-20           20429         321          4812          2414          27130         577            4434          3650
21-25           20429         321          4812          2414          27130         577            4434          3650
26-30           20429         321          4812          2414          27130         577            4434          3650
31-35           20429         321          4812          2414          27130         577            4434          3650
36-40           20429         321          4812          2414          27130         577            4434          3650
41-45           20429         321          4812          2414          27130         577            4434          3650
46-50           20429         321          4812          2414          27130         577            4434          3650
51-55           20420         321          4805          2409          27046         573            4424          3645
56-60           18943         279          4390          2262          24258         507            3842          3354
61-65           15125         188          3365          1851          19234         328            2891          2752
66-70           11226         122          2367          1438          14165         202            2035          2156
71-75           7510          74           1482          1006          9617          123            1332          1526
76-80           4419          45           835           595           5977          70             797           1007
a
  Number of respondents used in Figure 1. Numbers for job-related health outcomes shown in Figures 2 and 3 are somewhat lower. For instance, for retirement in Figure 4
because only the sample of people who retired from a job is used. The numbers in this table do not match exactly the ones in Tables A-3 and A-4 because there is some
double counting for individuals with more than one childhood health problem.




                                                                                   54
Table A-3: Estimates of childhood health and SES variables from linear regressions on the probability of onset of a CVD over ages 16 to 80 for men in Europea
                                                     16-20    21-25 26-30        31-35 36-40 41-45 46-50              51-55 56-60       61-65 66-70 71-75 76-80
Mental (0-1)                                         -0.003 0.008 0.011          0.018* 0.008 0.009 -0.002 0.001 -0.030* 0.009 -0.023 -0.016 -0.028
                                                     (0.006) (0.007) (0.009) (0.011) (0.013) (0.015) (0.020) (0.018) (0.016) (0.021) (0.023) (0.026) (0.021)
Physical (1SD below the mean) (0-1)                  0.005*** 0.003* 0.005*** 0.003 0.006* 0.003 0.003                0.010* 0.002      0.001 -0.005 0.009 -0.015**
                                                     (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.004) (0.005) (0.005) (0.006) (0.006) (0.007) (0.008) (0.008)
Poor/fair/changing SRH (0-1)                         0.010*** 0.005** 0.004      0.006** 0.011** -0.000 0.028*** 0.008 -0.000           0.008 0.010 -0.005 0.017*
                                                     (0.003) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) (0.005) (0.008) (0.007) (0.008) (0.008) (0.009) (0.009) (0.010)
Severe headaches or migraines (0-1)                  0.009** -0.001 -0.005 0.011** 0.011 0.008 0.015                  0.023** 0.011     -0.020* -0.001 0.038** -0.013
                                                     (0.005) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) (0.007) (0.008) (0.011) (0.011) (0.011) (0.011) (0.013) (0.018) (0.016)
Rooms (an increase of one room)                      0.000    0.000 -0.000 -0.000 -0.004 0.001 -0.005 0.008 -0.016*** -0.001 -0.004 -0.010 -0.008
                                                     (0.002) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.004) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.007) (0.007) (0.006)
Bookcase (0-1) (1 = >25 books)                       0.003** 0.001 0.001         0.003 0.001 -0.003 -0.005 -0.002 -0.008                -0.005 -0.013** -0.002 0.008
                                                     (0.002) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.006) (0.007) (0.008)
Number of facilities at home when 10 years old (0-4) -0.001 0.000 -0.001 -0.001** -0.000 -0.000 -0.001 -0.002 0.003** -0.000 -0.000 -0.004** -0.000
                                                     (0.000) (0.000) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002)
Born in urban area (0-1)                             0.001    0.000 -0.000 -0.000 -0.000 0.003 0.009** -0.004 -0.002                    -0.001 0.003 0.006 -0.001
                                                     (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) (0.004) (0.005) (0.005) (0.006) (0.006) (0.007)
Regular dental care since childhood (0-1)            -0.001 -0.000 -0.000 0.000 0.004 -0.000 0.001                    -0.001 -0.006     0.000 -0.004 0.010* 0.002
                                                     (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.006) (0.006) (0.007)
R-squared                                            0.007    0.004 0.005        0.004 0.007 0.012 0.015              0.018 0.036       0.038 0.053 0.044 0.055
Observations                                         26741 26741 26741 26741 26741 26741 26741 26723 24747                              19647 14506 9640          5649
a
  OLS estimates of childhood health and SES variables from linear regressions on the probability of onset of a CVD over ages 16 to 80 for men in Europe. All models include
also dummies for country and 5-year birth cohorts. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01 ** p<0.05 * p<0.10.




                                                                                   55
Table A-4: Estimates of childhood health and SES variables from linear regressions on the probability of onset of a CVD over ages 16 to 80 for women in Europea
                                                     16-20    21-25 26-30    31-35    36-40     41-45     46-50      51-55 56-60       61-65   66-70    71-75 76-80
Mental (0-1)                                         0.020*** 0.015** 0.007  0.006    0.018*    -0.001    -0.007     0.010 -0.014      0.004   0.014    -0.022 0.022
                                                     (0.007) (0.007) (0.007) (0.007) (0.010) (0.010) (0.014)         (0.014) (0.012) (0.017) (0.021) (0.019) (0.030)
Physical (1SD below the mean) (0-1)                  0.002    0.001 0.005** 0.005** 0.002       0.002     0.009*     0.005 0.010*      0.003   0.011    0.013 -0.011
                                                     (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.004) (0.005)         (0.005) (0.006) (0.006) (0.007) (0.008) (0.008)
Poor/fair/changing SRH (0-1)                         0.001    0.003 0.005** 0.006** 0.008** 0.016*** 0.012*          0.010 0.008       0.015** -0.000 0.008 0.008
                                                     (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) (0.005) (0.006)         (0.006) (0.006) (0.007) (0.008) (0.008) (0.009)
Severe headaches or migraines (0-1)                  0.006** 0.004 0.001     0.003    0.006     0.009     0.025***   0.014* 0.015*     -0.000  0.004    0.000 0.031**
                                                     (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) (0.006) (0.008)         (0.008) (0.008) (0.009) (0.010) (0.011) (0.015)
Rooms (an increase of one room)                      0.004    -0.001 0.001   -0.004** -0.002    -0.009*** -0.012**   0.002 -0.012*** -0.015*** -0.002 -0.006 0.005
                                                     (0.003) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005)         (0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.006) (0.007) (0.010)
Bookcase (0-1) (1 = >25 books)                       -0.002 -0.001 -0.001 0.001       -0.007*** -0.003    -0.004     -0.007 -0.006     -0.007  -0.007 -0.009 -0.009
                                                     (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004)         (0.004) (0.004) (0.005) (0.006) (0.006) (0.007)
Number of facilities at home when 10 years old (0-4) -0.000 -0.000 -0.000 -0.001 -0.002*** -0.004*** -0.006***       -0.002* -0.006*** -0.002  -0.001 -0.000 0.002
                                                     (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)         (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002)
Born in urban area (0-1)                             0.001    -0.001 0.001   -0.001 0.003       0.007** 0.002        -0.003 0.004      0.006   0.006    -0.001 -0.014**
                                                     (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.004)         (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.005) (0.006) (0.006)
Regular dental care since childhood (0-1)            -0.002 0.001 -0.004** 0.001      -0.001    -0.007** -0.011**    -0.006 -0.008* 0.006      -0.013** 0.000 0.003
                                                     (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004)         (0.004) (0.004) (0.005) (0.005) (0.006) (0.006)
R-squared                                            0.004    0.003 0.003    0.003    0.005     0.012     0.015      0.022 0.041       0.038   0.057    0.047 0.053
Observations                                         34151    34151 34151 34151 34151           34151     34151      34049 30501       24080   17730 12037 7508
a
  OLS estimates of childhood health and SES variables from linear regressions on the probability of onset of a CVD over ages 16 to 80 for women in Europe. All models
include also dummies for country and 5-year birth cohorts. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01 ** p<0.05 * p<0.10.




                                                                                   56
Table A-5: Estimates of childhood health and SES variables from linear regressions on accumulated career gaps since career start from age 21 to 64 or the latest
age observed for men in Europea
                                                     21-25        26-30        31-35         36-40        41-45         46-50         51-55       56-60        61-64
Mental (0-1)                                         0.194**      0.381***     0.612***      1.048***     1.529***      2.019***      2.536***    2.976***     3.153***
                                                     (0.081)      (0.124)      (0.176)       (0.239)      (0.307)       (0.384)       (0.463)     (0.514)      (0.533)
Physical (1SD below the mean) (0-1)                  0.010        0.012        -0.003        -0.010       -0.031        -0.035        -0.029      0.008        0.020
                                                     (0.014)      (0.018)      (0.023)       (0.031)      (0.040)       (0.052)       (0.067)     (0.083)      (0.093)
Poor/fair/changing SRH (0-1)                         0.019        0.045*       0.095***      0.158***     0.244***      0.386***      0.562***    0.727***     0.839***
                                                     (0.020)      (0.027)      (0.036)       (0.049)      (0.065)       (0.084)       (0.108)     (0.131)      (0.144)
Severe headaches or migraines (0-1)                  -0.015       -0.022       -0.017        0.033        0.131         0.185         0.234       0.339*       0.426**
                                                     (0.027)      (0.037)      (0.050)       (0.068)      (0.093)       (0.122)       (0.156)     (0.185)      (0.202)
Rooms (an increase of one room)                      -0.028*      -0.030*      -0.034        -0.039       -0.055        -0.075        -0.130*     -0.243*** -0.355***
                                                     (0.016)      (0.018)      (0.024)       (0.031)      (0.042)       (0.055)       (0.072)     (0.089)      (0.099)
Bookcase (0-1) (1 = >25 books)                       -0.012       -0.025       -0.044**      -0.066**     -0.109*** -0.170*** -0.268*** -0.432*** -0.565***
                                                     (0.012)      (0.016)      (0.022)       (0.029)      (0.038)       (0.049)       (0.063)     (0.077)      (0.086)
Number of facilities at home when 10 years old (0-4) -0.013*** -0.018*** -0.027*** -0.040*** -0.060*** -0.091*** -0.130*** -0.178*** -0.221***
                                                     (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.009)      (0.012)       (0.016)       (0.021)     (0.025)      (0.027)
Born in urban area (0-1)                             0.018        0.043***     0.077***      0.112***     0.165***      0.233***      0.294***    0.276***     0.234***
                                                     (0.011)      (0.015)      (0.020)       (0.027)      (0.035)       (0.045)       (0.058)     (0.071)      (0.079)
Regular dental care since childhood (0-1)            -0.045*** -0.059*** -0.081*** -0.113*** -0.147*** -0.210*** -0.301*** -0.403*** -0.483***
                                                     (0.012)      (0.016)      (0.021)       (0.028)      (0.037)       (0.049)       (0.063)     (0.077)      (0.085)
R-squared                                            0.028        0.020        0.018         0.021        0.026         0.033         0.040       0.050        0.089
Observations                                         23592        25755        26155         26283        26340         26370         26386       26399        26401
a
  OLS estimates of childhood health and SES variables from linear regressions on accumulated career gaps between age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed for men in Europe.
All models include also dummies for country and 5-year birth cohorts. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01 ** p<0.05 * p<0.10.




                                                                                   57
Table A-6: Estimates of childhood health and SES variables from linear regressions on accumulated career gaps since career start from age 21 to 64 or the latest
age observed for women in Europea
                                                     21-25        26-30        31-35         36-40        41-45         46-50         51-55       56-60        61-64
Mental (0-1)                                         0.006        -0.048       -0.100        -0.025       0.183         0.574         0.978**     1.275***     1.303***
                                                     (0.081)      (0.139)      (0.198)      (0.259)       (0.319)       (0.385)       (0.444)     (0.479)      (0.491)
Physical (1SD below the mean) (0-1)                  -0.018       -0.150*** -0.256*** -0.317*** -0.345*** -0.396*** -0.407**                      -0.405**     -0.439**
                                                     (0.028)      (0.050)      (0.072)      (0.094)       (0.116)       (0.139)       (0.162)     (0.179)      (0.187)
Poor/fair/changing SRH (0-1)                         0.146***     0.314***     0.503***      0.713***     0.901***      1.131***      1.420***    1.664***     1.780***
                                                     (0.034)      (0.060)      (0.087)      (0.114)       (0.140)       (0.168)       (0.195)     (0.215)      (0.224)
Severe headaches or migraines (0-1)                  0.042        0.066        0.036         0.079        0.148         0.203         0.313       0.383        0.427
                                                     (0.045)      (0.079)      (0.113)      (0.147)       (0.182)       (0.218)       (0.253)     (0.280)      (0.292)
Rooms (an increase of one room)                      -0.200*** -0.392*** -0.531*** -0.627*** -0.751*** -0.881*** -1.040*** -1.218*** -1.296***
                                                     (0.026)      (0.047)      (0.069)      (0.091)       (0.113)       (0.137)       (0.161)     (0.179)      (0.188)
Bookcase (0-1) (1 = >25 books)                       -0.246*** -0.451*** -0.604*** -0.739*** -0.907*** -1.116*** -1.360*** -1.619*** -1.738***
                                                     (0.022)      (0.040)      (0.058)      (0.076)       (0.094)       (0.112)       (0.130)     (0.144)      (0.150)
Number of facilities at home when 10 years old (0-4) -0.057*** -0.102*** -0.140*** -0.182*** -0.227*** -0.268*** -0.333*** -0.397*** -0.424***
                                                     (0.007)      (0.013)      (0.019)      (0.024)       (0.030)       (0.036)       (0.042)     (0.046)      (0.048)
Born in urban area (0-1)                             -0.007       -0.015       -0.005        0.074        0.120         0.143         0.138       0.097        0.082
                                                     (0.022)      (0.039)      (0.057)      (0.075)       (0.092)       (0.110)       (0.128)     (0.141)      (0.146)
Regular dental care since childhood (0-1)            -0.189*** -0.334*** -0.475*** -0.584*** -0.703*** -0.867*** -1.029*** -1.183*** -1.248***
                                                     (0.024)      (0.042)      (0.061)      (0.081)       (0.100)       (0.119)       (0.139)     (0.153)      (0.159)
R-squared                                            0.062        0.115        0.149         0.161        0.164         0.162         0.160       0.170        0.202
Observations                                         27159        28707        29370         29816        30075         30217         30282       30310        30318
a
  OLS estimates of childhood health and SES variables from linear regressions on accumulated career gaps between age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed for men in Europe.
All models include also dummies for country and 5-year birth cohorts. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01 ** p<0.05 * p<0.10.




                                                                                   58
Table A-7: Estimates of childhood health and SES variables from linear regressions on the probability of retiring from a job from age 21 to 64 or the latest age
observed for men in Europea
                                                     21-25        26-30        31-35         36-40          41-45        46-50        51-55          56-60        61-64
Mental (0-1)                                         -0.003*** -0.001          0.014         0.044**        0.046**      0.070***     0.064**        0.037        0.009
                                                     (0.001)      (0.006)      (0.012)       (0.018)        (0.020)      (0.024)      (0.031)        (0.036)      (0.029)
Physical (1SD below the mean) (0-1)                  -0.001       -0.001       0.001         0.001          0.000        0.001        -0.000         -0.018*      -0.004
                                                     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.005)      (0.007)        (0.010)      (0.008)
Poor/fair/changing SRH (0-1)                         0.002        0.004*       0.005*        0.008**        0.018***     0.028***     0.030***       0.038***     0.015
                                                     (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.005)      (0.007)      (0.010)        (0.012)      (0.010)
Severe headaches or migraines (0-1)                  -0.002*** -0.003          0.001         0.003          0.002        -0.005       0.009          0.025        -0.005
                                                     (0.000)      (0.002)      (0.004)       (0.006)        (0.007)      (0.009)      (0.015)        (0.019)      (0.017)
Rooms (an increase of one room)                      0.001*       -0.000       0.000         -0.002         -0.002       -0.004       -0.013*        -0.035*** -0.025***
                                                     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.005)      (0.007)        (0.010)      (0.008)
Bookcase (0-1) (1 = >25 books)                       -0.000       -0.002       -0.001        -0.001         -0.002       -0.009**     -0.029*** -0.058*** -0.035***
                                                     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.007)        (0.009)      (0.007)
Number of facilities at home when 10 years old (0-4) -0.000       -0.000       -0.000        -0.002**       -0.003*** -0.005*** -0.004**             -0.011*** -0.008***
                                                     (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.002)
Born in urban area (0-1)                             0.000        0.001        0.002         0.003          0.007**      0.011**      0.005          0.000        0.009
                                                     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.006)        (0.008)      (0.007)
Regular dental care since childhood (0-1)            -0.000       0.001        0.000         0.001          0.001        -0.002       -0.002         -0.006       -0.007
                                                     (0.001)      (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.006)        (0.008)      (0.007)
R-squared                                            0.003        0.007        0.024         0.043          0.060        0.092        0.103          0.164        0.142
Observations                                         17671        17671        17671         17671          17671        17671        17671          17671        17671
a
  OLS estimates of childhood health and SES variables from linear regressions on the probability of retiring from a job between age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed for
men in Europe. All models include also dummies for country and 5-year birth cohorts. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01 ** p<0.05 *
p<0.10.




                                                                                     59
Table A-8: Estimates of childhood health and SES variables from linear regressions on the probability of retiring from a job from age 21 to 64 or the latest age
observed for women in Europea
                                                     21-25        26-30        31-35         36-40          41-45        46-50        51-55          56-60        61-64
Mental (0-1)                                         0.002        0.010        0.022         0.051***       0.062***     0.071***     0.098***       0.060**      0.035*
                                                     (0.007)      (0.010)      (0.014)       (0.018)        (0.020)      (0.023)      (0.030)        (0.026)      (0.020)
Physical (1SD below the mean) (0-1)                  0.001        0.004        0.004         0.004          0.007        0.005        0.002          -0.009       -0.008
                                                     (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.005)      (0.007)      (0.010)        (0.010)      (0.008)
Poor/fair/changing SRH (0-1)                         0.003        0.006*       0.007**       0.011**        0.019***     0.025***     0.033***       0.028***     0.018**
                                                     (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.010)        (0.010)      (0.008)
Severe headaches or migraines (0-1)                  0.001        0.002        0.013**       0.009          0.006        0.026**      -0.005         -0.004       -0.003
                                                     (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.008)      (0.011)      (0.014)        (0.014)      (0.012)
Rooms (an increase of one room)                      0.001        -0.000       -0.001        -0.004         -0.003       -0.013*      -0.027*** -0.017*           -0.015*
                                                     (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.009)        (0.010)      (0.008)
Bookcase (0-1) (1 = >25 books)                       -0.001       0.002        0.002         -0.000         -0.002       -0.013**     -0.044*** -0.031*** -0.015***
                                                     (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.008)        (0.007)      (0.006)
Number of facilities at home when 10 years old (0-4) -0.001       -0.001       -0.001        -0.001         -0.002*      -0.001       -0.009*** -0.007*** -0.004**
                                                     (0.000)      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)        (0.002)      (0.002)
Born in urban area (0-1)                             0.001        -0.002       0.000         0.002          0.004        0.005        0.008          0.016**      0.019***
                                                     (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.007)        (0.007)      (0.006)
Regular dental care since childhood (0-1)            -0.003**     -0.003       -0.006**      -0.005*        -0.010*** -0.014*** -0.002               -0.001       0.003
                                                     (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.007)        (0.007)      (0.006)
R-squared                                            0.008        0.023        0.027         0.033          0.047        0.070        0.141          0.234        0.155
Observations                                         18508        18508        18508         18508          18508        18508        18508          18508        18508
a
  OLS estimates of childhood health and SES variables from linear regressions on the probability of retiring from a job between age 21 to 64 or the latest age observed for
women in Europe. All models include also dummies for country and 5-year birth cohorts. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01 ** p<0.05 *
p<0.10.




                                                                                    60
