                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               CHINA'S MODEL OF MANAGING THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM

                                    Markus K. Brunnermeier
                                       Michael Sockin
                                         Wei Xiong

                                       Working Paper 27171
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27171


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We are grateful to Will Cong, Darrell Duffie, Anton Korinek, Debbie Lucas, Helene Rey, Alp
Simsek, Larry Summers, Liyan Yang, Hao Zhou, Haoxiang Zhu, and participants of numerous
seminars and workshops for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27171.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Markus K. Brunnermeier, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
China's Model of Managing the Financial System
Markus K. Brunnermeier, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 27171
May 2020
JEL No. G01,G14,G28

                                           ABSTRACT

China's economic model involves active government intervention in financial markets. We
develop a theoretical framework in which interventions prevent a market breakdown and a
volatility explosion caused by the reluctance of short-term investors to trade against noise traders.
In the presence of information frictions, the government can alter market dynamics since the
noise in its intervention program becomes an additional factor driving asset prices. More
importantly, this may divert investor attention away from fundamentals and totally toward
government interventions (as a result of complementarity in investors' information acquisition). A
trade-off arises: government's objective to reduce asset price volatility may worsen, rather than
improve, information efficiency of asset prices.

Markus K. Brunnermeier                            Wei Xiong
Princeton University                              Princeton University
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance                       Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08544                               Princeton, NJ 08450
and CEPR                                          and NBER
and also NBER                                     wxiong@princeton.edu
markus@princeton.edu

Michael Sockin
Department of Finance
University of Texas Austin
McCombs School of Business
Austin, TX 78712
michael.sockin@mccombs.utexas.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27171
1     Introduction
China'
     s model of "state capitalism" has lifted millions of people out of poverty in the last
four decades. It is therefore not surprising that this model has become increasingly ap-
pealing to many governments around the globe. While China has adopted many elements
of a capitalistic laissez-faire economy that rely on Adam Smith'
                                                               s "invisible hand" since its
economic reforms started in the late 1970s, it still relies on heavy-handed interventions by
the government.1 The government'
                               s "visible intervening hands" thus interact intensively
with the invisible hand and jointly propel the Chinese economy. This paper focuses on the
consequences of government interventions in the ...nancial system.
    A striking feature of the Chinese ...nancial system is how actively the government leans
against short-term market uctuations in order to promote ...nancial stability. The Chinese
government does so through frequent policy changes, using a wide array of policy tools
ranging from changes in interest rates and bank reserve requirements to stamp taxes on
stock trading, suspensions and quota controls on IPO issuances, modi...cations to rules on
mortgage rates and ...rst payment requirements, and direct trading in asset markets through
government-sponsored institutions. For example, during China'
                                                            s stock market turmoil in
the summer of 2015, the Chinese government organized a "national team"of securities ...rms
to backstop the market meltdown, as documented by Huang, Miao, and Wang (2019) and
Allen et al. (2020). As potential justi...cation for such large-scale, active interventions,
     s ...nancial markets are highly speculative2 and largely populated by inexperienced
China'
retail investors. Its markets experience high price volatility and the highest turnover rate
among major stock markets in the world.3
   1
     An intense economic tournament, for instance, motivates local government o¢ cials to drive local devel-
opments, see e.g., Xu (2011), Qian (2017), and Xiong (2019). Song and Xiong (2018) o¤er a review of the
institutional foundation of China's ...nancial system.
   2
     Carpenter and Whitelaw (2017) review an extensive literature on the so-called A-share premium puzzle
with the prices of A shares issued by publicly listed Chinese companies to domestic investors trading at
substantial price premia and much higher turnover rates, relative to B shares and H shares issued by the
same companies to foreign investors. Mei, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2009) attribute this phenomenon to
speculative trading of Chinese investors. Furthermore, Xiong and Yu (2011) document a spectacular bubble
in Chinese warrants from 2005 to 2008, during which Chinese investors actively traded a set of deep out-of-
money put warrants that had zero fundamental value.
   3
     In 2008, the China Securities Regulatory Commission issued the China Capital Markets Development
Report, which shows that, in 2007, retail accounts with a balance of less than 1 million RMB contributed
to 45.9% of stock positions and 73.6% of trading volume on the Shenzhen Stock Exchange. This report
particularly highlights speculative behavior of these small investors and the lack of mature institutional
investors as important characteristics of China'  s stock market. Hu, Pan, and Wang (2018) o¤er a detailed
account of stock market volatility and turnover in China.


                                                     1
   By leaning against short-term market uctuations created by inexperienced investors,
government intervention helps reduce market volatility and ensure ...nancial stability. Despite
the seeming myriad advantages of government intervention, there remain open questions
about whether such countercyclical government interventions come with any trade-o¤ and,
in particular, whether they are able to ensure the information e¢ ciency of the ...nancial
system for investors to invest their savings and for ...rms to ...nance their investments. These
questions are also relevant for other countries beyond China, as the 2008 global ...nancial crisis
has incentivized governments in many countries to intervene in ...nancial markets, though on
a smaller scale.
   We develop a conceptual framework to analyze these questions. Our analysis focuses on
government intervention through direct trading against noise traders in asset markets. We
build upon the standard noisy rational expectations models of asset markets with asymmetric
information, such as in Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Hellwig (1980), and their dynamic
versions, including He and Wang (1995) and Allen, Morris, and Shin (2006). In these models,
noise traders create short-term price uctuations, and a group of rational investors, each
acquiring a piece of private information, trade against these noise traders to provide liquidity
and to speculate on their private information. Our setting includes a new large player, a
government, who is prepared to trade against noise traders to stabilize the market.
   That the asset fundamental in our setting is unobservable stems from realistic information
frictions faced by investors and policy makers in the Chinese economy. Noise traders reect
inexperienced retail investors in the Chinese markets, who contribute to price volatility and
instability. The political process, hampered by informational and moral hazard frictions,
introduces unintended noise into the government'
                                               s intervention, with the magnitude of this
noise increasing with the intensity of intervention. We assume that investors are myopic
so as to reect the highly speculative nature of Chinese investors. In addition, each in-
vestor chooses between acquiring a private signal about either the asset fundamental or this
government noise before trading.
   With these elements, we build our analysis in several steps. First, we characterize a
benchmark economy in which the asset fundamental is observable to the public. In the ab-
sence of government intervention, the asset price volatility may explode and the market may
break down when the volatility of noise trading becomes su¢ ciently high. This breakdown
occurs because investors care only about the short-term return from trading the asset. The



                                                2
larger the volatility of noise trading, the larger the short-term return volatility and the higher
the risk premium that investors demand from trading the asset. This higher risk premium
raises the sensitivity of the asset price to noise trading volatility, which further increases
short-term return volatility. Through this adverse feedback loop, short-term return volatil-
ity eventually explodes when noise trading volatility becomes su¢ ciently large. The market
breaks down because no risk premium exists that can induce investors to trade against noise
traders. The volatility explosion and the possible market breakdown introduce a role for
the government-- which can take a longer horizon than investors-- to stabilize the market by
trading against noise traders.
   We then consider an extended setting in which the asset fundamental is unobservable
to both investors and the government. The government follows a linear strategy of trading
against perceived noise trading based on the publicly available information, while each in-
vestor may acquire a private signal about either the fundamental or the noise in government
intervention. Depending on the investors'information choices, we may obtain two di¤erent
equilibrium outcomes, which we label "fundamental-centric" and "government-centric," re-
spectively. In the fundamental-centric equilibrium, each investor acquires a private signal
about the fundamental, and the asset price aggregates their information to partially reveal
the fundamental. In contrast, when the government-centric equilibrium arises, investors all
focus on learning about noise in government intervention, and their trading, consequently,
makes the asset price exposed even to their anticipated future government noise. The like-
lihood of a government-centric equilibrium increases with the intensity of the government
intervention.
   Interestingly, for an intermediate range of government intervention intensity, both the
fundamental-centric and government-centric equilibria can coexist, as a result of the in-
tertemporal complementarity in investors' information acquisition choices-- if investors in
the next period acquire fundamental information, the asset price in that next period will
be more informative about the asset fundamental, which, in turn, makes it more desir-
able for investors to acquire information about the asset fundamental. Surprisingly, in the
case when both equilibria exist, the same intervention intensity allows the government to
achieve substantially lower price volatility in the government-centric equilibrium than in the
fundamental-centric equilibrium. This occurs because, in the latter, the government trades
both against noise traders, to minimize their price distortion, and against investors, who



                                                3
trade based on their respective private information. In contrast, in the government-centric
equilibrium, informed investors share the same information about the fundamental with
each other and the government; consequently, they tend to trade alongside the government
against noise traders, which reinforces the government'
                                                      s e¤ort to reduce price volatility and
renders its intervention more e¤ective in mitigating the price distortion of noise traders. The
downside is that the informational e¢ ciency of the asset price is also lower as a result of the
lack of information acquisition about the fundamental.
   How intensively the government intervenes depends on its objective. There are two simi-
lar, albeit subtly di¤erent, objectives for government intervention. The ...rst is to reduce asset
price volatility and ensure ...nancial stability, while the other is to improve the informational
e¢ ciency of the asset price. In a fully microfounded social-welfare analysis, we can trace
these two objectives: ...rst, to minimizing the risk premia faced by market participants and
second, to improving the e¢ ciency of investment by the real sector of the economy. When
investors have no information acquisition choice, the government intervention accomplishes
both objectives by simply leaning against noise traders. This "divine coincidence"has often
motivated policy makers to treat these two objectives as the same. In practice, the focus is
on reducing asset price volatility, as it is easier to measure asset price volatility than informa-
tional e¢ ciency; see e.g., Stein and Sundarem (2018). However, once investors'information
acquisition choices are endogenous, our analysis shows that the government faces a trade-o¤
between these two seemingly congruent objectives-- more intensive interventions can lead to
a government-centric equilibrium with lower price volatility, but worse information e¢ ciency.
   Our model delivers two key insights not only for government intervention in China, but
also more generally for intervention programs in other countries. First, it demonstrates
that, even in the absence of informational frictions, there can be a role for government
intervention to reduce price volatility and ensure ...nancial stability. Second, and more im-
portantly, our analysis highlights that, despite the seeming appeal for the government to
lean against short-term uctuations in prices, there is a tension between ensuring ...nancial
stability and improving informational e¢ ciency. This tension arises because government in-
tervention makes noise in government policy an additional factor in asset prices, which, if
su¢ ciently intensive, may attract the speculation of investors and distract them from ac-
quiring information about fundamentals. This speculation, in turn, reinforces the impact of
government noise on asset prices.



                                                4
   The tension between ...nancial stability and informational e¢ ciency captures a key chal-
lenge faced by the Chinese government in managing its ...nancial system. As eloquently
argued by Zhu (2016), asset bubbles are present in several key sectors of China'
                                                                               s ...nan-
cial system, including the real estate market, the bond market, and the stock market, as a
result of the paternalistic and countercyclical interventions of the government that create
implicit guarantees to investors. Such guarantees embolden investors to ignore economic
fundamentals and instead engage in reckless speculation. Our model provides a systematic
economic framework to evaluate the consequences of government intervention and, in partic-
ular, demonstrates how a policy focus of ensuing ...nancial stability may induce a substantial
cost through worsened price e¢ ciency.
   Our model builds on the literature that studies information choice in noisy rational expec-
tations models. Hellwig and Veldkamp (2009) demonstrate that, in settings with strategic
complementarity in actions, strategic complementarity also arises in information choices,
leading agents to choose to learn the same information as others. Ganguli and Yang (2009)
and Manzano and Vives (2011) investigate the complementarity in information choice among
investors when they can choose to acquire private information either about supply noise or
about fundamentals in static settings, and the resulting multiplicity and stability of equilib-
ria. Farboodi and Veldkamp (2016) examine the role of investors'acquisition of information
about order ows, instead of fundamentals, in explaining the ongoing trend of increasing
price informativeness and declining market liquidity in ...nancial markets. Di¤ering from the
intratemporal complementarity in information choices studied by these papers, our model
highlights intertemporal complementarity of investors'information choice, in a spirit similar
to Froot, Scharfstein, and Stein (1992). They illustrate how intertemporal complementarity
in information acquisition can lead investors to focus on learning about short-term, rather
than long-term, fundamentals.
   Our paper also contributes to the literature on the ...nancial market implications of govern-
ment intervention. Bond and Goldstein (2015) study the impact on information aggregation
in prices when uncertain, future government intervention inuences a ...rm'
                                                                         s real outcomes.
Cong, Grenadier, and Hu (2017) explore the information externality of government inter-
vention in money market mutual funds in a global games environment in which investors
face strategic coordination issues and intervention changes the information publicly available
to them. Angeletos, Hellwig, and Pavan (2006) and Goldstein and Huang (2016) consider



                                               5
information design by an informed policy maker that can send messages through its actions
to coordinate the response of private agents in a global games setting. In contrast to these
studies, we focus on the incentives of market participants to acquire information when there
is uncertainty about the scope of government intervention in ...nancial markets through large-
scale asset purchases. Our government, by internalizing investors' information acquisition
choices, faces a tension between reducing price volatility and improving price e¢ ciency.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides institutional background. By ...rst
taking the government intervention as given, Sections 3 and 4 analyze its e¤ects under perfect
information and information frictions, respectively. Section 5 analyzes the government'
                                                                                      s
intervention objective; Section 6 concludes with some additional discussions. We cover the
salient features of the model under di¤erent settings in the main text, while providing more
detailed descriptions of the model in the Appendix. A separate Online Appendix contains
all technical proofs involved in our analysis.


2     Institutional Background
As an integral part of the Chinese economy, China'
                                                 s ...nancial system is crucial for channeling
capital to real investment. While market forces have played increasingly important roles in
driving ...nancial markets, the systemic risk imposed by the ...nancial system on the broader
economy has motivated the government to regularly intervene. This section summarizes the
extent of government intervention in China'
                                          s ...nancial system, focusing in particular on the
general strategy of the Chinese government to lean against short-term market uctuations
either through direct trading or broad policy interventions.


The national team and the 2015 stock market crash. In 2014-15, the Chinese stock
market experienced a dramatic boom-and-bust cycle, as described by Allen et al. (2020).
From July 2014 to June 2015, the Chinese stock market index increased by over 150%, which
prompted a large number of new investors with little ...nancial knowledge and investment
experience to ood into the stock market and motivated, in particular, these investors to
take on substantial leverage through margin ...nancing of their stock positions. In June
2015, when the stock market initially plunged by over 30%, many investors received margin
calls, which forced them to liquidate their leveraged positions. Bian et al. (2017) provide a
systematic account of the resulting margin spiral, which directly threatened the stability of


                                                 6
the whole ...nancial system. Motivated by the pressing need to maintain ...nancial stability,
the Chinese government organized a "national team"of investment ...rms to bail out the stock
market in the period from June to September of 2015. According to Allen et al. (2020) and
Huang, Miao, and Wang (2019), during this bailout period the national team invested in
1,365 stocks, which accounted for about 50% of the total number of listed stocks and 6%
of the capitalization of the Chinese stock market. Their analysis shows that, by stablizing
the market, the intervention of the national team substantially increased the value of the
rescued non...nancial ...rms through increased stock demand, reduced default probabilities,
and improved market liquidity.


Other policy interventions in the stock market. In addition to the trading of the
national team during the 2015 stock market crash, the China Securities Regulatory Com-
mission (CSRC), the regulator of China'
                                      s stock market, has regularly used a set of policy
tools to lean against cycles in the stock market. A common feature of the CSRC'
                                                                              s policy
interventions is to loosen aggregate stock supply during booms and tighten supply during
busts. Since 1994, the CSRC has suspended IPO issuance nine times, usually when the stock
market was distressed and sometimes for as long as 15 months. Packer and Spiegel (2016)
...nd a signi...cant, positive relation between the number of IPOs and the market index return
in China'
        s stock market, con...rming the CSRC'
                                            s e¤ort to use IPO issuance to lean against
the market cycle. During the 2015 stock market turmoil, the CSRC had also employed
another measure to stabilize the market: prohibiting large shareholders from selling their
shares. As discussed by Allen et al. (2020), on July 8, 2015, the CSRC imposed a lockup
on shareholders owning 5% or more of their companies, initially for six months. It was later
extended in January 2016 after the stock market declined sharply again.
   The Chinese authorities have also used other measures to lean against the stock market
cycles. These are not directly related to share supply but may nevertheless have counter-
cyclical e¤ects on the intensity of stock trading. For example, during the 2015 stock market
crash, the People'
                 s Bank of China (PBC), the central bank, cut interest rates and reduced
banks' required reserve ratios to boost the liquidity in the ...nancial system; the CSRC
announced a relaxation of margin trading rules, lowering thresholds for individual investors
to trade on margins and expanding brokerages' funding channels; and the Shanghai and
Shenzhen stock exchanges lowered securities transaction fees by 30%. More generally, the
CSRC has changed the rate of transaction tax on stock trading seven times since 1994,

                                              7
increasing the tax rate during market booms and reducing it during market downturns; see
e.g., Deng, Liu, and Wei (2018) and Cai et al. (2019).


Countercyclical interventions in other markets. The Chinese government has also
actively intervened in other markets besides the stock market. According to Liu and Xiong
(2019), the real estate market has perhaps even more systemic importance to the Chinese
economy, because of the substantial exposures of local governments, real estate developers,
...rms, and households, who use real estate assets as collateral for debt ...nancing. As a
result, the Chinese government has used a wide range of policy measures to lean against real
estate cycles. During booms, the government tends to increase land supply for real estate
development. It also restricts purchases of investment homes in large cities, by both residents
and nonresidents, and increases mortgage down payments and mortgage rates for purchases
of both primary and investment homes. During downturns, the government tends to reverse
these measures. Furthermore, the PBC also adopts counter-cyclical monetary policies to
assist government e¤orts to lean against real estate cycles.
   The foreign exchange market is another marketplace where the government intervenes.
During the past decade, the Chinese government has made great e¤orts to internationalize its
currency RMB and liberalize its capital accounts. This process exposed the RMB exchange
rate to intense market speculation and China'
                                            s capital accounts to dramatic inows and
outows. In 2013-15, domestic enterprises took on dollar debt from the global capital markets
to take advantage of the substantially lower interest rates outside China, leading to large
capital inows. The direction of capital ows reversed after late 2015 when China'
                                                                               s economic
growth slowed and intense market pressure mounted to speculate against the RMB exchange
rate. In the subsequent two years, capital outows led to China'
                                                              s loss of FX reserves in
excess of $1 trillion. In response to these developments, the PBC has adopted a series of
macroprudential regulatory measures to lean against speculative capital inows/outows.
As detailed in the 2018 report of HKEX, during periods of capital outows or depreciation
pressure on the RMB, the PBC adopted the following measures: 1) an increase of the FX
risk reserve requirement ratio to 20%; 2) the introduction of reserve requirements on foreign
...nancial institutions'RMB deposits in domestic ...nancial institutions, which directly a¤ects
the supply of RMB to foreign speculators for shorting RMB; 3) the use of a countercyclical
adjustment factor in the mechanism of determining the RMB'
                                                         s central parity rate; and 4)
the imposition of uni...ed regulations on local and foreign currencies. During periods of

                                              8
capital inows or appreciation pressure on the RMB, the PBC reversed the aforementioned
measures.


Government interventions in other countries. Governments of other countries have
also intervened in ...nancial markets, albeit not as regularly or broad in scope as the Chinese
government. During the Asian ...nancial crisis in the summer of 1998, for instance, the Hong
Kong Monetary Authority organized a massive intervention to lean against market specula-
tors by buying large quantities of Hong Kong dollars, individual stocks in the Hong Kong
Hang Seng Index (HSI), and HSI futures contracts (Bhanot and Kadapakkam (2006)). In
Japan, the Bank of Japan has gradually expanded its stock purchase program in recent years
as part of its massive monetary easing program to lift the country out of deation (Shirai
(2018)). More broadly, since the global ...nancial crisis in 2008, several central banks, includ-
ing the U.S. Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank, have implemented quantitative
easing through large-scale asset purchase programs, which are aimed more at stimulating the
economy than at leaning against short-term market uctuations.


3     The Basic Model with Perfect Information
In this section, we present a baseline setting with perfect information to illustrate how
government intervention helps avoid market breakdown and the volatility explosion caused
by the reluctance of short-term investors to trade against noise traders. Our model can be
seen as a generalized version of De Long et al. (1990) with fundamental risk. We will expand
the setting in the next section to incorporate realistic information frictions.
    Consider an in...nite-horizon economy in discrete time with in...nitely many periods: t =
0; 1; 2:::. There is a risky asset, which can be viewed as stock issued by a ...rm that has a
stream of cash ows Dt over time:

                                                       D
                                       Dt = Vt +    D "t :


The component Vt is a persistent component of the fundamentals, while "D
                                                                       t is independent

and identical cash ow noise with a Gaussian distribution of N (0; 1) and          D   > 0 measures
the volatility of cash ow noise.
    As the literature has extensively studied the direct e¤ects of government policies on the



                                               9
pro...tability of ...rms,4 we intend to analyze a di¤erent channel, through which government
intervention can impact market dynamics without directly a¤ecting the ...rm'
                                                                           s cash ow.
Speci...cally, we assume that the asset'
                                       s fundamental Vt follows an exogenous AR(1) process:
                                                                   V
                                           Vt =    V Vt 1   +   V "t ;


where      V   2 (0; 1) measures the persistence of Vt ,        V   > 0 measures its volatility, and "V
                                                                                                      t s

N (0; 1) is independently and identically distributed shock.
       In this section, we assume that at time t, Vt+1 is observable to all agents in the economy.
This setting serves as a benchmark.5 We will remove this assumption in the next section
to make Vt+1 unobservable to both the government and investors and then discuss how
government intervention a¤ects the investors'information acquisition.
       For simplicity, suppose there is also a risk-free asset in elastic supply that pays a constant
gross interest rate Rf > 1: In what follows, we de...ne Rt+1 to be the excess payo¤, not
percentage return, to holding the risky asset:

                                       Rt+1 = Dt+1 + Pt+1           R f Pt :

       There are three types of agents in the asset market: noise traders, investors, and the
government. We describe each of them below.

3.1        Noise Traders
Motivated by the large number of inexperienced retail investors in China'
                                                                        s stock markets,
we assume that, in each period, these inexperienced investors, whom we call noise traders,
submit exogenous market orders into the asset market. This way of modeling noise trading
is standard in the market microstructure literature. We denote the quantity of their net buy
orders by Nt and assume that Nt is an i.i.d. process:
                                                            N
                                                 Nt =    N "t ;
   4
     For example, if the government faces a time-varying cost in implementing such a policy, the cost of
the policy can become an important factor in driving variation in a stock'       s cash   ows and thus its price
dynamics. See Pastor and Veronesi (2012, 2013) for recent studies that explore this channel. In addition,
when government policies a¤ect the cash      ow of publicly traded ...rms, Bond and Goldstein (2015) show that
such intervention feeds back into how market participants trade on their private information. This results
in socially ine¢ cient aggregation of private information about the unobservable fundamental vt into asset
prices, which can impede policymaking if the government also infers relevant information about vt from the
traded asset price in determining the scale of its intervention.
   5
     We make vt+1 ; not just vt , observable at time t so that this benchmark is exactly the limiting case of the
setting in the next section, where we allow the precision of each investor'  s private information about vt+1 to
become arbitrarily large.

                                                       10
where    N    > 0 measures the volatility of noise trading (or noise-trader risk in this market),
and "N
     t s N (0; 1) is independently and identically distributed shocks to noise traders. The

presence of noise traders creates incentives for other investors to trade in the asset market.

3.2     Investors'Problem
There is a continuum of investors in the market who trade the asset on each date t: We
assume that these investors are myopic. They can be thought of as living for only two
periods, trading in the ...rst and consuming in the second. That is, in each period a group
of new investors with measure 1 joins the market, replacing the group from the previous
period. We index an individual investor by i 2 [0; 1] : Investor i born at date t is endowed
with wealth W and has constant absolute risk aversion CARA preferences with coe¢ cient
of risk aversion      over its next-period wealth Wti+1 :

                                  Uti = E        exp        Wti+1 j Ft :

It purchases Xti shares of the asset and invests the rest in the risk-free asset at a constant
rate Rf , so that Wti+1 is given by

                                      Wti+1 = Rf W + Xti Rt+1 :

The investors have symmetric, perfect information, and their expectations are all taken with
respect to the full-information set Ft =               fVs+1 ; Ns ; Ds gs   t   in this section. As a result
of CARA preferences, an individual investor'
                                           s trading behavior is insensitive to his initial
wealth level.
    The assumption of investor myopia follows from De Long et al. (1990) and can be mo-
tivated from agency problems faced by institutional investors; see, e.g., Shleifer and Vishny
(1997). In our setting, this assumption also serves to capture the short-termism of Chi-
nese investors, which is important for generating market breakdown when noise trader risk
becomes su¢ ciently large.

3.3     Equilibrium without Government Intervention
To facilitate our discussion, we ...rst characterize the rational expectations equilibrium with-
out government intervention. Speci...cally, we derive the equilibrium price and show formally
that market volatility explodes and the market ultimately breaks down when noise trader
risk,   N;   rises above a critical threshold.

                                                       11
       We ...rst conjecture a linear rational expectations equilibrium.6 In this equilibrium, the
asset price Pt is a linear function of the fundamental Vt+1 and the noise trader shock Nt :
                                                              1
                                              Pt =                         Vt+1 + pN Nt ;
                                                       Rf              V
               1
where     Rf
                       Vt+1 is the expected present value of cash ows from the asset. With this con-
                   V

jected price function, an investor holding the asset faces, at time t; price risk from uctuations
of both Vt+1 and Nt , as given by
                                                                                                    2
                                                             2                      1                       2
                               V ar (Rt+1 jFt ) =            D   +                                          V    + p2
                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                            N:
                                                                           Rf               V

CARA utility with normally distributed payo¤s implies identical asset demand Xti :
                                               1                           pN R f
                                   Xti =                                            2                                Nt ;
                                                   2                   1                 2
                                                   D     +        Rf                     V      + p2
                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                N
                                                                            V


which trades o¤ expected asset return with return variance over the subsequent period.
       Then, imposing market-clearing in the asset market Xti = Nt leads to a quadratic equation
that pins down the price coe¢ cient pN . There may exist two positive roots for pN : We focus
on the less positive root.7 The following proposition shows that there may not be any
root-- i.e., the equilibrium does not exist-- if                           N    is higher than a threshold:
                                                                            Rf
                                               N   =         r                                              :                                               (1)
                                                                                                        2
                                                                     2
                                                         2           D     +        Rf
                                                                                            V
                                                                                                V


Proposition 1 If noise-trader risk satis...es                                   N                   N;      then an equilibrium exists with
@ (V ar(Rt+1 jFt ))                @ (V ar(Rt+1 jFt ))
       @ 2
                        > 0, and          @ 2
                                                             ! 1 as                     N       !           N;       which implies that the asset
         N                                  N
                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                            2
return variance is highest at             N   =    N     with a value of 2                                  D   +      Rf
                                                                                                                            V
                                                                                                                                        . If   N   >   N,   no
                                                                                                                                V

equilibrium exists.

       We provide a proof to Proposition 1 as a special case of Proposition 3. It shows that
the asset return variance increases with noise-trader risk,                                                     N;   and the rate of this increase
   6
     We later verify in the proof of Proposition 3 that there cannot be any nonlinear equilibrium if we treat
the economy as the in...nite-horizon limit of an economy with a ...nite number of trading periods.
   7
     As N ! 0 (i.e., noise-trader risk vanishes from the economy), the less positive root has the nice property
that pN N ! 0 (i.e., the price impact of noise traders diminishes), while the more positive root diverges.
Furthermore, if one treats the quadratic equation de...ning pN as a recursion, the less positive root is backward
stable while the more positive root is forward stable, and market breakdown occurs when both roots diverge
(pN ! 1). The less positive root is consequently the more intuitive root since prices are determined by
backward, rather than forward, induction of future payo¤s.

                                                                       12
Figure 1: Asset price variance with and without government intervention with respect to the
variance of noise trading 2N . The solid line represents the case without government intervention,
and the dashed line represents the case with government intervention at a given intensity #N , based
on the following parameters: = 1; Rf = 1:01; v = 0:75; 2                2
                                                             v = 0:01; D = 0:8; #N = 0:2:


explodes as    N   gets close to the critical threshold    N;   as illustrated in Figure 1. This
proposition also establishes that the market breaks down when          N   rises above   N:

   The myopia of investors and the price insensitivity of noise traders jointly lead to this
market breakdown. As a result of myopia, investors care only about the risk and return
over the subsequent one period. As        N   rises, investors demand a higher risk premium to
take on a position against noise traders, i.e., a more positive coe¢ cient pN , which, in turn,
leads to higher asset return volatility. Through this feedback process, once             N    becomes
larger than   N;   the asset return volatility becomes so large that investors are unwilling to
take any position regardless of the risk premium. If investors instead had longer horizons,
they would be willing to take a position despite the return volatility over the short term,
which would, in turn, stabilize the price impact of noise traders. The following proposition
illustrates that, when investors have a two-period trading horizon, the market still breaks
down if investors are su¢ ciently risk averse, while if they have in...nite trading horizons, then
a market equilibrium always exists.

Proposition 2 If investors trade for two periods, then market failure occurs if their risk-
aversion coe¢ cient,     ; is su¢ ciently high. In contrast, when investors have an in...nite
horizon, a market equilibrium always exists.

                                                 13
       Proposition 2 highlights that it is the short-term horizon of investors that limits their
capacity to trade against noise traders and contributes to market breakdown. This insight
is reminiscent of the classic result highlighted by De Long et al. (1990), which shows that,
in the presence of myopic arbitrageurs, noise traders can create their own space in asset
prices even when there is no fundamental risk. In contrast to our setting, there is no market
breakdown in De Long et al. (1990) because of the lack of fundamental risk in their model.
Speci...cally, their model corresponds to a special case of our setting with          D   =   V   = 0: In this
case,     N   % 1 according to (1), and consequently market breakdown never occurs. Without
fundamental risk, rational investors recognize that any mispricing today will mean-revert in
the next period. With fundamental risk the price may also move against them in the next
period for fundamental reasons, which makes them more reluctant to trade against the price
spread between the risky and riskless assets. The fundamental risk therefore gives rise to
the market breakdown characterized by our model.8 This mechanism for market breakdown
is also distinct from that in Bhattacharya and Spiegel (1991), in which a monopolist insider,
in the spirit of Kyle (1989), has an unbounded motive to manipulate its trading when
uninformed investors respond excessively to information in prices.
       The noise traders'price-insensitive trades serve to capture market rigidity that sometimes
occurs as a result of either forced ...re sales or panic selling during market turmoil. For
example, Bian et al. (2017) document that the crash of China'
                                                            s stock market in the summer
of 2015 was caused by the ...re sales of highly leveraged stock investors. Our simple model
describes a setting in which ...re sales by some investors can lead a market breakdown because
other investors are too short-termist to absorb these ...re sales. This kind of market breakdown
represents systemic failure and warrants government interventions.

3.4       Equilibrium with Government Intervention
We now incorporate government intervention into the model. Speci...cally, we augment the
baseline setting to include a government that actively intervenes in the asset market. The
government follows a linear trading rule:

                                       XtG =     # N Nt +   N #N Gt :
   8
     Market breakdown does not occur in Spiegel (1998), despite his model also including fundamental risk. As
investors in Spiegel have in...nite horizons, they are able to prevent market breakdown, even though multiple
equilibria may still emerge. Watanabe (2008) analyzes a model with myopic investors and fundamental
risk. Market breakdown would occur in his setting, but his analysis focuses on the implications of multiple
equilibria, without even mentioning the possibility of market breakdown.

                                                     14
The ...rst term       #N Nt captures the government'
                                                   s intended intervention strategy of trading
against the noise traders, with the coe¢ cient #N measuring the intensity of the intervention.
We choose the convention of a negative coe¢ cient because this term will partially o¤set
noise trader demand when we later impose market clearing. We also include the second term
 N #N Gt    to capture unintended noise that arises from frictions in the intervention process,
                                                                                                    G
such as behavioral biases, lobbying e¤ort, or information frictions. Speci...cally, Gt =         G "t

with "G
      t s N (0; 1) as independently and identically distributed shocks and         G   as a volatility
parameter. The magnitude of this noise component scales up with the intended intervention
intensity    N #N .    This speci...cation is reasonable as it is easier for frictions to a¤ect the
government'
          s intervention when the intervention strategy requires more intensive trading.
Furthermore, the government can neither correct nor trade against its own noise, because
the noise originates from its own trading system. Instead, the government can internalize
the amount of noise by choosing its trading intensity #N . For now, we take #N as given. We
later specify a government objective in Section 5 to analyze its optimal intervention intensity
choice.
   Several notable features of our setting merit discussion. First, while we model government
intervention as direct trading in asset markets, the speci...ed intervention strategy captures
the key feature of the Chinese government'
                                         s broad-based policy interventions of leaning
against cycles in the ...nancial system, as summarized in Section 2. This simple linear in-
tervention strategy allows us to take advantage of the well-developed framework from the
market microstructure literature. Second, our speci...cation of the government'
                                                                              s intervention
strategy is symmetric to both booms and busts. One may argue that, in practice, the gov-
ernment might be more concerned with preventing market crashes than market booms. To
the extent that an unsustainable boom would eventually lead to a market crash, we believe
it is reasonable to make the government equally concerned about mitigating both booms and
crashes that are induced by noise traders.
   As the government trades alongside investors to accommodate the trading of noise traders,
                             R1
the market-clearing condition 0 Xti di + XtG + Nt = 0 implies the following linear asset price
function with the government noise as an additional factor:
                                             1
                                 Pt =                Vt+1 + pN Nt + Pg Gt :
                                        Rf       V

The following proposition rules out other nonlinear price equilibria and characterizes this
linear market equilibrium, with the proof given in the Online Appendix.

                                                       15
Proposition 3 For a given linear government intervention strategy with intensity #N , the
asset market breaks down if
                                                              1
                                              N   >q                           N;                         (2)
                                                                  2
                                                       (1   #N ) +    #2
                                                                       N
                                                                           2
                                                                           G


where       N   is given in equation (1). Otherwise, an asset-market equilibrium exists, with price
                                  2                                                 2
volatility increasing in          N    and price informativeness decreasing in      N:


        As long as (1   #N )2 +#2
                                N
                                          2
                                          G   < 1; government intervention stabilizes the market by raising
the critical value of noise-trader risk that induces breakdown. Note that (1 #N )2 + #2N G
                                                                                          2
                                 h        i
is decreasing in #N for #N 2 0; 1+1 2 and is less than 1 for #N < 2= (1 + 2   G ) : Thus, if
                                                   G
                     2
#N < 2= (1 +         G) ;   the government'
                                          s trading against noise traders makes the equilibrium
existence condition slacker relative to the benchmark case without government intervention.
The closer #N is to         1+
                              1
                                  2   , the slacker is the equilibrium existence condition. This is shown
                                  G

in Figure 1, which depicts the shift in the market breakdown upper-bound and also the
                                                                                                         2
reduced asset price volatility before               N   reaches the upper-bound. However, if #N >      1+    2   ;
                                                                                                             G

government trading actually raises the market breakdown upper-bound for                       N   due to the
noise it injects into prices.
        Taken together, government interventions in asset markets helps ensure market stability,
especially during times of extreme market dysfunction when noise-trader risk is high. With
informational frictions, however, the intervention to stabilize asset prices has additional
e¤ects on market dynamics, which we investigate in the next section.


4         An Extended Model with Information Frictions
We now extend the model to introduce realistic information frictions that investors and the
government face in ...nancial markets, while keeping the other features of the model the same
as before. Speci...cally, we assume that the asset fundamental Vt+1 and noise trading Nt are
both unobservable at time t to all agents in the economy. For simplicity, we assume that
the noise in government trading Gt is publicly observable at date t; albeit not before t: Since
the government has no private information, this is equivalent to assuming that the scale
of government intervention, XtG ; is observable at date t:9 As the government noise a¤ects
    9
    In an earlier draft of the paper, we analyzed the case with Gt being unobservable even after t: The
results are qualitatively similar to our current setting, although the analysis is substantially more complex.


                                                            16
the asset price in equilibrium, investors have an incentive to acquire information about the
next period'
           s government noise. This extended model consequently allows us to analyze how
government intervention interacts with both trading and information acquisition of investors,
which ultimately a¤ect information e¢ ciency of asset prices.

4.1    Information and Equilibrium
We ...rst describe the information structure of the economy and the asset-market equilibrium.


Public information. All market participants observe the full history of all public infor-
mation, which includes all past dividends, asset prices, and government noise:

                                    FtM = fDs ; Ps ; Gs gs   t   ;

which we will hereafter refer to as the "market" information set. We de...ne

                                        ^tM
                                        V                M
                                          +1 = E Vt+1 j Ft


as the conditional expectation of Vt+1 with respect to FtM . The government needs to trade
against noise trading based on its conditional expectation of Nt . At the risk of abusing
notation, we de...ne
                                        ^ M = E Nt j F M ;
                                        N t           t

which represents expectation of the current-period Nt rather than Nt+1 : We also de...ne

                                    ^M
                                    G                M
                                     t+1 = E Gt+1 j Ft


as the market'
             s conditional expectation of the next-period Gt+1 : These three belief variables,
^ ;N
V M    ^ ; and G
        M      ^ M ; are time-t expectations of Vt+1 , Nt , and Gt+1 , respectively. Together
 t+1   t          t+1

with the publicly observed current-period Gt , they summarize the public information at time
t regarding the aggregate state of the market. We collect these variables as a state vector:
                                        h                            i
                                t   =       ^M N
                                            V     ^M G
                                                     ^ M Gt              :
                                              t+1  t   t+1



Government intervention. We assume that the government does not have any private
information. Instead, at date t the government trades against noise traders based only on




                                                 17
the publicly available information FtM .10 As before, we adopt the following intervention
                                                                        ^M:
program, instituted to trade against the conditional market expectation N                   t
                                                    r       h              i
                             XtG   =    #N ^M
                                         ^ Nt +         V ar #N ^
                                                                N
                                                              ^ t
                                                                  M
                                                                    j F M
                                                                        t 1 Gt ;                              (3)

where #N
       ^ is the intensity of the government'
                                           s intervention. We also extend the noise brought
by the government
         r         intervention to be increasing with the conditional variance of government
              h               i
trading, V ar #N     ^ M    M
                  ^ Nt j Ft 1 ; which is consistent with N #N in the perfect-information

case. In this section, we continue to take the government'
                                                         s intervention intensity #N
                                                                                   ^ as

given and focus on analyzing investors'information choice. We will analyze the government'
                                                                                         s
intervention choice in the next section.


Investors' information choice. In each period, investors face uncertainty in the asset
fundamental, the noise trading, and the government noise. Speci...cally, at date t; each
investor can choose to acquire a private signal about either the next-period asset fundamental
                                                                      s choice as ai
Vt+1 or the next-period government noise Gt+1 : We denote the investor'            t 2 f0; 1g ;

with 1 representing the choice of a fundamental signal and 0 the choice of a signal about the
government noise.11 When the investor chooses ai
                                               t = 1; the fundamental signal is

                                                        p      s;i
                                          si              i
                                           t = Vt+1 + 1= at s "t ;


where "s;i
       t s N (0; 1) is signal noise, independent of all other random variables in the setting,

and    s   represents the precision of the signal if chosen. When the investor chooses ai
                                                                                        t = 0,

the government signal is                             q
                                        i                                g;i
                                       gt = Gt+1 + 1= (1        ai
                                                                 t)   g "t ;

  10
     In a previous draft, we adopted an alternative setting in which the government possesses private signals
about the fundamental. This private information causes the government to hold di¤erent beliefs about
the fundamental and noise trading from investors and, more importantly, makes the government'           s trading
not fully observable to the investors. Through this latter channel, the noise in the government'         s signals
endogenizes the government'     s intervention noise Gt . Such a structure substantially complicates the analysis
by introducing a double learning problem for the investors to acquire information about the government'          s
belief, which is itself the outcome of a learning process. It is reassuring that this more elaborate setting gives
similar results as in our current setting with exogenous government intervention noise.
  11
     Generally speaking, the investors may also acquire private information about noise trading, rather than
asset fundamental and government noise. Introducing such a third type of private information would com-
plicate the analysis without any particular gain in economic insight. In our current setting, each investor
can indirectly infer the value of noise trading through the publicly observed asset price. See, for instance,
Ganguli and Yang (2009) for a setting in which investors can learn either about the asset fundamental or
noise trading.


                                                        18
where "g;i
       t s N (0; 1) is signal noise, independent of all other random variables in the setting,

and      g   represents the precision of the signal if chosen. These signals allow the investor
to better predict the next-period asset return by forming more precise beliefs about Vt+1
and Gt+1 . Motivated by limited investor attention and a realistic ...xed cost in information
acquisition, we assume that each investor chooses one and only one of these two signals.12
       At date t; each investor ...rst makes his information acquisition choice ai
                                                                                 t based on the

public information set FtM1 from the previous period. After receiving his private information
ai  i
 t st + (1      ai    i
                 t ) gt and the public information Dt , Pt , and Gt released during the period, the

investor chooses his asset position Xti to maximize his expected utility:

                       Uti = imax E max
                                      i
                                        E           exp      Wti+1 j Fti      FtM1 ;
                            at 2f0;1g    Xt


                  s full information set Fti is
where the investor'

                                 Fti = FtM _ ai    i i
                                              t ; at st + 1      ai  i
                                                                  t gt :



Noisy rational expectations equilibrium. Market clearing of the asset market requires
that the net demand from the investors and the government be equal to the supply of the
                             R1
noise traders at each date t: 0 Xti di + XtG + Nt = 0: By assuming elastic supply of riskless
debt, the credit market clears automatically.
    We also assume that the investors and the government have an" initial prior
                                                                             # with Gaussian
                                                                     V
                                                                     0    0
distributions at t = 0: (V0 ; N0 ) s N V ; N ; 0 ; where 0 =               N
                                                                               : Note that the
                                                                    0      0
variables in both FtM and Fti all have Gaussian distributions. As a result, conditional beliefs
of the investors and the government about Vt and Nt under any of the information sets are
always Gaussian. Furthermore, the variances of these conditional beliefs follow deterministic
dynamics over time and will converge to their respective steady-state levels at exponential
rates. Throughout our analysis, we will focus on steady-state equilibria, in which the belief
variances of the government and investors have reached their respective steady-state levels
and their policies are time homogeneous.
  12
    Instead of a discrete information acquisition choice a 2 f0; 1g, one could generalize our framework to
allow for a continuous choice a 2 [0; 1] ; which corresponds to a signal that is partially informative about
both the fundamental and the government noise. We conjecture that, in such a setting, instead of having a
government-centric outcome, investors would nevertheless tilt their information acquisition too much toward
acquiring government information, when the government'    s objective is to minimize price volatility.




                                                    19
       At time t, a Noisy rational expectations equilibrium is a list of policy functions: ai (                            t 1) ;

and X i (          i    i i
              t ; at ; at st   + (1      ai    i
                                          t ) gt ; Pt ) ; and a price function P (   t ; Vt+1 ; Nt ; Gt+1 ),   which jointly
satisfy the following:

         Investor optimization: each investor i takes as given the government'
                                                                             s intervention
                                                                 i    i
         strategy #N
                   ^ to make his information acquisition choice at = a (                             t 1)   based on his ex
         ante information set FtM1 and then makes his investment choice X i (                               i    i i
                                                                                                       t ; at ; at st   + (1   ai    i
                                                                                                                                t ) gt ; Pt )

         based on other investors'information acquisition choices at i                           i
                                                                                                     and his full informa-
         tion set Fti :

         Market clearing:
                      Z 1
                                    Xi           i    i i
                                            t ; at ; at st   + 1   ai  i            G
                                                                    t gt ; Pt di + X (     t)   + Nt = 0:
                                0

         Consistency: investor i and the government form their expectations of Vt+1 ; Gt+1 ; and
         Nt based on their information sets Fti and FtM ; respectively, according to Bayes'Rule.

4.2        The Equilibrium
We now analyze the equilibrium by describing its key elements to convey the key economic
mechanism of the model. The complete steps of deriving the equilibrium and formulas are
in Appendix A.

4.2.1      Price Conjecture and Equilibrium Beliefs

With government intervention introducing noise into the equilibrium asset price as an addi-
tional factor, each investor faces a nontrivial choice at date t in whether to acquire private
information about either the next-period fundamental Vt+1 or government noise Gt+1 . When
all investors choose to acquire information about the government noise, the asset price does
not aggregate any private information about Vt+1 but rather brings the next-period govern-
ment noise Gt+1 into the current-period asset price. To analyze the equilibrium asset price,
we begin by conjecturing a linear price function:13
                1        ^tM               ^M                            ^ M + pG Gt+1               ^ M + pN Nt : (4)
  Pt =                   V +1 + pg Gt + pG
                                         ^ Gt+1 + pV Vt+1                V t+1                       G t+1
           Rf        V
  13
    This conjectured functional form is not unique because the market'    s beliefs about Vt+1 ; Nt ; and Gt+1
                                                                 ^ M can be replaced by a linear combination
are correlated objects after observing the asset price. That is, Nt
        ^ M ; and G
of Pt , V          ^ M and as such does not have to appear in the price function, even though N ^tM determines
          t+1        t+1
the government'   s intervention.

                                                                   20
The ...rst term        1       ^ M is the expected asset fundamental conditional on the market infor-
                               V
                  Rf       V
                                 t+1

mation FtM at date t, the term pg Gt reects the noise introduced by the government into the
asset demand in the current period, while the term p ^ G^Mt+1 reects the market expectation
                                                               G

of the government noise in the next period. These three pieces serve as anchors in the asset
price based on the public information. The fourth term pV Vt+1 V    ^ M captures the fun-
                                                                                t+1

damental information aggregated through the investors'trading. Following the insight from
Hellwig (1980), if each investor acquires a private signal about the asset fundamental Vt+1 ,
their trading aggregates their private signals and allows the equilibrium price to partially
reveal Vt+1 . If all investors choose to acquire information about the next-period govern-
ment noise Gt+1 , instead of Vt+1 , the coe¢ cient of this term pV would be zero. Instead,
their trading aggregates their private information about Gt+1 , as captured by the ...fth term
pG Gt+1 G    ^ M .14 The ...nal term pN Nt represents the price impact of noise trading.
                 t+1

       Given the asset price in (4), in order to predict the asset return, an individual investor
needs to infer not only the asset fundamental, Vt+1 ; but also the government noise, Gt+1 :
As each individual investor has a piece of a private signal, ai  i
                                                              t st + (1               ai    i
                                                                                       t ) gt , his learning

process simply requires adding this additional signal to the market beliefs. We summarize
the ...ltering process through the updating equation as
"          #      "       #         ("         #                             )
   ^ti
   V   +1
                    ^
                    V  M
                      t+1               V t+1
              =             + CoV                ; ai  i
                                                    t st + 1    ai   i
                                                                  t gt   FtM
   ^ i
  Gt+1              ^ M
                    Gt+1               Gt+1
                                                           h                                             i
                                                         1
                    V ar ai  s
                            t t
                               i
                                 + 1  a i
                                        t  g i
                                             t F  M
                                                  t         ai  i
                                                             t st
                                                                    ^tM
                                                                    V  +1 + 1          ai
                                                                                        t
                                                                                             i
                                                                                            gt    ^M
                                                                                                  Gt+1       :

The variance and covariance in this expression depend on various endogenous objects such
as the informativeness of the equilibrium asset price and the precision of the market beliefs,
and fully derived in Appendix A. This expression makes clear that the investor'
                                                                              s private
signal helps him infer the asset fundamental or the government'
                                                              s trading noise in the next
period, both of which impact the asset return.

4.2.2      Information Choice

To analyze an individual investor'
                                 s information choice, it is convenient to decompose the
expected asset return based on his information set relative to the market information set.
  14
   There is no need to incorporate a term related to investors' (higher order) cross-beliefs about Vt+1 or
             R1                   R1
Gt+1 because 0 ai  i
                t st di = Vt+1 and 0 1   ai   i
                                          t gt di = Gt+1 by the Weak Law of Large Numbers.




                                                      21
We can update E [Rt+1 j Fti ] from E Rt+1 j FtM by the Bayes'Rule according to

      E Rt+1 j Fti = E Rt+1 j FtM _ ai  i
                                     t st + 1                     ai  i
                                                                   t gt
                             CoV Rt+1 ; ai    i
                                                         ai    i    M          h                                                             i
                                           t st + (1      t ) gt j Ft                          ^M + 1                                 ^M
  = E Rt+1 j FtM +                                                                 ai  i
                                                                                    t st       V t+1           ai
                                                                                                                t
                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                            gt        Gt+1       :
                               V ar [ai  i
                                      t st + (1     ai    i
                                                     t ) gt j Ft ]
                                                                  M


            s private information through either si
The investor'                                           i
                                                  t or gt helps him better predict the ex-

cess asset return relative to the market information. Given the investor'
                                                                        s myopic CARA
preferences, his demand for the asset is
                                                      1 E [Rt+1 j Fti ]
                                               Xi =                       :                                                 (5)
                                                       V ar [Rt+1 j Fti ]

In choosing whether to acquire either si     i
                                       t or gt at date t; the investor maximizes his expected

utility based on the ex ante market information:
                              ( "                                                          2
                                                                                               !         #          )
                                                                     1 E [Rt+1 j Fti ]
   E Uti j FtM1 = imax              E     E exp            Rf W                                    FtM       FtM1       ;
                       at 2f0;1g                                     2 V ar [Rt+1 j Fti ]

which has already incorporated the investor'
                                           s optimal asset position in (5).
   The investor'
               s expected CARA utility in our Gaussian framework is fully determined by
the second moment of the return distribution conditional on his information set Fti . This
nice feature allows us to simplify his information choice to

                      ai
                       t = arg i
                               max              V ar Rt+1 jFtM ; ai  i
                                                                  t st + 1         ai  i i
                                                                                    t gt ; at :
                                   at 2f0;1g

This objective involves only minimizing the conditional price change variance, which is sta-
tionary in the steady-state equilibria that we consider. Thus, the information acquisition
choice faced by each individual investor is time invariant. By noting that
                                                                                                                                  2
                                                                          CoV Rt+1 ; ai     i
                                                                                         t st + (1     ai     i    M
                                                                                                         t ) gt j Ft
V ar Rt+1 j   FtM ; ai  i
                     t st   + 1      ai
                                      t
                                           i
                                          gt    = V ar Rt+1 j     FtM                                                                 ;
                                                                             V ar [ai  i
                                                                                    t st + (1      ai     i      M
                                                                                                    t ) gt j F t ]

we arrive at the following proposition, which corresponds to Proposition A7 in Appendix A.

Proposition 4 At date t, investor i chooses to acquire information about the next-period
                                i j FM 2
                    CoV [Rt+1 ;gt                           M 2
                                     t ]   CoV [Rt+1 ;si
                                                       t j Ft ]
fundamental Vt+1 if    V ar[gt
                                         <                      and about the next-period govern-
                                   t ]              t j Ft ]
                                              V ar[si
                             i j FM                       M

ment noise Gt+1 otherwise.

   The investor chooses his signal to maximize his informational advantage over the pub-
lic information set when trading. Proposition 4 states that this objective is equivalent to

                                                           22
choosing the signal that leads to a greater reduction in the conditional variance of the excess
asset return. The investor may choose to acquire the signal on the government noise over
the signal on the asset fundamental, because the government noise a¤ects the asset return
when the investor sells his asset holding on the next date. As a result, the more the govern-
ment noise covaries with the unpredictable component of the asset return from the market
information set, the more valuable the signal about the government noise is to the investor.
       In models of information aggregation, such as in Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Hell-
wig (1980), information choices among investors are typically strategic substitutes. That
is, all else equal, if some investors at time t acquire private information about Vt+1 , then
the equilibrium asset price at time t will become more informative about it, and this re-
duces the incentives of other investors to acquire information about Vt+1 . In models in
which investors can acquire di¤erent sources of information, including those in Ganguli and
Yang (2009), Manzano and Vives (2011), and Farboodi and Veldkamp (2016), information
choices can exhibit intratemporal strategic complementarity. As some investors learn more
about one source of information, asset prices become more informative of the fundamentals,
strengthening the incentive of other investors to acquire information, albeit about a di¤erent
source.
       Interestingly, our model features intertemporal complementarity between investors' in-
formation choices and government policy across periods. Similar, for instance, to Froot,
Scharfstein, and Stein (1992), investors have incentive to align their information choices
across generations when the asset fundamental is persistent.15 If more investors at time t + 1
acquire information about Vt+2 , then there is greater incentive for investors at time t to
acquire information about Vt+1 ; as Vt+2 partially reects Vt+1 : Novel to our setting, however,
is that there is also intertemporal complementarity between the government'
                                                                          s announced
intervention policy at time t + 1 and investors'choice to learn about Gt+1 at date t; since the
government is a large trader with price impact. Importantly, the government internalizes
that it can inuence the investors'information choices when choosing its policy.16 In con-
trast to Hellwig and Veldkamp (2009), in which intratemporal complementarity in agents'
  15
     This intertemporal complementarity does not operate through Gt , since it is independent over time. If
we were to relax this simplifying assumption, as we did in a previous version of the paper, the model will
display even stronger complementarity in investors'information choices.
  16
     This is also in contrast to the literature on information aggregation with strategic traders, as in, for
instance, Kyle (1989). Since the solution concept in these models is an "equilibrium in demand curves,"
large traders do not internalize that they can impact the learning and information decisions of other large
traders. As such, these equilibria are ex post e¢ cient up to the impact of market power.


                                                     23
actions leads to complementarity in their information choices, here the government'
                                                                                  s future
intervention policy induces investors today to learn about future noise in government inter-
vention, since the government'
                             s policy materially impacts their return from trading the risky
asset. This complementarity can be su¢ ciently strong to dominate the substitution e¤ect in
information choice across investors, and to cause all of them to acquire private information
about the same variable.
   The choice of an individual investor to acquire information about the government noise
rather than the asset fundamental introduces an externality for the overall market. When
investors devote their limited attention to do so, less information about the asset fundamental
is imputed into the asset price, which causes the asset price to be a poorer signal about the
asset fundamental. In addition, as investors devote attention to learning about Gt+1 ; the
asset price will aggregate more of the investors'private information about Gt+1 ; causing the
next-period government noise to impact the current-period asset price. In this sense, the
investors'speculation of government noise may exacerbate its impact on asset prices.

4.2.3     Market Equilibrium

Given the investors'optimal information and asset choices and the government'
                                                                            s intervention
strategy, we have the following market-clearing condition:
                               r      h                  i Z i
                        ^ M                ^  M        M     at E Rt+1 j FtM ; sit
        0 = Nt #N     ^ Nt +     V ar #N ^ Nt j Ft 1 Gt +                             di
                                                               V ar [Rt+1 j Ft ; si
                                                                             M
                                                                                   t]
                Z                       M    i
                    1 ai  t E Rt+1 jFt ; gt
              +                                    di:
                           V ar [Rt+1 j FtM ; gt
                                               i
                                                 ]
The Weak Law of Large Numbers implies that aggregating the investors'asset positions will
                                                        R                      R i
partially reveal their private information about Vt+1 if ai
                                                          t di = 1 and Gt+1 if  at di = 0: By
matching the coe¢ cients of all the terms on both sides of this equation, we obtain a set of
equations to determine the coe¢ cients of the conjectured equilibrium price function in (4).
   There can exist several types of equilibrium.

        Fundamental-centric outcome. When all investors choose to acquire information
        about the asset fundamental, the asset price aggregates the investors'private informa-
        tion and partially reects the asset fundamental, but does not reect the next-period
        government noise. As a result, the asset price takes a particular form of
                                    1       ^ M + pg Gt + pV Vt+1   ^ M + p N Nt ;
                        Pt =                V t+1                   V t+1                  (6)
                               Rf       V

                                                    24
      which is di¤erent from the general asset price speci...cation in (4) in that the terms
         ^M
       ^ Gt+1 and pG Gt+1
      pG                     G^ M do not appear.
                                t+1


      Government-centric outcome. When all investors choose to acquire information
      about the next-period government noise, the asset price partially reects the next-
      period government noise but not the asset fundamental:
                             1       ^ M + pg Gt + p ^ G
                                                       ^M                         ^ M + p N Nt ;
                 Pt =                V t+1          G t+1 + pG Gt+1               G t+1
                        Rf       V


      where the term pV Vt+1           ^tM
                                       V +1 does not appear.


      Mixed outcome. It is also possible to have a mixed equilibrium with a fraction of
      the investors acquiring information about the asset fundamental and the others having
      information about the government noise. In such a mixed equilibrium, the general
      price function speci...ed in (4) prevails.

   Depending on the model parameters, all three types of equilibrium may appear. In the
special case that the fundamental Vt is i.i.d., or        V   = 0; the following proposition establishes
a necessary and su¢ cient condition for the government-centric equilibrium to occur for a
given government intervention intensity #N
                                         ^:


Proposition 5 Suppose        V   = 0; and ...x a government intervention intensity #N
                                                                                    ^ : A government-

centric equilibrium exists under a necessary and su¢ cient condition:
                                      s
                             f                          2    2     2
                     1     R                1    Rf          V + D
                   2 N c 1 #N    ^        2 N c 1 #N ^          c
                                          v                    0                              12
                                          u
                         2                u                          1 #N ^
                                          u                 1 @
                                                                      #
                   p     V
                                  (1 + x) t 2 G + (1 + x) g
                                                                        ^
                                                                        N                     A;           (7)
                                                                  2                     x
                       2
                       V +   s
                               1
                                                                  G   Rf 1              #N^



where x is given by
                                                                     2
                                               3          #N^   3
                                        x (1 + x) =         f   G        ;
                                                          R
                                        f
and c is a nonnegative function of #N
                                    ^; R ;            G       given in the Online Appendix. This equi-
                                                      2             2                               2
librium is more likely to exist the higher are        N   and       D;   and it always exists for   V   that is
su¢ ciently small.



                                                   25
                                 Table I: Baseline Model Parameters

                                                                                  2
                   Government:                           = 1:25;       V   = 1;   G   =2

                                                                   2              2
                   Asset Fundamental:               V   = 0:75;    V   = 0:01;    D   = :8

                                                                   2
                   Noise Trading:                                  N   = 0:2

                   Investors:                 = 1;       s   = 500;    g   = 500; Rf = 1:01




     In a government-centric equilibrium, the asset price Pt aggregates only private informa-
tion about the future noise in government trading, Gt+1 : In this situation, all investors are
willing to acquire information about Gt+1 if it reduces their conditional uncertainty about
the future price, Pt+1 ; which contains Gt+1 through the government'
                                                                   s trading, more than
would learning about the fundamental, Vt+1 : Proposition 5 reveals that this can occur for
two reasons. The ...rst is that the bene...t to learning about the fundamental, as measured
                        2
by its uncertainty,     V;   is small. The second is that the bene...t to learning about the future
noise in the government'
                       s trading is large. The larger the noise in prices from noise trading,
pN    N   (which is the left-hand side of (7)), the less aggregated private information about Gt+1
is revealed by the price, and the more motivated investors are to acquire private informa-
tion about Gt+1 : Since pN       N   is increasing in the uncertainty about noise trading and the
                                         2          2
unlearnable part of the dividend,        N   and    D;   respectively, a government-centric equilibrium
                                              2           2
is more likely to occur the larger are        N    and    D:


4.3       E¤ects of Government Intervention
This subsection analyzes how government intervention a¤ects the market dynamics. For
comparison, we also include a benchmark case without government intervention, which cor-
responds to the classic Hellwig (1980) equilibrium, in which each investor acquires a funda-
mental signal, and the equilibrium asset price follows the form in (6). Proposition A1 in the
Appendix characterizes the Hellwig equilibrium and, in particular, shows that information
frictions reduce the critical level of noise-trader risk so that the market is more likely to
break down. Proposition A2 further shows that even if an equilibrium exists, asset price
volatility is higher and price e¢ ciency is lower in the presence of information frictions.


                                                        26
Figure 2: Equilibrium dynamics across intervention intensity #N
                                                              ^ . Panel A depicts the conditional
price variance and Panel B the conditional variance of price deviation from the fundamental.


   We analyze the e¤ects of government intervention through a series of numerical examples,
based on a set of baseline parameter values listed in Table I. Figure 2 illustrates how the
asset market dynamics vary with a given intensity #N
                                                   ^ of the government intervention. As we

will discuss in the next section, the government can choose an optimal level of intervention
intensity to accomplish a certain policy objective. Panels A and B depict the conditional
                                      M
asset price variance V ar Pt (#N^ ) jFt 1  and the conditional asset price deviation from
                  h                         i
                              1           M
fundamental V ar Pt (#N ^) Rf
                                  Vt+1 jFt 1 , our price e¢ ciency measures, respectively.
                                   V

                                                                     ^ from zero, investors
   As the government gradually increases its intervention intensity #N
continue to acquire information about the fundamental. In this fundamental-centric equi-
librium, both conditional price variance and conditional price deviation from fundamental
drop from their respective values in the Hellwig benchmark, con...rming the common wisdom
that, by leaning against noise traders, government intervention ensures ...nancial stability
and improves price e¢ ciency.
   More interestingly, Figure 2 shows that by trading more aggressively against noise traders,
ensuring ...nancial stability and improving price e¢ ciency are not always consistent with each
other, which is a key insight of our model. Speci...cally, as #N
                                                               ^ exceeds 0:22, a government-

centric equilibrium emerges with all of the investors choosing to acquire information about
the government noise. When the market transitions from the fundamental-centric equi-

                                               27
librium to the government-centric equilibrium, the asset price variance slumps downward,
indicating that government intervention is able to further mitigate the price e¤ect of noise
traders. The conditional variance of the price deviation from its fundamental value jumps
up, however, suggesting that price e¢ ciency is reduced rather than improved. This occurs
because intensive government intervention makes government noise an important factor in
asset returns, which in turn diverts investor attention from acquiring fundamental informa-
tion to acquiring information about future government noise. Panel B shows that when this
happens, price e¢ ciency can become even worse than the benchmark case without govern-
ment intervention.
       Figure 2 also shows a more subtle implication of our model: the government-centric equi-
librium may allow the government to more e¤ectively reduce the price impact of noise traders
                                                       ^ is in an intermediate range be-
without trading more. When the intervention intensity #N
tween 0:22 and 0:40, both the fundamental-centric and the government-centric equilibria
exist,17 as a result of the aforementioned intertemporal complementarity in investors'infor-
mation choices.18 Comparing these two equilibria for a given level of intervention intensity
shows that asset price volatility is substantially lower in the government-centric equilibrium
without requiring more government trading. This happens because, in the fundamental-
centric equilibrium, each investor has his own private information about the asset funda-
mental, and the private information causes investors to hold beliefs di¤erent from each other
and from the government about not only the asset fundamental but also the current-period
noise trading. As a result, the government has to trade against not only noise traders but
also investors. Investors' trading disseminates their private fundamental information into
the asset price and improves its information e¢ ciency, but partially o¤sets the government'
                                                                                           s
e¤ort to counter noise traders. In contrast, in the government-centric equilibrium, investors'
private information is about the next-period government noise, and, like the government,
investors all use the same public information to infer the current-period noise trading. Con-
sequently, investors tend to trade against noise traders along the same direction as the gov-
ernment, thereby reinforcing the e¤ectiveness of the government'
                                                               s intervention in reducing
  17
     A mixing equilibrium is also possible when #N  ^ is in this range. For simplicity, we omit discussions of
the mixed equilibrium. In the presence of the multiple equilibria, we assume that the government, as a large
player in the game, has the capacity to select the equilibrium most desirable to its objective.
  18
     The presence of this strong intertemporal complementarity also implies that even if each investor is free
to choose a mixed signal that is partially informative about the asset fundamental and the government noise
(as discussed in Footnote 12), the investor may nevertheless choose to focus on a pure signal about either
the asset fundamental or the government noise.


                                                     28
volatility. This mechanism further highlights the tension between reducing price volatility
and improving price e¢ ciency.


5     Intervention Objective
In this section, we discuss the objective of government intervention and analyze the resulting
optimal intervention intensity. We ...rst discuss two intervention objectives, one to reduce
price volatility and the other to improve price e¢ ciency, and then expand the model setting
to provide a full welfare analysis of government intervention. In our analysis, we assume that
the government, as a large player in the market, has the capacity to choose an equilibrium
aligned closest to its objective in the presence of multiple equilibria among investors.

5.1    Reducing Volatility versus Improving E¢ ciency
This subsection discusses two widely recognized intervention objectives by policy makers.
                                                                               h              i
                                                                                           M
One is to minimize asset price volatility, which is equivalent to reducing V ar Pt #N
                                                                                    ^ ;t jFt 1 ,

the conditional asset price variance, and the other is to improve asset price e¢ ciency, which
                              h                                i
                                                1           M
is equivalent to reducing V ar Pt #N  ^ ;t  R f   V t +1 jF t 1 ; the conditional variance of the
                                                    V

deviation of the asset price from its fundamental value. Reducing price volatility is consis-
tent with attenuating the risk premia required by market participants and the destabilizing
e¤ects of asset price volatility on leveraged investors and ...rms, thereby ensuring ...nancial
stability as suggested by Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) and Geanakoplos (2010). Im-
proving asset price e¢ ciency is consistent with making asset prices more informative, and
consequently more e¢ cient in guiding resource allocation in the economy, as reviewed by
Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein (2012). These two objectives are often viewed as congruent
with each other, as an intervention strategy of leaning against noise trading reduces the
impact of noise trading on asset prices, thus reducing price volatility and improving price ef-
...ciency. With price volatility being much easier to measure in practice than price e¢ ciency,
policy makers tend to use reducing price volatility as an operational intervention objective;
see, e.g., Stein and Sundarem (2018).
    For simplicity of exposition, we do not impose any budget constraint on the government'
                                                                                          s
intervention. We will consider the government'
                                             s trading pro...t in our welfare analysis in
the next subsection. Interestingly, despite the absence of any budget constraint, there is
an interior optimum to the government'
                                     s intervention strategy because it internalizes the

                                               29
Figure 3: Equilibrium dynamics across noise-trader risk. Panel A depicts the conditional price
variance V ar hPt #N         M
                      ^ j Ft 1 ; Panel B the   i conditional variance of price deviation from the fun-
                                1           M
damental V ar Pt #N    ^     Rf
                                    vt+1 j Ft 1 ; and Panel C the conditional variance of government
                                  v
trading. In these panels, the dotted line represents the Hellwig equilibrium without government
intervention, the solid line the equilibrium with government intervention to improve price e¢ ciency,
and the dashed line the equilibrium with government intervention to reduce price volatility.


amount of noise that its intervention introduces into the market. As illustrated in Figure 2,
                                     ^ succeeds more in introducing additional government
an excessive intervention intensity #N
noise into the asset price than it does in removing noise trading.
   Figure 3 highlights an important observation: the objectives of reducing volatility and
improving e¢ ciency can lead to sharply di¤erent equilibrium dynamics. Speci...cally, Figure
3 depicts conditional price variance in Panel A, conditional variance of the deviation of
the price from its fundamental value in Panel B, and conditional variance of government
                                                                             2
trading in Panel C across di¤erent values of noise-trading variance          N   for three equilibria:
1) the Hellwig equilibrium without government intervention (the dotted line), 2) government
intervention with an objective to improve price e¢ ciency (the solid line), and 3) government
intervention with an objective to reduce price volatility (the dashed line).
   With the objective to improve price e¢ ciency, the optimal intervention policy attempts
                                                                2
to remain in the fundamental-centric equilibrium when           N   is below a level of around 0:33
                                                                      2
and only jumps to the government-centric equilibrium for              N   above that. The optimal


                                                 30
intervention intensity is typically increasing in noise-trading risk. An exception is the region
       2
of     N   between 0:27 and 0:33. In this region, the government needs to reduce its intervention
coe¢ cient in order to stay in the fundamental-centric equilibrium. Consequently, while
the conditional price variance and conditional price deviation from fundamental are both
increasing with noise-trading risk, their levels are lower than the respective levels in the
Hellwig equilibrium without government intervention.
       If the objective is to reduce price volatility, the optimal intervention policy generally
entails a higher level of government trading intensity relative to that under the objective
of improving e¢ ciency. The more intensive intervention causes the market to shift from
a fundamental-centric equilibrium to a government-centric equilibrium at a substantially
                     2
lower level of       N   around 0:05, rather than 0:33. The intervention leads to lower price
volatility, but worse price e¢ ciency. Surprisingly, the price e¢ ciency is even worse than
                                                                                    2
that in the Hellwig equilibrium without government intervention when                N   is below a level of
                           2
around 0:22. When          N   is above 0:05, intensive government intervention distracts investors
from acquiring information about the asset fundamental and instead focuses their attention
on future government noise. This is the key mechanism that leads to the reduced price
e¢ ciency.19
       Figure 3 illustrates that, in contrast to the common practice of treating volatility reduc-
tion as equivalent to improving price e¢ ciency, these objectives can lead to sharply di¤erent
intervention intensities and market dynamics. These di¤erences are due to the impact of
government intervention on investors' information acquisition. To highlight this channel,
Proposition 6 formally shows that, ...xing investors'information acquisition in a government-
centric equilibrium, these two objectives are consistent with each other.

Proposition 6 In a government-centric equilibrium, improving price e¢ ciency is equivalent
to reducing price volatility.

5.2         Welfare Analysis
We now provide a welfare analysis of government intervention by expanding the model setting
to include four groups of agents: investors, noise traders, entrepreneurs, and taxpayers. For
simplicity, we assume that these four groups do not overlap. All agents are risk averse and
  19
    When 2   N is below 0:05, the market stays in a fundamental-centric equilibrium with investors acquiring
fundamental information. Price e¢ ciency is nevertheless worse than with the Hellwig equilibrium because
of the noise generated by the government'  s more intensive intervention.

                                                    31
have CARA utility with a common coe¢ cient of absolute risk aversion . In order not to
overload the paper, we relegate the full model setting to Appendix B and provide only a
brief introduction of the four groups here:

      The ...rst group, investors, follows directly from the main model in Section 4, and their
      expected utility in each period is derived in (A7).

      We microfound noise traders as discretionary liquidity traders, in a way similar to Han,
      Tang, and Yang (2016), in order to explicitly account for their welfare from trading.
      These liquidity traders participate in asset-market trading to receive a hedging bene...t
      by submitting a market order of random size in each period. We derive their expected
      utility in each period in (A8).

      We also introduce a group of entrepreneurs, who can invest in risky projects whose
      payo¤s are correlated with the traded asset. As a result, these entrepreneurs bene...t
      from extracting useful information from the asset price. We show in (A9) that their
                                                 M;V V
      expected utility is decreasing with                  -- an inverse measure of the asset price e¢ -
      ciency (or, speci...cally, the conditional variance of the asset fundamental based on each
                                                 2
      period'
            s public information)-- and          y;   the variance of project-speci...c noise. Also, as
                                 2
      project-speci...c noise,   y,   rises, the usefulness of the asset price signal, i.e. the impact
           M;V V
      of           on entrepreneurs'welfare, declines.

      We also include a fourth group, taxpayers, as the residual claimants to the government'
                                                                                            s
      trading pro...t. Their expected utility from the government'
                                                                 s trading pro...t in each
      period is given in (A10).

   We assume that the government maximizes the Nash social welfare function proposed by
Kaneko and Nakamura (1979), which is a monotonic transformation of the product of the
utilities of all agents in the economy. As speci...ed in (A11), this welfare function is essentially
given by the sum of the logarithmic expected utilities of the four aforementioned groups. As
each group has CARA utility and Gaussian-distributed payo¤s, its logarithmic expected
utility is the sum of its expected pro...t and a utility penalty for risk that is decreasing in the
conditional payo¤ variance. As the asset-market trading is a zero-sum game among investors,
liquidity traders, and taxpayers, we are able to establish the following proposition for the
objective function of government intervention, which is fully determined by the second-order
moments of the asset return:

                                                      32
Figure 4: Boundary between fundamental-centric and government-centric equilibria based on the
baseline parameter values listed in Table I.


                                                                 ^ to maximize
Proposition 7 The government chooses its intervention intensity #N
                                       2
                                       V                V ar Rt+1 j FtM2
            sup              2
             #N
              ^
                     (1      V)
                                       M;V V    +   2
                                                    y    V ar [Rt+1 j Fti ]
                               2        2
                                        N   +   2
                                                n   + #2
                                                       N^ 1+
                                                                 2
                                                                 G
                                                                          2
                                                                          N
                                                                                   M;N N
                                                                                            V ar Rt+1 j FtM ;
        V ar[Rt+1 j Ft
                     M
                       2]
where    V ar[Rt+1 j Ft
                            and V ar Rt+1 j FtM are given in Appendix B.
                      i
                        ]
   The social welfare derived in Proposition 7 highlights the two particular objectives for
government intervention: 1) to improve price e¢ ciency, which is given by the ...rst term
and represents a desire to guide the real investment of entrepreneurs; and 2) to reduce
price volatility, which is given by the third term and represents a desire to reduce the risk
premia faced by all groups. The second term, which is always greater than or equal to 1;
is the inverse of the informational advantage of informed investors and is consequently an
additional motive to reduce price volatility.
   The intervention objective derived in Proposition 7 can be roughly interpreted as a
weighted average of the desires to improve price e¢ ciency and reduce price volatility, with
                                                                     2
the weight on improving e¢ ciency decreasing in                      y;   the variance of entrepreneurs'project-
speci...c noise. Intuitively, as project-speci...c noise becomes more uncertain, the information
extracted from the asset price becomes less useful to entrepreneurs. Building on this inter-
vention objective, Figure 4 depicts the boundary between the government-centric equilibrium
                                                                              2         2
and the fundamental-centric equilibrium on a plane of                         y   and   N   with other parameter val-
                                   2
ues given in Table I. As           y   rises, the government assigns a lower weight to improving price

                                                            33
e¢ ciency and a higher weight to reducing price volatility. Consequently, the government
intervenes more aggressively and the market shifts from the fundamental-centric equilibrium
                                                                    2
to the government-centric equilibrium at a lower threshold of       N.   By combining our ear-
lier analysis of the fundamental-centric and government-centric equilibria, Figure 4 suggests
that, as the government assigns a greater weight to reducing price volatility, the resulting
lower price volatility may come at the expense of lower price e¢ ciency. In other words, the
government faces a trade-o¤ between ...nancial stability and price e¢ ciency in choosing its
intervention policy.


6     Further Discussions
Our model highlights that, when adopting policies that lean against noise traders in ...nancial
markets, a government faces a tension between ensuring ...nancial stability and improving
price e¢ ciency. We believe that this tension represents a key challenge faced by policy
makers in China'
               s ...nancial system. As summarized in Section 2, the Chinese government has
frequently engaged in leaning against ...nancial-market cycles either through direct trading or
through broad policy interventions. Our model shows that such interventions are helpful in
terms of preventing market breakdown, which may occur when noise-trader risk is su¢ ciently
large and market participants are short-termist. Depending on the weights the government
puts on reducing price volatility and improving price e¢ ciency, however, its intervention may
lead to drastically di¤erent market dynamics. In particular, our model shows that, with an
objective that weighs heavily on reducing asset price volatility, government intervention is
more likely to move the market into a government-centric equilibrium, in which investors all
focus on speculation of noise in government policy while ignoring asset fundamentals.


Consequences of government intervention in China. The Chinese government has
announced multiple goals for its ...nancial policies, but has not provided clear weights on these
goals. Nevertheless, it is widely believed by the public that maintaining ...nancial stability
is of paramount importance, followed by stimulating economic growth. There are extensive
discussions about the consequences of these extensive countercyclical interventions. Many
recognize that the interventions have been successful in reducing market uctuations and
ensuring ...nancial stability. More relevant to our analysis, however, is that some commen-
tators have also pointed to their potential adverse e¤ects on market e¢ ciency. Allen et al.


                                               34
(2020) and Huang, Miao, and Wang (2019) argue that, while the massive stock purchases by
the national team during the 2015 stock market crash helped alleviate downside risk, this
bene...t may have come at the cost of preventing market discovery of stock prices and exac-
erbating the deviation of prices from their fundamental values. Indeed, Dang, Li, and Wang
(2020) show that, in the cross-section of stocks, the trading of the national team is associated
with reduced informativeness of stock prices. More generally, Zhu (2016) argues that the
Chinese government'
                  s heavy interventions in its ...nancial system, strongly motivated by its
urge to ensure ...nancial and social stability, have created implicit guarantees to investors,
leading to adverse incentives of risk-seeking without concerns about risks and fundamentals.
For example, Zhu argues that the dearth of public-...rm delistings from the stock exchanges,
partly related to regulators'reluctance to upset shareholders and stakeholders of potentially
distressed ...rms, has emboldened stock investors to ignore ...rms'fundamentals and instead
speculate on rumors and fads. In addition, the lack of public defaults by ...rms, driven mainly
by the government'
                 s frequent intervention to bail out troubled borrowers, has emboldened
households to invest in opaque shadow-banking credit products, contributing in recent years
to China'
        s leverage boom.


Government commitment. In practice, governments may not have the ability to com-
mit to an intervention strategy, and a time-inconsistency problem arises that reinforces the
government-centric equilibrium. In this situation, the government may want to initially con-
vince investors that it will not intervene too aggressively, in the hope of inducing them to
acquire information about the asset fundamental. After investors have collected fundamental
information, however, the government-- even with a single objective of improving informa-
tion e¢ ciency-- has incentive to change its intentions ex post and to trade more aggressively
against noise traders than it initially promised. Rationally anticipating this opportunistic
behavior by the government, investors would always choose to collect information about
the government'
              s future trading noise instead. In this way, the time-inconsistency prob-
lem may lead to the government-centric equilibrium, even when the government prefers the
fundamental-centric outcome. In a related paper, Brunnermeier, Sockin, and Xiong (2017)
explore this time-inconsistency problem in the context of China'
                                                               s ...nancial reform.




                                              35
  References
Allen, Franklin, Stephen Morris, and Hyun Song Shin (2006), Beauty Contests and Iterated
    Expectations in Asset Markets, Review of Financial Studies 19, 719-752.
Allen, Franklin, Jun "QJ"Qian, Chenyu Shan, and Julie Lei Zhu (2020), The Development
    of the Chinese Stock Market, in Marlene Amstad, Guofeng Sun, and Wei Xiong (Eds):
    The Handbook of China' s Financial System, Princeton University Press, forthcoming.
Angeletos, George Marios, Christian Hellwig, and Alessandro Pavan (2006), Signaling in
   a Global Game: Coordination and Policy Traps, Journal of Political Economy 114,
   452-484.
Bhanot, Karan, and Palani-Rajan Kadapakkam (2006), Anatomy of a government inter-
   vention in index stocks: Price pressure or information e¤ects?, Journal of Business 79,
   963-986.
Bhattacharya, Utpal, and Matthew Spiegel (1991), Insiders, outsiders, and market break-
    downs, Review of Financial Studies 4, 255-282.
Bian, Jiangze, Zhiguo He, Kelly Shue, and Hao Zhou (2017), Leverage-Induced Fire Sales
    and Stock Market Crashes, Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Bond, Philip, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein (2012), The Real E¤ects of Financial
   Markets, Annual Review of Financial Economics 4, 339-360.
Bond, Phillip, and Itay Goldstein (2015), Government Intervention and Information Ag-
   gregation by Prices, Journal of Finance, 70, 2777-2811.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse Heje Pedersen (2009), Market Liquidity and Funding
    Liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201-2238.
Brunnermeier, Markus, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong (2017), China'
                                                                 s Gradualistic Eco-
    nomic Approach and Financial Markets, American Economic Review Papers and Pro-
    ceedings 107(5): 608-613.
Cai, Jinghan, Jibao He, Wenxi Jiang, and Wei Xiong (2019), The Whack-A-Mole Game:
     Tobin Taxes and Trading Frenzy, Working Paper, Princeton University.
Carpenter, Jennifer, and Robert Whitelaw (2017), The Development of China'
                                                                         s Stock Mar-
    ket and Stakes for the Global Economy, Annual Review of Financial Economics 9,
    233-257.
Compte, Olivier, and Philippe Jehiel (2010), The coalitional Nash bargaining solution,
   Econometrica 78, 1593-1623.
Cong, Lin William, Steven R. Grenadier, and Yunzhi Hu (2017), Intervention Policy in a
   Dynamic Environment: Coordination and Learning, Journal of Financial Economics,
   forthcoming.
Dang, Tri Vi, Wei Li, and Yongqin Wang (2020), Managing China'
                                                             s Stock Markets: The
   Economics of the National Team, Working Paper, Columbia University and Fudan
   University.
Deng, Yongheng, Xin Liu, and Shang-Jin Wei (2018), One Fundamental and Two Taxes:
   When Does a Tobin Tax Reduce Financial Price Volatility?, Journal of Financial
   Economics 130, 663-692.

                                           36
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann
    (1990), Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets, Journal of Political Economy, 98,
    703-738.
Farboodi, Maryam, and Laura Veldkamp (2016), Long Run Growth of Financial Technology,
    Working Paper, Princeton University and NYU Stern.
Froot, Kenneth A., David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy Stein (1992), Herd on the Street: In-
    formational Ine¢ ciencies in a Market with Short-Term Speculation, Journal of Finance
    47, 1461-1484.
Ganguli, Jayant Vivek, and Liyan Yang (2009), Complementarities, Multiplicity, and Sup-
   ply Information, Journal of the European Economic Association, 7, 90-115.
Geanakoplos, John (2010), The Leverage Cycle, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 24, 1-66.
Goldstein, Itay, and Chong Huang (2016), Bayesian Persuasion in Coordination Games,
    American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 106, 592-596.
Grossman, Sanford, and Joseph Stiglitz (1980), On the impossibility of informationally
    e¢ cient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393-408.
Han, Bing, Ya Tang, and Liyan Yang (2016), Public information and uninformed trading:
    Implications for market liquidity and price e¢ ciency, Journal of Economic Theory 163,
    604-643.
He, Hua, and Jiang Wang (1995), Di¤erential Information and Dynamic Behavior of Stock
    Trading Volume, The Review of Financial Studies 8, 919-972.
Hellwig, Martin (1980), On the aggregation of information in competitive markets, Journal
    of Economic Theory 22, 477-498.
Hellwig, Christian, and Laura Veldkamp (2009), Knowing what others know: Coordination
    motives in information acquisition, Review of Economic Studies 76, 223-251.
Hong Kong Exchange (2018), Macro-prudential management of cross-border capital ows
   and the opening up of China'
                              s bond market, Chief China Economist's O¢ ce.
Hu, Xing, Jun Pan, and Jiang Wang (2018), Chinese capital market: An empirical overview,
    Working Paper, MIT Sloan.
Huang, Yi, Jianjun Miao, and Pengfei Wang (2019), Saving China'
                                                              s stock market, IMF
   Economic Review 67, 349-394.
Kaneko, Mamoru, and Kenjiro Nakamura (1979), The Nash Social Welfare Function, Econo-
   metrica 47, 423-435.
Kyle, Albert S. (1989), Informed Speculation with Imperfect Competition, Review of Eco-
    nomics Studies 56, 317-355.
Liu, Chang, and Wei Xiong (2019), China'    s Real Estate Market, in Marlene Amstad,
    Guofeng Sun, and Wei Xiong (Eds): The Handbook of China'       s Financial System,
    Princeton University Press, forthcoming.
Manzano, Carolina, and Xavier Vives (2011), Public and Private Learning from Prices,
   Strategic Substitutability and Complementarity, and Equilibrium Multiplicity, Journal
   of Mathematical Economics, 47, 346-369.

                                           37
Mei, Jianping, José Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong (2009), Speculative Trading and Stock
    Prices: Evidence from Chinese A-B Shares Premia, Annals of Economics and Finance
    10, 225-255.
Moulin, Hervé (2004), Fair Division and Collective Welfare, MIT Press.
Packer, Frank, and Mark Spiegel (2016), China'
                                             s IPO activity and equity market volatility,
    FRBSF Economic Letter 18, 1-5.
Pastor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi (2012), Uncertainty about Government Policy and Stock
    Prices, Journal of Finance 67, 1219-1264.
Pastor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi (2013), Political Uncertainty and Risk Premia, Journal
    of Financial Economy 110, 520-545.
Qian, Yingyi (2017), How Reform Worked in China, MIT Press.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny (1997), The Limits of Arbitrage, Journal of Finance
     52, 35-55.
Shirai, Sayuri (2018), The e¤ectiveness of the Bank of Japan'
                                                            s large-scale stock-buying
    programme, VoxEu.
Song, Zheng, and Wei Xiong (2018), Risks in China'
                                                 s Financial System, Annual Review of
    Financial Economics 10, 261-286.
Spiegel, Matthew (1998), Stock Price Volatility in a Multiple Security Overlapping Gener-
    ations Model, Review of Financial Studies 11, 419-447.
Stein, Jeremy, and Adi Sundarem (2018), The Fed, the Bond Market, and Gradualism in
     Monetary Policy, Journal of Finance 73 (3), 1015-1060.
Watanabe, Masahiro (2008), Price Volatility and Investor Behavior in an Overlapping Gen-
   erations Model with Information Asymmetry, Journal of Finance 63, 229-272.
Xiong, Wei, and Jialin Yu (2011), The Chinese Warrants Bubble, American Economic
    Review 101, 2723-2753.
Xiong, Wei (2019), The Mandarin Model of Growth, Working Paper, Princeton University.
Xu, Chenggang (2011), The fundamental institutions of China'
                                                           s reforms and development,
    Journal of Economic Literature 49(4), 1076-1151.
Zhu, Ning (2016), China's Guaranteed Bubble, McGraw Hill.




                                          38
Appendix A                Deriving Equilibrium with Information Fric-
                          tions and Government Intervention
In this Appendix, we derive the equilibrium with information frictions and government in-
tervention in several steps. We assume that the economy is initialized from its stationary
equilibrium, in which all conditional variances from learning have reached their deterministic
steady state and the coe¢ cients in prices and policies are time homogeneous.
    We ...rst consider the case without government intervention. We begin, as in the main
text, by conjecturing a linear equilibrium price function:

                           Pt = p V ^M
                                  ^ Vt+1 + pV Vt+1
                                                        ^tM
                                                        V +1 + pN Nt :

                                                                     1
Importantly, we recognize that it must be the case that pV    ^ = Rf     ; since a unit shift in Vt
                                                                       V
                                                                       1
must raise the discounted present value of future cash      ows by Rf      .
                                                                         V
    We ...rst state several properties of the linear equilibrium without government interven-
tion. We defer the derivation of the noisy rational expectations equilibrium to the case with
government intervention, which is the more general case.

Proposition A1 In the presence of informational frictions, the coe¢ cient on the funda-
                             ^ ; the coe¢ cient on noise trading, pN ; is more positive. In
mental V; pV ; is less that pV
addition, market breakdown occurs at a lower value of N ; N ; such that N         N ; where
 N is given in (1).


    In the presence of informational frictions, investors systematically underreact to infor-
mation about the fundamental in prices (since pV < pV  ^ ) and overreact to noise. In addition,
market breakdown occurs at lower levels of noise-trading variance than with perfect infor-
mation. Since informational frictions introduce additional return volatility, investors require
a higher risk premium to accommodate noise traders for the same level of noise-trader risk,
 2
 N : As a result, the critical value at which investors demand too high a risk premium to
accommodate noise traders occurs at a smaller 2     N:
    In the special case in which the fundamental, V; is i.i.d. ( V = 0), we can express the
condition for breakdown implicitly as
                    s
                                   2                           1          M;V V   1
                                1                f )2        s                  s
        Rf < 2 N        2
                        D +             2
                                        V +  ( R                                      ;
                               Rf                       M;V V +
                                                                  s
                                                                    1   M;V V +
                                                                                  s
                                                                                    1


which reveals that uncertainty about V; parameterized through the posterior conditional
variance of beliefs, M;V V ; e¤ectively raises the volatility of the fundamental from 2       V to
                        1               1
  2        f 2                 M;V V
                                                                                             M;V V
  V +    R                               1 : There is both a direct e¤ect that, for a ...xed       ;
                      s               s
                  M;V V +   1 M;V V +
                          s            s
the critical N that leads to market breakdown falls, and an indirect e¤ect that an increase
in N also increases M;V V : We can also establish that price volatility is higher, and price
informativeness lower, with informational frictions when N is su¢ ciently large.



                                                39
Proposition A2 In the special case that V = 0; price volatility is higher, and price in-
formativeness is lower, in the presence of informational frictions when N is su¢ ciently
large.

   Having characterized the noisy rational expectations equilibrium without the govern-
ment, we now consider the case with government intervention. We again conjecture a linear
equilibrium price function:

       Pt = p V ^M
              ^ Vt+1 + pG
                          ^M
                        ^ Gt+1 + pV Vt+1
                                              ^ M + pG Gt+1
                                              V                    ^ M + pg Gt + pN Nt :
                                                                   G
                                                t+1                  t+1

                                                                    1
Importantly, we recognize that it must be the case that pV   ^ = Rf     ; since a unit shift in Vt
                                                                      V
                                                                      1
must raise the discounted present value of future cash     ows by Rf      .
                                                                        V
    We now construct the equilibrium in several steps. We ...rst solve for the learning processes
of the government and investors, which begin with an intermediate step of deriving the beliefs
from the perspective of the market that has access only to public information. Given the
market' s beliefs, which we can de...ne recursively with the Kalman ...lter, we can construct
the conditional posterior beliefs of the government and the posterior beliefs of each investor
by applying Bayes' Rule to the market'     s beliefs given the private signal of each investor.
We then solve for the optimal trading and information acquisition policies of the investors.
Imposing market clearing, we can then express the government'       s objective in terms of the
equilibrium objects we derive from learning.

Appendix A.1             Equilibrium Beliefs
In this subsection, we characterize the learning processes of the government and the investors.
As we will see, it will be convenient to ...rst derive the market's posterior beliefs about Vt+1 ;
Nt ; and Gt+1 ; respectively, which are Gaussian with conditional mean V      ^tM    ^ M ^M
                                                                                +1 ; Nt ; Gt+1 =
                                                                    22        3         3
                                                                         Vt+1
E (Vt+1 ; Nt ; Gt+1 ) j FtM and conditional variance M    t = V ar
                                                                    44 Nt 5 j FtM 5 : Impor-
                                                                        Gt+1
tantly, the market faces strategic uncertainty over the government'    s action as a result of the
noise in the government'   s trading. As such, one must form expectations about this noise both
for extracting information from prices and for understanding price dynamics and portfolio
choice.
    To solve for the market beliefs, we ...rst construct the innovation process M t for the asset
price from the perspective of the market:
                     M
                          = Pt     (pV
                                     ^
                                               ^M
                                          pV ) V       (pG
                                                         ^
                                                                  ^M
                                                             pG ) G      pg Gt
                     t                           t+1               t+1
                          = pV Vt+1 + pG Gt+1 + pN Nt :

Given that the investors and the government do not observe Gt+1 (the next-period govern-
ment noise), they must account for it in their learning.
   Importantly, the asset price Pt and the innovation process Mt contain the same infor-
                     M               M
mation, such that Ft =          Ds ; s ; Gt s t : Since the market'
                                                                  s posterior about Vt+1

                                                40
will be Gaussian, we need only specify the laws of motion for the conditional expectation
  ^M ;N ^M; G
            ^M     and the conditional variance M
  V t+1  t    t+1                                 t : As is standard with a Gaussian infor-
mation structure, these estimates are governed by the Kalman ...lter. As a result of learning
from prices, the beliefs of the market about Vt+1 ; Nt ; and Gt+1 will be correlated ex post
after observing the asset price. We summarize this result in the following proposition.
                                                                                                             2
Proposition A3 Given the normal prior (V0 ; N0 ) s N                   V; N ;       0   and G0 s N (0;       G) ;
the posterior market beliefs are Gaussian (Vt+1 ; Nt ; Gt+1 ) j FtM s N                 ^tM
                                                                                        V      ^ M ^M
                                                                                          +1 ; Nt ; Gt+1 ;
                                                                                                               M
                                                                                                               t+1   ;
                              ^M ;N
where the ...ltered estimates V     ^M; G
                                        ^ M follow the stochastic di¤erence equations
                                t+1  t    t+1

                       2 ^M       3      2     ^M   3
                         Vt+1                V Vt
                                                             2            3
                                                                   ^tM
                                                                  Dt
                                                                   V
                       6 N^M      7 6    0          7
                       6 t        7=6               7 + KM 4 M pV V    ^M 5;
                       4 G
                         ^M       5 4 G
                                      ^ M           5    t   t       V t
                           t+1          tjt     1
                                                               Gt Gtjt 1
                          Gt          Gt       1


and the conditional variance M   t follows a deterministic induction equation. The market's
posterior expectations of Vt+1 ; Nt ; and Gt+1 are related through
                                                     ^ M + pG G
                      pV Vt+1 + pG Gt+1 + pN Nt = pV V        ^ M + pN N
                                                                       ^M:
                                                       t+1      t+1      t


    Importantly, when the market tries to extract information from the price, market par-
ticipants realize that the price innovations M t contain the government trading noise Gt+1 :
As such, they must take into account the information content in the government noise when
learning from the price and must form expectations about Gt+1 : Through this channel, the
path dependence of the government noise feeds into the market'  s beliefs, and the market has
incentives to forecast the future noise in the government's trading.
    Since investors learn through Bayesian updating, we can update their beliefs sequentially
by beginning with the market beliefs, based on the coarser information set FtM ; and then
updating the market beliefs with the private signals of investor i (si       i
                                                                        t ; gt ) : Given that the
market posterior beliefs and investor private signals are Gaussian, this second updating
process again takes the form of a linear updating rule. We summarize these steps in the
following proposition.

Proposition A4 Given the market beliefs, the conditional beliefs of investor i are also
Gaussian (Vt+1 ; Nt ; Gt+1 ) j Fti s N ^ti
                                       V      ^ i ^i        s
                                         +1 ; Nt ; Gt+1jt ; t (i) ; where

                              2 ^i 3 2         ^M 3
                                Vt+1           V t+1                   ^M
                              4 N^i 5 = 4       ^M 5 +       0   si
                                                                  t    V t+1
                                    t          N  t          t    i    ^M       ;
                                ^ i            ^ M               gt    G t+1
                                G  t+1         Gt+1
      s                       M
and   t   (i) is related to   t   through a linear updating rule.



                                                        41
    Since the government does not observe any private information, its conditional posterior
beliefs align with those of the market. In what follows, we focus on the covariance-stationary
limit of the Kalman ...lter, after initial conditions have diminished and the conditional vari-
ances of beliefs have converged to their deterministic, steady state. The following corollary
establishes that such a steady state exists.

Proposition A5 There exists a covariance-stationary equilibrium, in which the conditional
variance of the market beliefs has a deterministic steady state. Given this steady state, the
beliefs of investors are also covariance-stationary.

   Having characterized learning by investors and the government in this economy, we now
turn to the optimal policies of investors.

Appendix A.2                  Investment and Information Acquisition Policies
We now examine the optimal policies of an individual investor i at time t who takes the
intervention policy of the government as given. Given the CARA-normal structure of each
investor's problem, the separation principle applies and we can separate the investor'
                                                                                     s learn-
ing process about (Vt+1 ; Nt ; Gt+1 ) from his optimal trading policy. To derive the optimal
investment policy, it is convenient to decompose the excess asset return as
                                                                          0 M                   0 M
                              Rt+1 = E Rt+1 j FtM +                        "t+1   =&    t   +    "t+1 ;

where                                          2                                      3
                                                               Dt+1 V   ^M
                                                                         t+1
                                  "M
                                   t+1 =
                                         4          M
                                                    t+1
                                                                    ^M
                                                               pV V V t+1
                                                                                 ^M 5 ;
                                                                              pg Gt+1
                                                               Gt+1 G   ^M
                                                                          t+1

and "M
     t+1 s N 03 1 ;
                      M
                         from Proposition A3. We can then decompose the excess return
based on the information set of the investor:
                                                                                   0 S;i
                                          Rt+1 = E Rt+1 j Fti +                     "t+1 ;

where we can update E [Rt+1 j Fti ] from E Rt+1 j FtM by the Bayes'Rule according to

        E Rt+1 j FtM ; ai  i
                        t st + 1               ai  i
                                                t gt
                                                                                        0
                                                          si     E si
                                                                    t j Ft
                                                                          M
     = E Rt+1 j    FtM          + CoV Rt+1 ;               t
                                                           i        i                       j FtM
                                                          gt     E gt j FtM
                                                      1
                 si           ^tM
                              V                             si     E si
                                                                      t j Ft
                                                                            M
         V ar     t
                              ^M
                                 +1
                                      j     FtM              t
                                                             i        i
                  i
                 gt           G t+1
                                                            gt     E gt j FtM
                                  M;G1 G1                             1
                      0                     + [(1         ai )   g]
                                                                                       M;V G1
                          !                        M;V G1                     M;V V                  1
                                                                                       + (ai s )                si
                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                     ^M
                                                                                                                     V t+1
     = &   t+                              1                                           1                             ^M      :
                  M;V V        + (a s )             M;G1 G1      + [(1       a)                     M;V G1 )2    i
                                                                                                                gt   G
                                                                                  g]            (                      t+1

This expression shows that the investor' s private information in either si      i
                                                                           t or gt can help
him better predict the excess asset return relative to the market-based information. Since

                                                                 42
the investor is myopic, his optimal trading strategy is to acquire a mean-variance e¢ cient
portfolio based on his beliefs. This is summarized in the following proposition.
                                                h                   i
                                                  ^ M  ^ M      ^ M
Proposition A6 Given the state vector t = Vt+1 ; Nt ; Gt ; Gt+1 and investor i'   s signals
si      i
 t and gt ; investor i's optimal investment policy Xti takes the following form:
                                        2                                                         1                                         32                   3
                                                 M;G1 G1
                                                                    + [(1            ai )    g]                  si     M;V G1
                                                                                                                        V^M
                                    0
                                        !4                                                                         t      t+1               54                   5
                                                                M;V G1                M;V V              1         i     ^M
                                                                                             + (ai s )          gt      G t+1
                    &       t   +                                                                                2
                1                                        ( M;V V +(a s ) 1 )( M;G1 G1 +[(1 a) g ] 1 ) ( M;V G1 )
      Xti   =                                           2
                                                            M;G1 G1                       1                            3                                             ;
                                                     0 4
                                                                     + [(1 ai ) g ]                    M;V G1
                                                                                                                       5 0
                                                      !                                                              1 !
                                                                         M;V G1                M;V V
                                0   M
                                                                                                       + (ai s )
                                                                                                                     2
                                                           ( M;V V +(a s ) 1 )( M;G1 G1 +[(1 a) g ] 1 ) ( M;V G1 )
the coe¢ cients &; ; and ! given in the Online Appendix.
    This proposition shows that both signals si         i
                                                 t and gt help the investor predict the asset
return over the public information, because they can be used to form better predictions of
Vt+1 and Gt+1 ; which determine the asset return in the subsequent period. The investor
needs to choose between acquiring either si       i
                                          t or gt based on the ex ante market information:
                               ( "                                               !           #     )
                                                                         i 2
                                                      1  E [ R  t+1 j  F t ]
E Uti j FtM1 = sup           E E exp        Rf W                             i
                                                                                        FtM FtM1
                    i
                   at 2f0;1g                          2 V ar  [ R t+1  j F   t ]
                             s                       (                                        !      )
                                0                                                 1         2
                                  ( M M (ai t ))                     f            2
                                                                                    ( &  t )     M
               = sup                 0 M            E exp          R W              0 M         Ft 1
                                ai
                                 t 2f0;1g
                                                     s                                                                                                                                !
                                                                    0
                                                                        (    M   M (ai
                                                                                     t ))                                                                   (&% t 1 )2
                                                                                                                                                            1
                        =           sup                     0       M             M M
                                                                                                exp                            Rf W              0
                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                          ;
                                ai
                                 t 2f0;1g
                                                                             + &K      KM 0 & 0                                                       M     + & KM M KM 0 & 0

by the properties of the moment-generating function of noncentral chi-squared random vari-
ables, where
                                                            M;G1 G1                                        1
                                                                              + [(1          ai )     g]
                                                                                                                               M;V G1
                                                 !                                   M;V G1                         M;V V                        1     !0
                                                                                                                               + (ai s )
            M ai                =                                                1                                                  1
                                             M;V V         + (ai s )                        M;G1 G1      + [(1          ai )                         M;V G1 )2
                                                                                                                               g]            (
                                          "                     1
                                                                                                                        #
                                                     M;V V      +(a          1                      0
                                                                        s)
                                = !                                                            1                          !0:
                                                                0                     M;G1 G1 +[(1 a)               1
                                                                                                               g]

                    1
Since pV
       ^ =      R
                            ;&=              0        R f pN pg                      R f pG
                                                                                          ^             R f pg      :
                        V


                                                                        &%    t 1     =       Rf pg Gt 1 ;
and therefore
                                         s                                                                                                                                    !
                                                       0                                                                                      1                    2
                                                           (     M   M (ai
                                                                         t ))                                                                        Rf pg Gt    1
E Uti j FtM1 = sup                               0     M              M M
                                                                                    exp                                 Rf W            0
                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                  ;
                            ai
                             t 2f0;1g
                                                                 + &K      KM 0 & 0                                                          M       + & KM      M KM 0 & 0



                                                                                            43
where 0 M + & KM M KM 0 & 0 = E V ar (Rt+1 ) j FtM1 + V ar E Rt+1 j FtM                       j FtM1 : By
the Law of Total Variance, this implies

        E V ar (Rt+1 ) j FtM1 + V ar E Rt+1 j FtM                 j FtM1 = V ar Rt+1 j FtM1 :
                      0    M
Consequently, since              M (ai
                                     t)     = V ar (Rt+1 j Fti ) and ai
                                                                      t is a binary choice,
                                                          0                                 1
                                s                                                f  ^ M
                                                                                         2
                                   V ar (Rt+1 j Fti )     B              1     R pg Gt      C
  E Uti j FtM1 =       max                       M
                                                      exp @     R f
                                                                    W                    M  A:
                       i
                      at 2f0;1g   V ar Rt+1 j Ft 1                       2 V ar Rt+1 j Ft 1

This is the expected utility of investor i based on the public information from the previ-
ous period. Importantly, we recognize that the investor'  s information acquisition choice is
independent of the expectation with respect to FtM1 : Intuitively, second moments are de-
terministic in a Gaussian framework, so the investor can perfectly anticipate the level of
uncertainty he will face without knowing the speci...c realization of the common knowledge
information vector t tomorrow. We can further reduce this objective to
                                                          0
                          ai = arg imax        log            M
                                                                   M ai        ;                    (A1)
                                    a 2f0;1g

                                                0     M
or, since log is a monotonic function and                      M (ai )   = V ar (Rt+1 j Fti ) ;

                  ai = arg sup          V ar Rt+1 j FtM ; ai  i
                                                           t st + 1        ai  i i
                                                                            t gt ; at :
                            ai 2f0;1g


Since the optimization objective involves only variances, which are covariance-stationary, the
signal choice faced by the investors is time invariant. Intuitively, given the Gaussian price
distribution and exponential utility for the investors, the bene...t of more precise private
information lies with the reduction in uncertainty over the excess asset return.
    By substituting M (ai ) into the optimization objective, we arrive at the following result.

Proposition A7 Investor i chooses to acquire information about the asset fundamental
Vt+1 (i.e., ai = 1) with probability :
                                      8
                                      < 1;         if Q < 0
                                    =    (0; 1) ; if Q = 0 ;
                                      :
                                        0;         if Q > 0;

where
                                                      2                               2
                     CoV Rt+1 ; Gt+1 j FtM                    CoV Rt+1 ; Vt+1 j FtM
                  Q=     M;G1 G1 +     1                           M;V V +     1
                                     g                                       s

is given explicitly in the Appendix, and 2 (0; 1) is the mixing probability when the investor
is indi¤erent between acquiring information about the asset fundamental or the government
trading noise.


                                                     44
    This proposition states that the investor chooses his signal to maximize his informational
advantage over the market beliefs, based on the extent to which the signal reduces the
conditional variance of the excess asset return. Importantly, this need not imply a preference
for learning about Vt+1 directly, since the government'   s future noise Gt+1 also contributes
to the overall variance of the excess asset return. The more the government'   s noise covaries
with the unpredictable component of the asset return from the market'       s perspective, the
                                                    20
more valuable this information is to the investors. This is the partial equilibrium decision
of each investor taking prices as given.

Appendix A.3                       Market Clearing
Given the optimal policy for each investor from Proposition A7 and the government'
                                                                                 s trading
policy in (3), imposing market clearing in the asset market leads to

                                       0
                                           !               1                         ^tM
                  &       t   +    M;V V           1                   Vt+1          V +1
                                           +   s           0
 0 = Nt +                                                      1
                                                                                                                               (A2)
                          0        M                   M;V V               1   0
                                           !                       +   s             !0
                                                               0               0
                                               0
                                                   !                   0                   ^M
                          &    t   +   M;G1 G1 +   1                               Gt+1    Gt+1             p
                                                 g                     1                             ^M
         + (1         )                                "                                  # !      ^ Nt +
                                                                                                  #N            #0 KM   M KM 0 #G ;
                                                                                                                                 t
                              0        M
                                                           0                   0
                                               !           0                   1            !0
                                                                       M;G1 G1 +   1
                                                                                 g


                                           0
whereR # = 0 #N     ^ 0 0
                          R and    we have applied the Weak Law of Large Numbers (WLLN)
that si  t di = V t+1 and   gt
                              i
                                di = Gt+1 over the arbitrary subset of the unit interval : In
                                          h                      i
addition, we have recognized that V ar # ^ N  ^ M j FtM1 ; fai
                                                             t g   = #0 KM M KM 0 #: Following
                                                                               N                  i
the insights of He and Wang (1995), we can express the market-clearing condition with a
smaller, auxiliary state space given that expectations about Vt+1 and Nt are linked through
the stock price Pt : We now recognize that

                              ^ M = Nt + pV Vt+1
                              N                                                    ^ M + pG Gt+1
                                                                                   V                  ^M ;
                                                                                                      G                        (A3)
                                t                                                    t+1               t+1
                                         pN                                              pN

from Proposition A3. This allows us to rewrite t as the state vector ~ t = [V
                                                                            ^tM    ^M
                                                                              +1 ; Gt+1 ; Vt+1 ;
Nt ; Gt ; Gt+1 ]:
    Matching coe¢ cients with our conjectured price function pins down the coe¢ cients
andncon...rms the linear equilibrium. Importantly,
                                                 o the coe¢ cients are matched to the ba-
      ^  M        ^ M ^M            ^ M
sis Vt+1 ; Vt+1 Vt+1 ; Gt+1 ; Gt+1 Gt+1 ; Gt ; Nt in accordance with our conjecture on the
  20
    Since higher signal precision will reduce the conditional variance of the excess asset return but impact
the expected return symmetrically because the signal is unbiased, the channel through which information
acquisition a¤ects portfolio returns is through reduction in uncertainty. Given that investors can take long or
short positions without limit, the direction of the news surprise does not impact the information acquisition
decision.


                                                                                   45
functional form of the asset price. This yields three conditions:

                                   0 =                 A 1 + pV
                                                              ^                     V       Rf   ;
                                                                            f
                               #N
                                ^ = 1   ApN R ;
                                     1
                               pG
                                ^ =    pg ;
                                    Rf
where
                                                                                                         1
   A=                          1
                                                                    +                                "                        #        ! :
           0   M           M;V V           1   0                                                         0         0
                    !              +   s               !0                       0           M    !                 1              !0
                              0                0                                                         0    M;G1 G1 +   1
                                                                                                                        g


These conditions pin down the relationship between the government'    s trading policy and the
price coe¢ cients, and
                                                         p
                                          ARf pg + #0 KM M KM 0 # = 0;                   (A4)
                                                0
                                                  !         1
                                            M;V V +    1
                        pV                           s      0
                           +                             1
                                                                          = 0;           (A5)
                        pN        0    M            M;V V +   1 0   0
                                           !                s     !
                                                        0       0
                                                                    0
                                                                        !               0
                                                            M;G1 G1 +   1
                 pG                                                   g                 1
                    + (1       )                                "                                #        !     = 0;                    (A6)
                 pN                                                 0                   0
                                           0       M        !       0                   1            !0
                                                                                M;G1 G1 +   1
                                                                                          g


which pin down pg ; pV ; and pG and, consequently, the informativeness of the asset price given
the loading on the noise-trading pN : As one can see above, since the investors always take a
neutral position on V^ M (as it is common knowledge), the government also takes a neutral
                       t+1
position by market clearing. The market-clearing condition (A4) re      ects that the investors
take an o¤setting position to the noise Gt in the government'  s trading.
    Since the investors determine the extent to which their private information about Vt+1
and Gt+1 is aggregated into the asset price, the government is limited in how it can impact
price informativeness. This is re  ected in the last two market-clearing conditions, (A5) and
(A6). The second terms in these conditions are the intensities with which the investors trade
                                                                                    pV      pG
on their private information about Vt+1 and Gt+1 , respectively. The ...rst terms, p N
                                                                                       and p N
                                                                                               ;
                                                                                 ^ M
are the correlations of Vt+1 and Gt+1 with the perceived level of noise-trading Nt ; as can be
seen from equation (A3). Since the government trades based on N     ^tM ; it cannot completely
separate its impact on the true level of noise-trading Nt in prices from its impact on Vt+1
and Gt+1 :
    Given that the government internalizes its impact on prices when choosing its trading
strategy #N  ^ ; we can view its optimization problem as being over the choice of price coe¢ -

cients fpg ; pV ; pG ; pN g in the price functional Pt = p ~ t ; subject to the market-clearing
conditions.

                                                                46
Appendix A.4           Computation of the Equilibrium
To compute equilibrium numerically, we follow the Kalman ...lter algorithm for the market
beliefs outlined in Proposition A3 to ...nd the stationary equilibrium. We then solve for
the portfolio choice of each investor, impose the market-clearing conditions, and optimize
the government'  s objective in choosing #N^ : Finally, we check each investor's information
acquisition decision by computing the Q statistic to verify that the conjectured equilibrium
is an equilibrium. We perform this optimization to search for both fundamental-centric
( = 1) and government-centric ( = 0) equilibria, as well as mixing equilibria ( 2 (0; 1)),
with the same equilibrium played at each date as consistent with covariance-stationarity.


Appendix B               Welfare Analysis
In this Appendix, we further expand the model setting to analyze the welfare consequences
of government intervention. The government is concerned with the welfare of four di¤erent
types of agents in the economy: investors, noise traders, entrepreneurs, and taxpayers. For
simplicity, we assume that these four groups are exclusive. All agents are risk averse and have
CARA utility with common coe¢ cient of absolute risk aversion : To minimize notation, we
assume that asset markets are in a covariance-stationary equilibrium and, consequently, the
government follows a stationary policy.

Investors. The ...rst group, investors, follows directly from the main model in Section 4.
At date t; they each take a position t in ...nancial markets and, from our earlier analysis,
garner expected utility:
                                                                2
                                                                                 2
         Uti =   exp       Rf W      E Xti Rt+1 j Fti +             Xti              V ar Rt+1 j Fti        ;   (A7)
                                                               2
where Xti can be decomposed as
                                                        2                  1=2
                                                                                                       3
                                                                [ai
                                                                  t s]        s;i
                                     1          0 6            M;V V +(a ) 1 "t                        7
                 Xti = Xt +                 i
                                                 !4                      s
                                                                                     1=2               5;
                              V ar [Rt+1 j Ft ]              [(1 ai
                                                                  t)         ]
                                                                                                "g;i
                                                                         g
                                                            M;G1 G1 +[(1         a)    g]
                                                                                            1    t

and Xt is the aggregate position of informed investors and, by market clearing, equals Nt
XtG :

Noise traders. We next microfound noise traders as discretionary liquidity traders to
incorporate their welfare from trading in the asset market. Similarly to Han, Tang, and
Yang (2016), we assume that a continuum of liquidity traders needs to decide at date t 1
on whether to join trading in the asset market at date t; in order to receive a hedging bene...t
B > 0 in certainty equivalent utility. If liquidity trader j chooses to join the market, he
needs to submit a market order at date t; which is given by

                           nj
                            t = Nt +
                                           j
                                        n "t+1 ;    "j
                                                     t+1 s iid N (0; 1) ;


                                                   47
      R
where D nj t dj = Nt by the WLLN on any measurable subset D         [0; 1] : If a trader chooses
not to join the market, he earns a reservation utility, which we normalize to 1: At date
t 1; liquidity trader j solves his expected utility from joining the market:

             E Vti j FtM1 = max E                         exp                  B + ni
                                                                                    t Rt+1                j FtM1 ; 1 :

We can express the excess return of the asset as
                          1                               1                              ^ M + pG Gt+2                         ^M
Rt+1 = Dt+1 +                      Vt+2       Rf                  Vt+1 + pN Nt+1 + Rf pg G t+2                                 Gt+2
                    Rf         V                   Rf         V

           + pg       f
                  R pG Gt+1 R pg Gt +         f
                                                              pV           V        Rf            1       Vt+1       ^M
                                                                                                                   V Vt
                       2                                      30
                         1 pV R f    V
                       6        0                             7 M M
            R p N Nt + 6
             f
                       4
                                                              7 K "t+1 ;
                                                              5
                           R f pG pg
                                0

where "Mt+1 =   Dt V  ^ M M pV V V       ^ M Gt                            Gtjt     1    : Since only terms in the last line
                       t    t             t
are ex ante correlated with Nt ; it follows that

                   E Vti j FtM1 =                 exp (       B ) E exp                 ApN Nt nj
                                                                                                t           j FtM1 ;

where pN     0 and                            2                                     30
                                                  pV R f               V        1       2 3
                                       6                       0                    7 M 0
                              A = Rf + 6
                                       4
                                                                                    7 K 4 1 5:
                                                                                    5
                                                        pg     R f pG
                                                                                          0
                                                               0
By the property of the moment-generating function of the chi-square distribution,

                                                              1
            E Vti j FtM1 = max                      exp         log 1 + 2 ApN                         2
                                                                                                      N          B ; 1 :
                                                              2

Consequently, a liquidity trader at date t                    1 will participate at date t if
                                                    1                                    2
                                          B           log 1 + 2 ApN                      N    ;
                                                   2

provided that ApN > 2 1 2 : Thus, for B su¢ ciently large, all liquidity traders will choose
                            N
at t 1 to participate in the asset market at date t: Furthermore, since the asset price is
covariance-stationary, the full measure of liquidity traders will participate at all dates.
    For the government' s welfare accounting, the expected utility of each liquidity trader at
date t is

           Vti = E            exp         B + nj
                                               t Rt+1                  j FtM                                                   (A8)
                                                                                    2
                                                                                                  2
               =      exp           B         nj           M
                                               t E Rt+1 j Ft +                           nj
                                                                                          t           V ar Rt+1 j FtM      :
                                                                                    2

                                                                  48
Entrepreneurs. We now introduce a third group, entrepreneurs, who make investment
decisions based on information extracted from the asset price. At date t; a continuum of
ex ante identical, risk-averse entrepreneurs can invest in a risky project whose quality is
positively correlated with "V
                            t = Vt    V Vt 1 ; the innovation in the fundamental of the traded
asset. By investing in capital Kt at date t, the project provides a net pro...t at date t + 1 of
                                         Ytl+1 =       "V
                                                        t+1 +
                                                                          l
                                                                       y "t+1      Kt ;
where "l  t+1 s N (0; 1) is project-speci...c noise that is independent across entrepreneurs and
  2                                                      V
  y is the variance of the project-speci...c noise. As "t+1 is not observable to entrepreneurs at
t, they rely on the history of asset prices and dividends fDs ; Ps gs t contained in the public
information set FtM to infer the value of Vt+1 and "V    t+1 .
     An entrepreneur l chooses Kt at date t to maximize its expected utility Ql    t :

   Ql
    t = sup E          exp           Ytl+1      FtM
            Kt
                                                                                   2 2
        = sup        exp          E      "V
                                          t+1   +   "l
                                                     t+1   j   FtM   Kt +                 V ar "V      l      M
                                                                                                t+1 + "t+1 j Ft Kt2 :
            Kt                                                                     2

                                   ^M ;
Given its posterior Vt+1 j FtM s N V                           M;V V
                                                                         ; its posterior for "V
                                     t+1                                                      t+1 is


                       "V      M     ^M                             ^M                    2       M;V V
                        t+1 j Ft s N Vt+1                         V Vt ;       1          V                :

It follows that all entrepreneurs choose the same optimal level of investment:
                             E "V       l      M
                                 t+1 + "t+1 j Ft     1    ^tM
                                                          V +1
                                                                                                      ^M
                                                                                                    V Vt
                 Kt =               V      l     M
                                                   =        2                                      M;V V +     2
                                                                                                                   :
                             V ar "t+1 + "t+1 j Ft     (1   V)                                                 y

Then, the realized output Ytk
                            +1 is given by

                                         1      ^M
                                                V                 ^M
                                                                V Vt
                                                  t+1
                             Ytl+1   =             2           M;V V +     2
                                                                                   "V      l
                                                                                    t+1 + "t+1 ;
                                             (1    V)                      y

and the entrepreneur'
                    s expected utility is
                                    0                                                         2
                                                                                                  1
                                                                 ^tM
                                                                 V                ^M
                                                                                V Vt
                                                 B 1               +1                             C
                                 Ql
                                  t =        exp @                   2        M;V V               2A
                                                                                                       :                   (A9)
                                                   2 (1              V)                +          y



Taxpayers. Finally, we include the fourth group, taxpayers, who are the residual claimants
to the government and consequently receive its trading pro...t each period. At each date t;
a new generation of taxpayers receives the pro...t from the government' s trading at date t:
Their expected utility as a group is
           Ht = E            exp             XtG Rt+1 j FtM
                                                                           2
                                                                                          2
                 =         exp        XtG E Rt+1 j FtM +                           XtG        V ar Rt+1 j FtM          :   (A10)
                                                                          2

                                                                49
Welfare function. We assume that the government adopts a variant of the Nash social
welfare function, as in Kaneko and Nakamura (1979):
                Z 1               Z 1               Z 1
    G                       i               j
  Ut (#N ^) =        log Ut di        log Vt dj         log Ql
                                                             t dl log ( Ht ) : (A11)
                  0                       0                       0

This criterion is a monotonic transformation of the product of the utilities of all agents
in the economy. It is an extension of the objective in the Nash bargaining solution for
two players and the coalition Nash bargaining for N agents (Compte and Jehiel (2010))
to social choice theory. Similar to utilitarian welfare, this welfare criterion satis...es several
desirable properties: Pareto optimality, independence of irrelevant alternatives, anonymity,
and continuity (Kaneko and Nakamura (1979)), as well as independence of a common scale
and a preference for equity (Moulin (2004)).
    Substituting for Uti ; Vtj ; and Qkt ; we arrive at
                Z 1                             2 Z 1
  G                   i               i                    2
Ut (#N^) =          Xt E Rt+1 j Ft di                   Xti V ar Rt+1 j Fti di  E Nt Rt+1 j FtM
                  0                            2 0
                  2
                      Nt2 +      2
                                 n   V ar Rt+1 j FtM + E XtG Rt+1 j FtM
                 2
                                                                                  2
                  2                                        ^tM
                                                           V            ^M
                                                                      V Vt
                            2                       1        +1
                      XtG       V ar Rt+1 j FtM +            2        M;V V           2
                                                                                          + Rf W   B;
                 2                                  2 (1     V)               +       y

                R1                  R1 j 2
by noting that 0 nj  t dj = Nt and 0 nt     dj = Nt2 + 2
                                                       n by the WLLN.
   We assume that the government determines its intervention intensity #N      ^ two periods
ahead. That is, it chooses #N   ^ for date t at date t   2: This timing re ects that the gov-
ernment cannot quickly adjust its intervention strategy in response to market conditions.
The government has the public information set and chooses #N      ^ to maximize its objective,
by taking as given the information acquisition decision of informed investors. Since asset
markets are covariance-stationary, the optimal information acquisition choice of informed
investors at date t 1 who trade at date t is knownRto the government at date t 2:
                                                       1
   By imposing the Law of Iterated Expectations, 0 Xti di = Xt ; and market clearing, we
recognize that
              Z 1
           E       E Xti Rt+1 j Fti di E Nt Rt+1 j FtM j FtM2 + E XtG Rt+1 j FtM2
                0
                 Z 1
       = E           Xti di Nt + XtG Rt+1 j FtM2 = 0;
                  0

which simply indicates that trading is a zero-sum game between investors, noise traders,
and the government. As a result, the social welfare is not a¤ected by any group'
                                                                               s expected




                                                  50
trading gain, but rather by the second-moment terms:
                                                            2
        E   UtG     ^) j
                  (#N         FtM2          =                   #2
                                                                 N^ 1+
                                                                                      2
                                                                                      G
                                                                                               2
                                                                                               N
                                                                                                             M;N N
                                                                                                                          V ar Rt+1 j FtM
                                                          2
                                                         1 V ar Rt+1 j FtM2                                  2
                                                                                                                      2       2
                                                                                                                      N   +   n   V ar Rt+1 j FtM
                                                         2 V ar [Rt+1 j Fti ]                                2
                                                                  2     2
                                                         1        V + y
                                                       +        2    M;V V +                            2
                                                                                                            + Rf W                B:
                                                         2 (1   V)                                      y

From our earlier derivation of Xti , we have
                                           "                          #
  h                                  i                    i 2
                                              E [Rt+1 j Ft ]             V ar Rt+1 j FtM2
    2   i 2               i      M                                 M
E     Xt V ar Rt+1 j Ft j Ft 2 = E                              j Ft 2 =                                                                                                 1;
                                             V ar [Rt+1 j Fti ]           V ar [Rt+1 j Fti ]
and, in addition
                         2                                              2
                                                                                          3
                                  ^tM
                                  V                      ^M
                                                       V Vt                                                       2      2
                     6              +1                                                 7                          V   +  y
                    E4                    2        M;V V                    2
                                                                                j FtM2 5 =                       2    M;V V           2
                                                                                                                                                 1:
                             (1           V)                    +           y                      (1            V)           +       y

                                   r    h              i
Since   XtG   =      ^ Nt
                    #N ^M         + V ar #N ^
                                            N
                                          ^ t
                                              M
                                                j F M
                                                    t 1 Gt and Gt is observable at date t; we have

        h                         i                                               h       i
                2
    E       XtG      j   FtM2         =   #2^          1+           2            ^
                                                                            V ar Nt j Ft 1 = #2
                                                                                   M   M
                                                                                               ^ 1+
                                                                                                                                  2              2        M;N N
                                                                                                                                                                     :
                                           N                        G                         N                                   G              N

As a result, the government'
                           s intervention objective is
                                               2
                                               V                                 V ar Rt+1 j FtM2
              sup                     2
              #N
               ^
                         (1           V)
                                               M;V V       +            2
                                                                        y         V ar [Rt+1 j Fti ]
                                        2      2
                                               N       +    2
                                                            n       + #2
                                                                       N^ 1+
                                                                                           2
                                                                                           G
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                  M;N N
                                                                                                                              V ar Rt+1 j FtM ;
where
                                                            0                                                                 2
    V ar Rt+1 j FtM2                                                M
                                                                                + & KM        M
                                                                                                  KM 0 & 0 + R f p g                  2
                                                                                                                                      G
                                                                                                                                                      M;GG
                                      =                                         "                                                                         #        ! ;
     V ar [Rt+1 j Fti ]                                                                M;V V
                                                                                               1
                                                                                                             1                    0
                                                   0        M                                  +[ai     s]
                                                                            !                                                     1                           !0
                                                                                               0                      M;G1 G1 +[(1        ai )        1
                                                                                                                                                 g]
                                                0
     V ar Rt+1 j         FtM          =                M
                                                                :
There are three pieces in this objective. The ...rst term is decreasing with the conditional
variance of the market belief regarding the asset fundamental M;V V , which represents a
desire for the government to increase price e¢ ciency and guide the real investment of en-
trepreneurs. Also, note that this term is decreasing with 2 y ; the variance of project-speci...c
noise in entrepreneurs'projects. The second term is a variance ratio, which determines the
informational advantage of informed investors. The third term is decreasing with the asset
return variance, V ar Rt+1 j FtM , which harms investors, liquidity traders, and taxpayers,
who are all risk averse. This welfare criterion corresponds to the objective in the statement
of Proposition 7.

                                                                                      51
