                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    LATENT DIRICHLET ANALYSIS OF CATEGORICAL SURVEY EXPECTATIONS

                                        Evan M. Munro
                                          Serena Ng

                                      Working Paper 27182
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27182


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




Financial support from the National Science Foundation (SES 1558623) is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Evan M. Munro and Serena Ng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Latent Dirichlet Analysis of Categorical Survey Expectations
Evan M. Munro and Serena Ng
NBER Working Paper No. 27182
May 2020
JEL No. C25,C55,E71

                                         ABSTRACT

Beliefs are important determinants of an individual's choices and economic outcomes, so
understanding how they differ across individuals is of considerable interest. Researchers often
rely on surveys that report individual expectations as qualitative data. We propose using a
Bayesian hierarchical latent class model to summarize and interpret observed heterogeneity in
categorical expectations data. We show that the statistical model corresponds to an economic
structural model of information acquisition, which guides interpretation and estimation of the
model parameters. An algorithm based on stochastic optimization is proposed to estimate a
model for repeated surveys when beliefs follow a dynamic structure and conjugate priors are not
appropriate. Guidance on selecting the number of belief types is also provided. Two examples are
considered. The first shows that there is information in the Michigan survey responses beyond
the consumer sentiment index that is officially published. The second shows that belief types
constructed from survey responses can be used in a subsequent analysis to estimate
heterogeneous returns to education.


Evan M. Munro
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
munro@stanford.edu

Serena Ng
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
Serena.Ng@columbia.edu
1   Introduction

A good part of economic analysis is understanding why economic outcomes differ across individ-
uals. Heterogeneity in individual beliefs, or expectations, is presumed to be an important factor
contributing to the observed differences. But as beliefs are not easily observed directly, researchers
often turn to surveys that solicit such information and report the qualitative responses in cate-
gorical form. For example, the Michigan Consumer Survey asks if individuals expect home prices
to increase or decrease, and whether they believe business conditions are worse or better than the
previous year. The Gallup Poll solicits sentiments towards politics, values and the environment,
while the Bank of England Inflation Attitudes Survey tracks inflation expectations as categorical
responses. Individuals' views on stock valuations have been studied in Shiller, Kon-Ya, and Tsutsui
(1996). For this paper, we will use the terms expectations, beliefs, and sentiments interchangeably.
    A distinctive feature of economic expectations is that they are cross-sectionally correlated, pre-
sumably due to public information about the economy, but the correlation is not perfect, since
individuals are heterogeneous. The research question is to design a methodology that can interpret
this form of heterogeneous expectations. Methods designed for analyzing categorical (or qualita-
tive) data on beliefs are, however, quite limited. Often, simple methods are used to create a single
aggregated index by averaging the ordered survey responses. As discussed in Pesaran and Weale
(2006), the application of this method is limited to datasets with variables that are closely related
and easily ordered. More concerning is that this method provides an aggregate summary without
modeling any heterogeneity, and thus cannot explain how expectations differ. Yet, Manski (2004)
and Dominitz and Manski (2004) document significant heterogeneity in expectations even for events
where individuals are unlikely to have private information. Manski (2004) suggests that the ob-
served heterogeneity can be related to differences in the way individuals process public information,
but did not make precise what the process might be. We suggest a model for this process.
    We model heterogeneity in beliefs measured in surveys as coming from differences in individ-
uals' information choice. An example helps fix ideas. Suppose that we have survey responses for
individuals grouped by the majority political affiliation (Democrat or Republican) for the county
in which they live. The goal is to understand the heterogeneity in the survey responses given the
observed group membership. Our economic model assumes that individuals have access to many
news sources of information such as CNN, ESPN, Discovery Channel, Fox News, etc. and can
choose one news source to improve their naive beliefs about inflation. The model would predict
that individuals living in a Republican-leaning county are more likely to (but do not always) choose
Fox News, while those living in a Democrat-leaning county are more likely to (but do not always)
choose CNN. To the extent that Fox News provides more coverage encouraging fiscal conservatism
and the dangers of monetizing the deficit, this news source may leave its followers with a more
pessimistic belief over future inflation. The information effect induced by Fox News is combined
with an individual's naive belief to determine whether the individual is optimistic or pessimistic
about inflation. In our economic model, an individual's observed group membership does not di-
rectly determine heterogeneous expectations, but it influences the source of information that the

                                                  1
individual chooses to process, which in turn influences their expectations.
    Our economic model maps into a Bayesian hierarchical model that shares many similarities
with Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) of Blei, Ng, and Jordan (2003). Accordingly, we refer to
our expectations model as LDA-E. LDA-E uses multinomial distributions to explicitly take into
account the categorical nature of the data. The hierarchical structure comes from the fact that
the observed group membership affects the observed outcome through the unobserved choice of
information source. The econometrician specifies a prior distribution for how group membership
affects the choice of the information sources and another prior for how information affects the
responses to the survey. The economic assumptions not only guide the choice of these priors, but
also facilitate interpretation of the posterior estimates.
    LDA-E is a member of a class of Bayesian hierarchical latent class models that are also known
as mixed membership models. Mixed membership models are used in a variety of applications to
cluster high-dimensional discrete data, such as text and genomic data. We use it as a structural
economic model for expectations heterogeneity. Two versions of the model will be estimated: one
for the static cross-section case, and one for the dynamic case when the belief formation process
is time-dependent. To illustrate the economic insight gained from estimating heterogeneous types
in expectations data, our first example estimates a dynamic LDA-E model from the Michigan
data to show that the estimated proportions of belief types are linked to macroeconomic factors
like uncertainty and unemployment; this information is not apparent when working only with the
aggregate consumer sentiment index currently published.
    Another important use of categorical data is education studies, which rely heavily on self-
assessments from surveys. In the second example, we re-examine the estimation of returns to
education considered in Card (1995). Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Young
Men, we first estimate belief types using LDA-E and then use the estimates to control for unobserved
heterogeneity in an OLS regression of income on education. We find two belief types which relate
to an individual's belief about whether `internal' versus `external' factors determine success. We
then find that individuals with different belief types have heterogeneous returns to education.


2   Related Econometrics Literature

There are three types of categorical variables: nominal variables which represent unordered cate-
gories (such as zip code and NAICS codes), numerical (count) data, which represent ordered data
such as age, and ordinal data (such as satisfaction ratios of excellent/good/bad) that are qualitative
in nature. Ordinal data are said to be non-metrical when the distance between two categories has
no interpretation. Survey expectations data are often of this latter type.
    There is a small existing literature on the methodology for analyzing qualitative survey ex-
pectations. Carlson and Parkin (1975) uses a model with latent thresholds to derive aggregate
probabilistic expectations from qualitative trichotomous responses on price expectations, assum-
ing underlying quantitative inflation expectations are distributed normally. Structural modeling of
categorical variables generally requires strong parametric assumptions for estimation of polychoric

                                                   2
correlations, which is computationally burdensome and not easily scalable. For a discussion on
these methods, see Ng (2015). Most often, a simple averaging method is used to aggregate qualita-
tive expectations data. For example, the Gallup Poll Weekly Economic Confidence Index is derived
from averaging responses to two questions on the current and future state of the economy, where
"good/excellent" or "getting better" is assigned a numeric value of 1 and "poor" or "getting worse"
is assigned a numeric value of -1. Pesaran (1985) uses a weighted average instead. Neither of these
methods capture heterogeneity in responses.
   For analyzing other types of categorical survey data, a popular method among social scientists
is the `asset index' method of Filmer and Pritchett (2001a,b) used to summarize categorical data
on asset ownership for households in developing countries. The method converts all categorical
variables to binary variables, and applies PCA to the transformed matrix of responses. The method
is simple, non-parametric and requires nothing more than the ability to compute a singular value
decomposition. PCA has also been applied to a matrix of responses directly when the outcomes
are ordered, so, in principle, all PCA-based methods can be used to analyze economic expectations
as well.
   Despite its simplicity, applying the Filmer-Pritchett method to analyze categorical survey data
has known drawbacks. In addition to conceptual issues concerning what the indices actually mea-
sure, as discussed in Davidson, Rutstein, Kiersten, Eldow, Wagstaff, and Amouzou (2007); Witten-
berg and Leibbrandt (2017) and references therein, there are also methodological issues. Foremost
is the problem that averaging methods ignore the fact that the distance between different cate-
gories may not be constant. Furthermore, converting multinomial outcomes to binary variables
will introduce spurious negative correlations within the multiple columns that are mapped from
a single question. These issues are discussed in Kolenikov and Angeles (2009); Vyas and Ku-
maranayake (2006); Lovaton, McCarthy, Kirdruang, Sharma, and Gondwe (2014), among others.
These limitations motivate our analysis.
   The framework we adopt is a hierarchical Bayesian latent class model. Latent class models
were first introduced in Lazarsfeld (1950) to analyze dichotomous attributes based on a survey
sample consisting of individuals who are assumed to belong to distinct classes. It was theorized
in Goodman (1979) as a model for categorical variables. A multinomial latent class model for
discrete data assumes that discrete survey data are generated by a finite mixture of multinomial
distributions and that the mixture probabilities are the same for each individual. In contrast,
the hierarchical latent class model allows for heterogeneous mixture probabilities. Although latent
variable models are widely used in economic analysis, hierarchical latent variable models are far
less common. The analysis of Moench, Ng, and Potter (2013) is for continuous data, while Catania
and Mari (2020) considers count data.
   Hierarchical models for categorical data are known in the statistics literature as mixed mem-
bership models. The first model in this class is the grade-of-membership model introduced in
Woodbury, Clive, and Jr. (1978) that allows individual units to belong to multiple classes simulta-
neously. A Bayesian version of it was used in Erosheva (2002) to analyze disability data. As seen


                                                3
from the collection of papers in Airoldi, Blei, Erosheva, and Feinberg (2015), many specifications
and assumptions are possible within models in the mixed membership class. Particularly popular
is Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) of Blei, Ng, and Jordan (2003) for modeling topics in docu-
ments, which is similar to the admixture (mixture of mixture) model independently developed in
Pritchard, Stephens, and Donnelly (2000). Erosheva, Fienberg, and Lafferty (2004) develop a re-
lated mixed membership model where topics in scientific publications are associated with multiple
multinomial distributions, one for words and one for references. Erosheva (2002) and Erosheva,
Fienberg, and Joutard (2007) develop mixed-membership models as a unifying framework for the
soft clustering of categorical data and show that every mixed membership model has a finite mixture
representation. Applications include social networks as in Airoldi, Blei, Fienberg, and Xing (2008),
voting patterns and political beliefs as in Gross and Manrique-Vallier (2014), and genetic studies,
such as associating genotypes with diseases as in Falush, Stephens, and Pritchard (2003). Their
adaptations to economic analysis remain quite limited, though LDA is getting increased attention.
Recent applications include the analysis of CEO time usage in Bandiera, Hansen, Prat, and Sadun
(2020), reducing the dimension of FOMC transcripts in Hansen, McMahon, and Prat (2018), and
predicting consumer purchases in Ruiz, Athey, Blei, et al. (2020). Although there is a wide variety
of mixed membership models available for various applications, it is not always clear to economists
how to choose a model for a given situation and under what conditions the parameter estimates
can be given an economic interpretation.


3   An Econometric Model of Expectations Based on Information Acquisition

The goal of the econometric exercise is to explain the heterogeneity in survey responses using a
model that (i) explicitly recognizes that many of the responses are in categorical form, ii) allows
the survey responses to have cross-section dependence; (iii) connects unobserved heterogeneity in
individuals to observed heterogeneity in characteristics and responses, and (iv) provides an economic
interpretation to the unobserved heterogeneity.
    We will use an economic model of information acquisition to motivate the econometric analysis.
There is extensive theoretical work on the role of information in shaping economic agents' decisions.
Costly information acquisition has been used as an amplifier of discrimination in the field experiment
of Bartos, Bauer, Chytilov´
                          a, and Matejka (2016), and as a justification for `mistakes' in choices in
the theoretical analysis of Caplin and Dean (2015). Empirical work has also used costly information
acquisition as a possible explanation for heterogeneous responses in the Michigan Survey data. In
Carroll (2003), households occasionally update their inflation forecasts based on reports provided by
the Survey of Professional Forecasters. Branch (2004) models individuals as econometricians, and
assumes that heterogeneous responses are generated by households choosing between a set of costly
econometric prediction methods. These models are designed for univariate continuous outcomes
and as a result do not make precise how information acquisition affects qualitative beliefs.




                                                  4
3.1       LDA-E for Cross-Section Data
There are N individuals indexed by i, and each individual is a member of a group di  G =
                                                                                                                        j
{1, . . . , G}. There are J discrete survey responses in the dataset, where each question j has L
                                                                                             j              j
possible responses. Individuals choose a single response xij  L = {1, . . . , L } for each question j
by choosing the option v most appropriate for question j as indicated by a score function Bij (v ),
which depends on the set of information an individual has processed.
    The information acquisition model we consider is one of sequential choice and is motivated by
Ruiz, Athey, Blei, et al. (2020) which recognizes that hierarchical models can be rationalized by
economic models of sequential choice. An individual i chooses which of the K sources of information,
zi  K = {1, . . . , K } to consume by maximizing their utility, which incorporates a group affinity for
                                        k
each information source ug,  R and an individual specific effect eik  R:

                                                                         K
                              zi = arg          max         Ui (k ) =          1(k = j )(udi ,j + eij )             (1)
                                             k{1,...,K }
                                                                        j =1


The chosen source of information zi determines an individual's belief type. The observed het-
erogeneity of an individual's group membership is linked to the unobserved heterogeneity of an
                                                                  K -1
individual's belief type by a function   G                                where

                           gk = P(zi = k di = g ) = P ugk + eik = max(ugj + eij ) .
                                                                                       j K


The probability that an individual i selects information source k is the probability that ugk - ugj +
eik - eij >= 0 for all j  K .
    The information source that is chosen influences the actual response that an individual makes.
In the model, the actual response to survey question j is optimal in the sense that it maximizes
the individual's score function for each response.

                                                                         Lj
                            xij = arg          max          Bij (v ) =          1(v = u)(qz
                                                                                          j
                                                                                            i ,u
                                                                                                    j
                                                                                                 + siu ).
                                            v {1,...,LJ }                u=1

    The score for each response Bij (v ) has two components:
                                j
   1. An individual effect siv  R drawn independently for each i,j and v from distribution S .
                                                j
                                    j         L
   2. An information effect qk,  R                  drawn independently for each k from some distribution Q.
              j
    Here, si, is interpreted as the naive score that the individual assigns to the question in the
                                                                                                    j               j
absence of any information. If the information is uninformative and qkv = 0 for all v  {1, . . . , L },
                                                                                                   j
then the individual selects the naive response with the maximum siv . In general, however, the
acquired information will affect the response.
                                                                                                                j
    The expected choices induced by each information source can be described by a map   K 
    j
   L -1                j
          . Precisely, k,v is a random variable that gives the probability that an individual with

                                                                   5
information source zi = k believes that option v is the appropriate response to question j .

                          j                           j        j          j           j
                       kv = P(xij = v zi = k ) = P qzi ,v + siv = max(qzi ,u + siu ) .
                                                                   uLj

                                                                                                                  g
   To complete the analysis, we assume that (a) ug, is independent over g with distribution Fu
and (b) eik is independent over i and k with distribution Fe . The economic model has the following
conditional independence properties:

Assumption E 1 The source of information zi chosen by individual i is independent of the source
of information chosen by individual h conditional on each individual's group membership and ,
                       N                      N
so that p(z d, ) = i=1 p(zi di , di ,zi ) = i=1 di ,zi

Assumption E 2 The group-specific mixtures g, are independent across groups, so p() =
  G
g=1 p(g, ).

Assumption E 3 Conditional on information source z , xij is independent of xhr for j  r and
                                                                                                      N
h  i, and is independent of an individual's group membership di . p(X d, , z ,  ) = i=1 p(xi, zi ,  ) =
  N     J
i=1 j =1 p(xij zi ,  ).

                                                                              j           j
Assumption E 4 Conditional independence of belief types, so k,  h, for h  k , and condi-
tional independence of beliefs and mixtures so that   .

   Property E1 follows from the two independence assumptions on ug, and eik . As group-specific
affinities for each information source are independent, E2 rules out the selection patterns of one
group influencing the access to information of a second group. Since all dependence across questions
in individual responses are channeled through the common information source, E3 rules out individ-
ual preferences that are correlated across questions and unrelated to the information source. The
terms in the score function Bij (v ) are independent of the parameters that determine an individual's
choice of information zi , which leads to E4. This completes the economic model.
   The econometrician does not observe u, e, or their distributions (Fu and Fe ), so treats the
G × K matrix  as random. He proceeds with estimation by taking the features of the model
                                                                                              K -1
E1-E4 as maintained assumptions. He specifies a prior on which   G ×                                 are more likely
                                                                          K
through a Dirichlet distribution with hyperparameter g,  R , which is the conjugate prior
to the multinomial g, . The econometrician also does not know the distributions S and Q, so
                                                                                               j
specifies a prior as to what sort of belief structures are more likely. Since each k, is a multinomial
                                                                   j
                                                           j       L
distribution, a Dirichlet prior with hyperparameter k,  R              is used:

                                                           j                      j
                              g,  Dirichlet(g, ),         k,  Dirichlet(k, ).

Thus, under the structure of the economic model, we arrive at the statistical model for LDA-E
defined by the following equations:

                                                     6
Model LDA-E

                                      xij  , zi  Multinomial(j,zi ),                                                  (2a)
                                        zi di ,  Multinomial(di , )                                                   (2b)
                                             di ,  Dirichlet(di , ),                                                  (2c)
                                                j                           j
                                             zi ,  Dirichlet(zi , )                                                   (2d)

where individuals are indexed by i = 1, . . . , N and categorical responses in the survey are indexed
                                                        j
by j = 1, . . . , J. Using p(xij = v  , zi ) = zi ,v and p(zi = k di , ) = di ,k , we can write the joint
distribution of the model as
                                            J       K               G               N               J
                                                            j                                              j
                      p( , , z , d, X ) =               p(k, )             p(g, )         di ,zi          zi ,xij .
                                            j =1 k=1                g =1            i=1            j =1


3.2   Dynamic LDA-E
Many surveys on beliefs are conducted repeatedly, each time with a possibly different sample of
individuals. The Michigan Survey of Consumers is perhaps the best known example as it has
been in existence for over 50 years. The Bank of Canada interviews the business leaders of about
100 firms to gather perspectives on business outlook, while the Bank of England solicits attitudes
towards inflation.
   As in the static model, we will motivate with an example, one that attributes differences in
economic sentiment to time of response and the outlook of business news. For the dynamic example,
we group individuals by the time at which they respond to the survey, rather than the location
in which they live. In each month, there are a variety of news articles that convey different
sentiments, but only a few are relevant to the survey questions. For example, some articles might
have an optimistic tone and others may have a pessimistic one. The model postulates that the
individual survey response will depend on the prevalence of the article type at time t (the time
specific effect), as well as a random idiosyncratic preference for the article type (the individual
specific effect). In the dynamic model, t varies with time to allow the proportion of optimistic
and pessimistic information about the economy to vary over time; during bad times, it is easier
to access pessimistic news and incorporate that information into beliefs. An individual's selection
of news type determines their belief type, and is labeled zi . An individual who reads negative
news on declining energy prices and bankrupt oil companies is more likely to respond to a survey
indicating that they believe the economy is weak. An individual who selects the positive news
source describing a booming tech industry with new product offerings and rising stock prices is
more likely to respond to a survey indicating that they believe the economy is robust. This is
                  j
represented by  , which gives the expected responses of individuals who have absorbed different
types of news sources.
   We will continue to work with a N × J matrix of survey response data but will refer to the


                                                                7
dynamic model of expectations as LDA-DE, denoting the time at which an individual responds to
the survey by si  {1, . . . , T }. The choice described in Equation 1 is now:

                                                                        K
                             zi = arg        max          Ui (k ) =           1(k = j )(usi ,j + eij )                           (3)
                                           k{1,...,K }
                                                                       j =1

In the static model, ut,j is assumed to be independent of us,j for any t  s. But, ut,j is meant to
capture the net cost and benefit of accessing news type j for individuals who form beliefs at time t.
Economic conditions tend to be persistent, so a high proportion of negative news in month t - 1 is
likely followed by pessimism in month t. Thus, we now assume time dependence in the proportions
of individuals of each belief type. As a consequence, while features E1, E3 and E4 of dynamic
model are the same as in LDA-E (and now labeled DE1, DE3 and DE4), E2 needs to be replaced
with the following:

Assumption DE2: Mixture proportion t, is a first order Markov process. t, is independent
                                                                                        K
of t-s, conditional on t-1, for s > 1. Let tk = exp(~tk )/  exp(~tk ) be lognormally distributed
                                                                                        k=1
               K
and satisfy k gk = 1, where for k = 1, . . . , K and t = 1, . . . , T ,

                                                                                               2
                                       ~tk = ~t-1,k + wt ,               wt  N (0, k ).

    The econometrician now takes DE1 - DE5 as maintained assumptions. For i = 1, . . . , N and
j = 1, . . . , J , the model is characterized by

                                                                                              j
                                           xij  , zi  Multinomial(zi , ),                                                       (4a)
                                             zi si ,  Multinomial(si , ),                                                       (4b)
                                                      2                                       2
                                 ~ si , 
                                        ~ si -1, , zi        Normal(~ si , , zi ),                                              (4c)
                                                      2
                                                 zi          InverseGamma(v0 , s0 ),                                            (4d)
                                                  j                                 j
                                                zi ,  Dirichlet(zi , ).                                                         (4e)

The joint probability distribution of the dynamic hierarchical latent class model becomes

                                  J    K                       T                              N
                                              j     2
              p( , , z , X ) =              p(k, )p(k )                p(~ t, ~ t-1, )              p(zi si , )p(xij zi ,  ).
                                 j =1 k=1                      t=1                            i=1


3.3    Relationship to Latent Class, Mixed Membership Models and NMF
We now describe how LDA-E and LDA-DE are related to existing models in both statistical and
economic terms. Consider first a non-hierarchical Bayesian latent class (LC) model. To justify the
absence of a group-specific effect would require that udi , is the same for each individual. Under
such a restriction, any observable heterogeneity di is independent of an individual's choice of infor-
mation zi . This, however, would be inconsistent with the substantial evidence that heterogeneity

                                                                   8
in responses is related to heterogeneity in observed characteristics, such as group membership.
For example, Manski (2004) finds gender and schooling type to be correlated with an individual's
optimism. Allowing an individual's choice of information to depend on observed characteristic di
endows LDA-E with more flexibility.
   The GoM (Grade of Membership) model of Erosheva (2002) is a mixed membership model,
which has been applied to survey data on disabilities. The difference between GoM and LDA-E is
that for GoM, the type assignment parameter Z is a N × J matrix, but for LDA-E, z is a N × 1
vector. This means that in GoM, the response to each question is assigned its own class label, so
each individual is a mixture over belief types. In both our economic model and LDA-E, we only have
an assignment to a single belief type. This does not mean that a more sophisticated economic model
cannot be written per se, but GoM cannot immediately be motivated by our model of information
acquisition. Furthermore, the flexibility of GoM comes at a cost of many more parameters, and, in
our experience, as further discussed in Section 4, GoM is more susceptible to the problem of non-
uniqueness for a given prior and dataset. LDA-E allows information source selection probabilities
to co-move yet also vary across individuals. Assuming that each individual is a member of only a
single belief type but groups of individuals are mixtures over belief types simplifies interpretation
and identification.
   The model in the mixed-membership class closest to ours is LDA for estimating topics in a
corpus of documents. In topics modeling, the singular value decomposition of a word-document
frequency matrix YD is known as Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI). A probabilistic variation of it,
known as pLSI, was developed in Hoffmann (1999) and Hofmann (2001). pLSI treats the document-
specific mixture over topics as a fixed parameter and the documents as a fixed collection. LDA is
the Bayesian version of pLSI, which treats document-specific mixtures over topics as random, as
specified by a Dirichlet distribution. The appeal of LDA over pLSI is that documents which have
not been observed can be analyzed.
   LDA-E is an adaptation of LDA to survey response data. Instead of the frequency of word
occurrences in documents, we analyze frequency of responses to questions in grouped individuals.
In LDA, documents are modeled as mixtures over topics, which each involve different distribution
over words. In LDA-E, we model survey responses as group-specific mixtures over K belief types,
each characterized by multinomial distributions over survey responses. A topic in LDA involves a
single distribution over all words in the corpus. For each word wi , the outcome variable is simply
the identity of that word, so J = 1. The joint likelihood for LDA can be factorized:

                                            K              D                N
                      p( , , z , w, g ) =         p(k, )           p(d, )         p(zi gi , )p(wi zi ,  ).
                                            k=1            d=1              i=1

    By contrast, LDA-E sets J  1 because in surveys we have J survey questions and for individual
i we observe xij for j = 1, . . . J . The belief types in the LDA-E model each specify J multinomial
distributions, one for each question response recorded in the columns of xi, . So we may think of
LDA-E as a multivariate variant of LDA with J  1, but a simplified version of GoM since our z is


                                                               9
an N × 1 vector instead of a N × J matrix. A concise comparison of LDA-E to LDA is as follows:


                        LDA-E for types in responses             LDA for topics in documents
 Data/outcome           xij response of i to question j          wi word in corpus
 Outcome dimension      xij  {1, . . . , Lj }                    wi  {1, . . . , V }
 Outcomes per unit      J  1 responses in xi,                    J = 1 word index of wi
 N                      # individuals in survey                  # words appearing in corpus
 Frequency matrix       YS (group-response)                      YD (document-word)
 Latent size            K information sources                    K topics
 Mixture size           G, number of groups                      D, number of documents
 Class assignment       zi information source/belief type        zi assignment of word i to topic
 Membership             di membership of individual i in group   gi membership of word i in doc
 Mixture                g, group-specific mixture over types     d, document specific mixture over topics
                          j
 Outcome distribution   k, for xij with zi = k                   k, for wi with zi = k


   The dynamic version of LDA introduced by Blei and Lafferty (2006) incorporates dynamics
into class proportions  but also allows the topic distributions  to evolve according to different
documents that are observed over time. Modeling time dependence in  would require the expected
responses induced by each information source to change over time. While this is possible, it seems
more appropriate to explain variations in survey expectations by the variation in the proportion of
belief types over time, while holding the expectations for each type fixed.
   Figure 1 presents a graphical view that concisely summarizes the differences in statistical condi-
tional independence assumptions across models. Figure (a) shows the standard LC model. Figure
(b) shows that LDA-E is the same as an LC model, except that (i) zi is now a descendant of
d rather than a common  , which means zi is now independent of zj upon conditioning on a
group-specific mixture, rather than an aggregate mixture  . These changes from the basic model
allow for more heterogeneity in the patterns of class assignment within the population. Comparing
GoM in (d) to LDA-E in (b), the plate surrounding a row of  is now N -dimensional, and the
J -subscripted plate now incorporates both xij and zij since Z is now N × J . Observe that in the
LDA-E model, there is no link between g and h except through their common prior. But in
LDA-DE there is a direct link between s and s+1 . The rest of the model remains the same, so
we assume that the time-specific mixture over belief types captures all the time dependence.
   We close this section with two additional remarks. First, note that xi, in LDA-E in (b) is
J -dimensional, but wi in LDA in (c) is not. This is not just a modeling choice but is in some sense
necessary. Modeling the J responses for each individual as one outcome would be necessary if we
assumed there were correlation in individual responses across questions beyond what is induced
by an individual's belief type. However, this would require dealing with the joint distribution of
responses for each individual, which would then be a multinomial distribution over all possible
response permutations for a survey. For J that is larger than a handful of questions, this is too
high-dimensional.


                                                  10
               Figure 1: Probabilistic Graphs for Hierarchical Latent Class Models

                                       
                                                                      


                                       g
                                                                      d


                                       zi           
zi                                                                    zi         


                                       xij          
xij                                         J                         wi         

     J                                   Ng                           Nd
      N                                      G                         D
          (a) Latent Class                       (b) LDA-E                      (c) LDA




                                                    
                  


                                                    t                t+1        
                  i


                                                    zi                zi
                  zi           


                                                    xij              xij        
                  xij                                    J                 J
                       J                                 Nt                Nt
                        N
                                                              

                             (d) GoM                          (e) LDA-DE




                                                     11
    Second, there are other interpretations of LDA that will also help in understanding LDA-E.
Buntine (2002); Buntine and Jakulin (2012) show that LDA is a type of independent component
analysis, while Canny (2004) shows that LDA is a type of factor analysis for discrete data. When
the latent class assignments zi are integrated out, LDA can also be seen as factorizing the D × V
(document-term) matrix YD into two low rank matrices, one representing the probability of topics
given document, and one representing probability of words given topics. In lieu of svd, it is also
possible to obtain a non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) of YD = WD HD into two rank K
matrices, WD and HD , both with non-negative entries. Ding, Li, and Peng (2006) show that NMF
and PLSI solve the same objective function. In LDA-E, the discrete data X is mapped into a
                                                                                                 J
(non-negative) frequency response matrix YS = (YS 1 , . . . , YSJ ) of dimension G × L, L = j =1 Lj . In
our analysis, belief type zi is itself of interest, so we do not integrate it out. But if this were done,
the frequency matrix YS , also known as contingency table, can also be seen as a product of two
low rank matrices: YS = HS WS . The matrix HS represents the probability of responses given
belief type assignment and can be compared to a flattened version of the 3-dimensional matrix  ,
while WS is the probability of belief type assignment for each group. Though the NMF approach
is non-parametric and does not specify a probability distribution for the latent variables, the low
rank factorization perspective is helpful in understanding the issues to be discussed in Section 4.


4     Implementation Issues

This section discusses three implementation issues: estimation of the model, the choice of the
number of belief types K , and identification for a given number of types K .

4.1    Sampling Algorithms
An appeal of LDA is that the hierarchical structure makes the model interpretable and computa-
tionally feasible, and LDA-E inherits these appealing features. We can also exploit computational
tools developed for estimating LDA, which is a heavily researched topic in the last two decades.
LDA can be estimated using either MCMC or variational inference methods. The latter approx-
imates posterior distributions using optimization techniques and is reviewed in Blei, Kucukelbir,
and McAuliffe (2017).
    For this paper, we will use MCMC methods, which are familiar to economists. In the static case,
conjugacy of the Dirichlet distribution makes deriving a Gibbs sampler for posterior estimation quite
simple. In each step of a Gibbs sampler, each variable is sampled from its conditional distribution,
conditional on all other variables in the model.

    1. Sample zi conditional on xi, ,  , and di , . The conditional distribution of zi is multinomial:

                                                               J
                                                                      j
                            p(zi = k xi, ,  , di , )  di ,k          k,x ,     i = 1, . . . N.
                                                                          ij
                                                              j =1




                                                    12
                                                                                                                               j
  2. Sample  conditional on  , X , and z . The conditional distribution of k, is Dirichlet, with:

                    j                      j          resp               j         resp
               k,  Dirichlet(k,1 + Cjk1 , . . . , k,L + CjkL ),                                     j = 1, . . . , J, k = 1, . . . , K,
                                                                               j         j


                            N Lj
                        =   1(zi = k )1(xij = )
              resp
     where Cjk
                         i=1 =1

  3. Sample g, conditional on , d, and z . The conditional distribution of g, is Dirichlet, with:

                                                                         grp                        grp
                         g, , z  Dirichlet(g1 + Cg1 , . . . , gK + CgK ),                                      g = 1, . . . , D,

                         N
     where Cgk =  1(zi = k )1(di = g ).
              grp
                         i=1

   Steps 1 and 2 of the Dynamic LDA-E sampler are the same as in LDA-E. But Step 3 is more
complicated because the dynamic model does not have a conjugate prior distribution for the state
mixtures t, . Blei and Lafferty (2006) specify a lognormal formulation for tk and use a variational
Kalman Filter for estimation. Using a Metropolis-Hastings step to sample from the posterior of
the lognormal distribution for t, would involve slow exploration of the posterior and is difficult to
scale to datasets with a large number of respondents or time periods. Bradley, Holan, and Wikle
(2018) and Linderman, Johnson, and Adams (2015) replace the lognormal formulation to improve
sampling speed and convergence.
   Rather than changing the formulation for the dynamics, we adapt recent advances in MCMC
methods to improve sampling speed and convergence. We use a sampling approach similar to the
one in Bhadury, Chen, Zhu, and Liu (2016), which is a method known as Stochastic Gradient
Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) developed in Welling and Teh (2011) for learning Bayesian models
from large scale datasets. In brief, SGLD works as follows. For parameter of interest , prior
p(), and data (x1 , . . . , xN ), let the likelihood be L(). Instead of using the full sample gradient
                        N
g () =  log p() + i=1  log L(xi ) of the log posterior distribution to find the mode, SGLD updates
 at step r according to

                                              (r)
                               (r)                    (r)          (r)   (r)       (r)                (r)            (r)
                                     =              g ( ) + h ( ) +                                          N (0,         )
                                              2
                                              (r)
                                                              (r)        N         (r) (r) (r)
                                     =               log p( ) +             log L(xi  ) +  .
                                              2                          M

        (r)                               n                  (r)                             (r)
where h () =  log p() +              N
                                     M
                                         i=1  log L(xi ) - g () and                                is the stepsize. The acronym SGLD
comes from the fact that it (i) uses mini-batches of the data of size M  N (the stochastic gradient
part), and (ii) adds noise (the Langevin dynamics part). The SGLD method ensures that the
parameters reach the maximum of the posterior distribution quickly, and once it reaches the MAP
value, the sampling procedure enters a Langevin dynamics stage, where the noise added to the
parameter updates result in exploration of the posterior distribution. Though the above defines a


                                                                         13
                                                                                                   (r)
non-stationary Markov chain, Welling and Teh (2011) show that                                            will converge to samples from
                                                                                                                              (k)
the true posterior distribution with careful choice of the stepsize . In particular,                                                must satisfy
    (k)                       (k) 2
k=1                      k=1 ( )
                         
            =  and                           < . The MCMC draws not only give the posterior mode, but the
entire posterior distribution.
   To use this approach in our setting requires making precise the density of interest and its
derivative. Let () be the standard normal density function. The condition distribution of ~t+1 is
proportional to:

                                                      K                                                       N
                                                                ~t,k - 
                                                                       ~t-1,k              ~t+1,k - 
                                                                                                    ~t,k              1(s   =t)
                    p(~ t, ~ t-1, , ~ t+1, , zi )                       2
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                    si ,zii
                                                      k=1               k                         k           i=1

   Then, the SGLD step for ~tk is a combination of gradient descent towards the maximum of the
posterior distribution and additional noise that ensures the full posterior distribution is explored.
Our approach nonetheless differs from SGLD in one way. In the original paper, the gradient descent
step is taken with respect to a random subsample of data (ie. the mini-batch). For many survey
datasets and certainly applications considered in this paper, the number of respondents is small
enough that we do not need to take subsamples when updating the parameters. Hence we use the
batch size that equals the size of the dataset. In step r of the Gibbs Sampler, for each k = 1, . . . , K ,

                                                      (r-1)      (r)        (r-1)   (r-1)
                 (r)         (r-1)       r
                                              log p(~ t,      ~ t-1, , 
                                                                       ~ t+1, , zi          )
                ~t,k    -   ~t,k
                                     =                                                          + i ,       i  N (0, r )
                                         2                     ~t,k

The first derivative is easily computed as follows:

              log p(~ t, ~ t-1, , ~ t+1, , zi ) -1                    1
                                               = 2 (~k,t - ~k,t-1 ) - 2 (~k,t+1 - ~kt ) + ntk - Nt k,t
                          ~t,k                  k                    k

              N
where Nt =  1(si = t) and ntk = i=1 1(zt = k )1(si = t).
                                                  N
              i=1
                                                                                                  -c
   We follow the literature and use a step size of                            r   = a(b + r)            at step r with a = 0.01, b = 1
and c = 0.5. Tuning these parameters to get fast convergence and good posterior exploration
can be challenging. Welling and Teh (2011) show that as                                r    decreases, the acceptance probability
approaches 1, so that a Metropolis-Hastings test is unnecessary as the acceptance probability is
                                                                                                   2
close to 1. The last part of the sampler for LDA-DE involves k , which, conditional on all the
other variables in the model, has an Inverse Gamma distribution. Let v1 = v0 + T and s1k =
      T
                            2
s0 +  (~t,k - ~t-1,k ) . Then, k   IGamma(v1 , s1k ).
      t=1


4.2       Identification and Choice of Priors
Finite mixture models are susceptible to weak and under-identification, and the researcher must
also be alert to label switching as the ordering of the estimated latent class is arbitrary. See Jasra,
Holmes, and Stephens (2005) and Masyn (2013) for a recent review of the literature. Since LDA-E

                                                                       14
is a variation of LDA, and LDA is a finite mixture model, we begin with a discussion of identification
issues concerning LDA. As noted earlier, LDA can be seen as a problem of finding a non-negative
factorization of the matrix YD , but such a matrix factorization is not unique. Some applications of
LDA do not require uniqueness, such as prediction of the content of new documents. It is nonetheless
still useful to understand the two sources of non-uniqueness and how to deal with the problem.
                                                                                   ~ D = WD QD  0
First, if a solution satisfies YD = WD HD , then any positive definite Q producing W
    ~ D = Q-1 HD  0 is also solution. For example, QD can be the permutation of a diagonal
and H      D
matrix with positive diagonal elements, so scaling and permuting the rows and columns of WD
and HD can produce equivalent solutions. For uniqueness of the non-negative matrix factorization
problem, see Gillis (2014), Moussaoui, Brie, and Idier (2005) Hoyer (2004), Huang, Sidiropoulous,
and Swami (2014). More problematic is that there may be additional W    ~ D and H
                                                                                ~ D matrices not
obtained from rotations by QD . Imposing summing up constraints on the rows of WD and HD
are not usually enough to tie down a unique LDA solution, so side conditions are needed. This is
not surprising because the LDA is a mixture model known to be non-identifiable without further
assumptions. The Bayesian approach is to impose non-exchangeable priors. For Dirichlet priors,
Griffiths and Steyvers (2007) show that the posterior distributions of  and  in LDA have a mode
of:
                                    word                                 doc
                                   Ckv     + v                         Cdk + k
                         kv =                      ,         dk =                     .
                                             V                                  K
                                V                                   K
                                v=1 Cdk
                                     word
                                            +  v                    k=1 Cdk
                                                                         doc
                                                                               +  k
                                             v                                  k
           word                                                                 doc
where C           is a K × V matrix of word counts for each topic, and C              is a D × K matrix of
document counts for each topic. From this representation, it is clear that the prior only shrinks
towards but does not restrict  or  to any particular value. See also Ke, Montiel-Olea, and Nesbitt
(2019) for a discussion of how the choice of priors influence identification in LDA.
      Like LDA, the LDA-E decomposition is not unique. Following the literature, we impose non-
exchangeable priors to ensure that the same belief type is identified in each MCMC draw. Specif-
ically, we assign a Dirichlet prior for the expected information choice conditional on group mem-
bership p(), and another Dirichlet prior for expected response choice conditional on information
choice p( ). The posterior expected values for  and  that emerge from steps 2 and 3 of the
                                                                                              word
Gibbs Sampler are analogous to the two expressions for LDA just presented, with C                    replaced
                                                       doc
by counts for the responses for a question and C             replaced by counts for each group.
      The choice of the hyperparameters for the Dirichlet distribution is important, but the economic
model provides some guidance. For example, the prior for  relates to assumptions about the
underlying distributions that determine the preference for news sources, Fu and Fe . Consider as
an example the case of two categories and a single group when the Dirichlet distribution for 1,
is also a Beta(, ) distribution. Figure 2 plots three cases:  > 1,  < 1, and  = 1. Values of
 < 1 are associated with values of 1, that are on the corners of the simplex. This implies that
the researcher believes that observed heterogeneity is tightly linked with unobserved heterogeneity,
or that members of a group are likely to choose the same source of information. Values of  > 1


                                                       15
are associated with values of  in the center of the simplex, which implies that group membership
is not highly correlated with unobserved heterogeneity. The case  = 1 is an uninformative prior,
with equal weight everywhere in the simplex. In the economic model, the unobserved heterogeneity
is due to information choice. Hence specifying  < 1 means that the researcher believes that the
group specific cost of acquiring information is more variable than that of the individual specific
benefit, so individuals in a certain group are likely to choose the same information. A similar
discussion relates the prior for  . Specifying a prior with  < 1 would reflect the econometrician's
prior that all individuals who choose the same source of information are likely to respond the same
way to each question. Although it is constant in this example, the hyperparameter vector need not
be constant. The econometrician can specify higher probabilities on certain areas of the simplex of
all possible beliefs over question responses.
   In the examples that follow, we impose g,k = 1 for all g and k , which is an uninformative
prior for the relationship between group membership and information acquisition. We impose that
jkm = 1 for k  m, and jkk = 10 otherwise. Effectively, we assume that each information source
is associated with a correctness score on one response that is higher than any other information
source for at least one question in the survey. For example, for the Michigan Survey of Consumers,
we assume that the first information source induces a higher probability on the first categorical
response compared to other responses for all questions. The first question asks respondents about
their financial condition compared to a year ago and the first categorical response to this question
is `better now'. We thus interpret the first belief type estimated in multiple MCMC procedures to
                                                                                     2
be the `optimistic' one. The dynamic model has K more parameters to estimate, k , which has its
own priors. Otherwise it is the same; we impose the same kind of prior restrictions on  .
   An additional issue relating to identification is that the frequency response matrix cannot have
columns or rows that are near zero. This effectively rules out including questions with very rare
responses; in some applications, responses are dropped or combined with more common responses.
This condition, however, can be checked ahead of estimation.

4.3   The Choice of K
Many solutions have been proposed to determine the number of latent classes in continuous data,
but each has some shortcomings. Calculating the Bayes Factor for this type of hierarchical mixture
model is computationally challenging due to the intractable integral over the parameter space
required to compute the integrated likelihood. Other methods that integrate model selection into
the MCMC procedure are complex and require specification of pseudo priors. Cross-validation is
popular in the machine learning literature, but it is sensitive to the number of folds and the splits
taken. Analyses on choosing the number of latent classes in discrete data are more limited. Early
work by McHugh (1956) and Goodman (1974) provided insightful results for simple latent class
models without a hierarchical structure. Simulation studies for hierarchical latent class models,
such as those in Airoldi, Fienberg, Joutard, and Love (2006), have considered different criteria with
no clear recommendation.


                                                 16
   We use insights from both matrix factorization and statistical model selection to guide the
choice of K , the number of belief types induced by differing sources of information. We first check
that there are enough `degrees of freedom' for a non-negative matrix factorization of YS . This is a
simple counting exercise: the number of independent observations in Y is G × (L - J ); the number
of free parameters for HS and WS is, respectively, K × (L - J ), and G × (K - 1). This bound is based
on counting entries in the frequency matrix alone. Additional information can loosen the bound.
For example, Anandkumar, Foster, Hsu, Kakade, and Liu (2012) derived an algorithm that also
uses third moments of the data to estimate LDA. To rule out under-identification would require
G(L - J )  K (L - J ) + G(K - 1), or

                                                  G(G - 1)
                                         K G-
                                                  L+G-J

If G = 2, J = 2 and L = 4, then the condition requires K = 1 which is no longer a mixture model.
However, if G = 5, J = 4 and L = 20, the condition K  5 - 20/21 tolerates K up to 4 classes.
Though we are ultimately interested in parametric estimation of LDA-E, this algebraic result serves
as a useful benchmark.
   We run Monte-Carlo simulations to examine the implications of this identification condition in
practice. Data are simulated using LDA-E as the DGP under two settings, one where the counting
                                                                                           1
rule is satisfied and the others where it is violated. We evaluate the posterior mean of 1, from the
MCMC procedure. In the setting where the counting rule is satisfied, we find that the correlation
                                  1                    1
between the posterior mean of 1, and the true 1, , averaged across 500 replications, approaches
1 as the sample size increases. This suggests that LDA-E is recovering the unique solution to the
problem. On the other hand, when the model is underidentified and our counting rule fails, the
model does not yield estimates that improve as the sample size increases because there are multiple
solutions by design. This suggests that the counting rule is a useful check of identifiability.
   In analysis of continuous data, it is well known from the Eckart-Young theorem that the best
rank K approximation of YS is spanned by the eigenvectors corresponding to the K largest eigen-
               T
values of YS YS . A similar idea can be expected to hold when YS is a function of discrete data.
                         T
The eigenvalues of YS YS can be used to generate a scree plot. If Y has rank K , there should be
K eigenvalues that are significantly larger than the rest. This can be used to guide the number
of classes needed to explain a prescribed fraction of the variance of YS . Though this method is
informal, it is useful in applications because this can be checked ahead of estimation.
   In the applications below, we use the BIC to approximate the Bayes factor. Let L(^k ) be the
maximum likelihood value of the data and  be the set of parameters in the model. For a model
with k classes, BICk = -L(  ^k ) + 1 pk log(N ) where 
                                   2
                                                      ^k is the maximum likelihood value of the
parameters and pk is the number of model parameters when the number of classes in the model is
k . We approximate the maximum likelihood value of the parameters using the posterior mean ~k




                                                  17
from the MCMC draws. The BIC considered is

                                    ~ k = -L(
                                   BIC       ~k ) + 1 pk log(N )
                                                    2

where the sample size N is the number of individuals. In simulations, this approximated BIC
criterion reliably selects K for models where the order condition for identification is met, even as
we vary the form of the priors. Furthermore, the K chosen by the BIC tends to coincide with the
number of eigenvalues that explain over 90% of variation in YS .


5     Applications

This section consists of two parts. The first application estimates multiple types of respondents
from the Michigan data using an LDA-E model. The goal is to show that while the proportion of
optimistic respondents over time matches up well with the published index, the other predominant
belief types in the data convey additional useful information on recession recovery and economic
uncertainty. The second example uses the data analyzed in Card (1995) to illustrate how the
estimated individual-level latent class belief types are linked to heterogeneous returns to education.

5.1    Heterogeneous Beliefs in Repeated Cross-Sections: The Michigan Data
The Michigan Index of Survey of Consumers (ICS) is a heavily watched indicator of consumer
expectations and confidence. The index is constructed from monthly survey responses of approxi-
mately 500 telephoned respondents in continental U.S. Each month, an independent cross-section
sample of households is drawn, and some are reinterviewed six months later. As explained on
the official website of the survey, the ICS is constructed from five questions of the survey on the
respondent's opinion about current and future economic conditions as follows: (i) For j = 1, . . . 5,
compute the relative scores Xj which is the percentage of respondents giving favorable replies to
question j , minus the percent giving unfavorable replies, plus 100; and (ii) After rounding each
                                                             1       5
relative score to the nearest whole number, compute ICS = 6.7558 j =1 Xj + 2.0 where 6.7558 is the
value of the ICS in 1966 (the base period). The 2.0 is added to correct for sample design changes
in the 1950s.
    The ICS is an aggregate index and is often found to have little independent predictive power for
real consumer spending. We will argue that there is unexploited information in the survey beyond
the ICS, which requires applying a methodology that captures heterogeneity in responses. To make
this point, we analyze 204,944 survey responses collected between January 1978 and May 2019.
We do not model the repeated interviewing that occurs in the Michigan data. We use LDA-DE to
analyze an additional 9 questions in the survey related to sentiment that are not incorporated in
the ICS but have been asked since 1978. A challenge in using this data is missing values, as many
survey respondents may not answer all questions. An appeal of LDA-DE is that it does not require
each question to have similar response categories, and it does not require dropping or imputing
responses that are incomplete, as long as they are not too rare in the sample.

                                                 18
   We estimate an LDA-DE model with K = 4 types. Type 2 captures individuals who are un-
informed and are likely to fill out the survey with lots of incomplete or missing responses. This
decreases over time presumably due to changes in survey collection practices. We plot the type
proportions 1t in Figure 3 where 1t , is the probability that an individual responding at time t
is assigned to type 1. A high 1t corresponds to a high probability of responding optimistically
to the survey questions on sentiment at time t. As seen from Figure 3, this index is highly corre-
lated with the rescaled Michigan ICS. Figure 3 also plots 3t and 4t with a rescaled news based
uncertainty index and the unemployment rate. While 4t often peaks before or at the beginning
of the recession, 3t peaks towards the end or after the recession. Examining the type-specific
multinomial distributions, a few of which are plotted in Figure 4, suggests that Type 4 is associ-
ated with individuals who consume pessimistic news sources, and have a negative response to most
questions, reflecting consumers' sentiment that the economy is in bad shape and will continue to
be so. This interpretation is supported by the correlation of 4t with the news-based uncertainty
index, which tracks the proportion of news that contain terms related to uncertainty. The proba-
bility of assignment to this `pessimism' profile decreases when times are good in the economy and
negative news is less available. In contrast, Type 3 can be understood as a recovery profile since
the respondents believe they will likely be better off a year from now, in spite of a reasonably high
probability that they have experienced bad times recently. This type is associated with turning
points in unemployment. Estimating more complex forms of heterogeneity beyond an aggregate
index is important for identifying and interpreting predominant types of beliefs among respondents
to the Michigan survey and how these types relate to aggregate economic conditions.

5.2   Heterogeneous Beliefs and Returns to Education
In this subsection, we illustrate how the class assignments zi can be used to control for unobserved
heterogeneity in subsequent regressions. It is well known that unobserved characteristics that are
correlated with observed covariates will introduce bias in parameter estimates. With panel data,
time-invariant characteristics can be controlled for by differencing or demeaning. These options
are not available with cross-sectional data, and instrumental variable estimation is often used. Our
approach is to use a high-dimensional set of auxiliary categorical information to control for omitted
variable bias and to estimate interpretable heterogeneous effects in a parsimonious way.
   Our application concerns estimating returns to education, and education research relies heavily
on surveys that solicit subjective assessments. Using data for Young Men from 1966 to 1976, we
consider the regression model
                                     yi = 1i xi + 2 wi + ai + ei                                 (5)

where yi is the outcome variable (income), xi is a covariate of interest (education), wi is a small
set of important controls, ai is unobserved heterogeneity, and vi = ai + ei is not observed directly.
E[ei xi ] = 0, but E[ai xi ]  0. The parameter of interest is the return to education for the men in
the sample. In Card (1995), wi includes covariates such as region, race, ability test scores, and



                                                 19
parental education, and proximity to college is then used as an instrument, orthogonal to ai , to
estimate returns to education 1i = 1 .
   We consider a scenario where a convincing instrumental variable is not available, but we have
some auxiliary information about the qualitative beliefs of an individual to control for unobserved
heterogeneity in belief type and to estimate heterogeneous effects that are based on an individual's
belief type. Our approach uses elements from Kasahara and Shimotsu (2009) and Bonhomme,
Lamadon, and Manresa (2017). However, we not only cluster the data, but also give an economic
interpretation to the latent class. We parameterize ai as a function of individual's belief type:

                                               K
                                    ai =             k p(zi = k ) + bi ,   E [bi ] = 0.
                                               k=1

   We further assume that the slope parameters also depend on belief type, so that

                                      K
                          1i =             k p(zi = k ) + i ,         E[i xi ] = 0, E[i ] = 0.
                                     k=1

Though p is not observed, we can estimate these latent class probabilities if additional data on
an individual's beliefs are available. In addition to traditional economic questions on income and
education, the U.S. National Longitudinal Survey asks other qualitative questions on beliefs and
values. There are in fact hundreds of categorical variables available in the NLSYM survey waves
that were not used in Card (1995). Therefore, in the first step, we estimate a model that allows the
probabilities of class membership to vary by groups. In a second step we use the LDA-E posterior
probabilities of membership in each belief type to generate an individual specific intercept, and
interact type membership with the slope parameters. In a third step, returns to education are
estimated by least squares regression of

                                    K                       K
                             yi =           ^(zi = k ) +
                                          k p                      ^(zi = k )xi + 2 wi +
                                                                 k p                       i           (6)
                                    k=1                    k=1

where   i   = i xi + bi + ei . If the belief type assignment provides a good proxy for the omitted variable
ai , then the bias on 1i should be reduced, and will be eliminated entirely if the belief type captures
any relationship that ai has with xi , or with yi .
   To illustrate, we use 2,830 of the original 3,010 men from Card (1995). We include (i) 11 variables
from the 1976 survey wave that are part of the Rotter questionnaire, a locus of control psychological
questionnaire that determined whether or not people believe individual choices determine outcomes
or if external factors were to blame. We also include (ii) an additional 3 variables from the 1966
survey, on attitudes about high school and high school courses. It would be difficult to include all
of these variables directly in the regression to measure heterogeneous effects without some method
of clustering individuals, since the dimensionality of 14 categorical variables with many different
response categories is high. LDA-E overcomes this problem since the information in the categorical


                                                                20
variables for an individual is now summarized into interpretable belief type probabilities, which are
low in dimension.
        We estimate an LDA-E model with K = 3, where individuals are grouped by the four possible
combinations of having a library card interacted with having a single mother at age 14. Table 1
contains the results for a replication of Card (1995)'s most basic OLS specification in column (1),
as well as the results from estimating Equation 4 in column (2). The mean return to education
does not change materially when an individual's belief type is added as a control, which suggests
that the estimated belief types are not affecting the bias of the OLS coefficient in this setting. This
is similar to what is found in Card (1995), where the OLS coefficient changes little as additional
controls are added beyond the basic specification.
        However, there is meaningful heterogeneity in returns to education across belief types. The
expected return to education for an individual with belief type 1 is 5.7%, while the return of an
                                                                                         j
individual with belief type 2 is 7.9%. To interpret these differences, we examine k, . In Figure
                                        j
5, we plot the posterior means of k, for the three questions j that vary the most between belief
                                                                                                j
type 1 and belief type 2, as measured by the Rao distance (see Rao (1945)), between 1, and
    j
2, . Responses 1 and 2 to the survey questions are responses labelled `most internal' and indicate
the individual believes success is a matter of internal drive, persistence, and leadership ability.
Responses 3 and 4 are labelled `most external', and correspond to individuals believing success is
a matter of luck, status, or other factors outside your control. Individuals assigned to type 1, who
have higher mean income but lower returns to education, have absorbed information that has caused
them to believe that work ethic and inherent ability leads to success with a higher probability than
individuals assigned to type 2. This result is intuitive; individuals who believe that work ethic
is important are more likely to make other choices that result in their success with or without a
formal education, and so have a lower return to education than individuals who believe external
factors determine their success.
        The information that an individual absorbs and incorporates into their beliefs can be an impor-
tant determinant of their economic choices and outcomes. Examining the returns to education for
individuals surveyed in the NLSYM, we do not find evidence that controlling for an individual's
belief type reduces bias in the estimate of the mean return to education. However, we do find that
belief types correspond to heterogeneous returns to education in a very intuitive way. Analyzing
heterogeneity in qualitative beliefs can lead to important insights on the variation in the impact of
education on economic outcomes.


6       Conclusion

This paper proposes a Bayesian hierarchical latent class approach to modeling categorical survey
responses. We motivate the statistical model using an economic model of information acquisition.
We illustrate using two applications how the estimated belief types can be useful in economic
analysis.



                                                    21
   For clarity and focus, the paper uses language, motivation, and applications appropriate for
categorical survey data on beliefs. However, there are many other examples of categorical survey
data that are used by economists and social scientists. For example, indicators of ownership of
assets and housing characteristics from, for example, the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS)
and Living Standard Measurement Surveys (LSMS) are often the only source of data from which
to build social and economic indicators to guide policies. The economic structural model used to
derive and interpret LDA-E for qualitative expectations data can be modified appropriately for
other types of economic categorical data.
   While traditional face-to-face and telephone surveys have declined, do-it-yourself web-based
surveys are becoming more popular. As Callegaro and Yang (2018) noted, Survey Monkey alone
generates 90 million surveys per month worldwide. One can expect more data of this type to be
available as surveys can now be easily conducted through the internet and mobile phones. LDA-
E can be useful for interpreting and characterizing heterogeneity in such data. Given the close
relation of LDA-E to the extensive computer science and statistics literature on mixed membership
models, a variety of extensions are possible, including more complex forms of dynamics as in Fox
and Jordan (2013), or integrating latent variable estimates in more complex causal analyses as
suggested in Wang and Blei (2018).




                                               22
 Table 1: Returns to Education Estimates


                    Dependent variable:
               LWAGE76             LWAGE76
                    (1)                  (2)
                                               
BLACK          -0.187              -0.182
                 (0.018)             (0.018)
                                           
EXP76           0.081               0.079
                 (0.007)             (0.008)
                                           
EXP762         -0.216              -0.208
                 (0.034)             (0.038)
                                           
SMSA76R         0.168               0.167
                 (0.016)             (0.016)
                                           
REG76R         -0.125              -0.127
                 (0.016)             (0.016)
                                           
ED76           0.072                0.074
                 (0.004)             (0.004)
                                           
Z1                                    0.24
                                     (0.114)
Z2                                   -0.017
                                     (0.106)
                                            
ED76:Z1                            -0.0165
                                     (0.009)
ED76:Z2                              0.0053
                                     (0.008)
Observations       2,830                2,830
 2
R                  0.282                0.284
                                        
Note:             p<0.1;      p<0.05;      p<0.01




                     23
          Figure 2: Density of Beta(, ) Distribution

          4
                                               =0.7
                                               =1
                                               =10

          3
Density




          2




          1




          0
              0.00   0.25      0.50     0.75          1.00
                              Value




                             24
                      Figure 3: LDA-DE Indices for Michigan Consumer Survey Data


        0.75
                                                                                          variable
value




        0.50
                                                                                              index_1

        0.25                                                                                  ics


        0.00
               1980              1990             2000              2010           2020
                                               dates

                                  (a) Sentiment corresponding to optimism

        1.25

        1.00
                                                                                          variable
value




        0.75
                                                                                              index_4
        0.50                                                                                  epu

        0.25

               1980                1990                  2000               2010
                                               dates

                                 (b) Sentiment corresponding to pessimism


        0.6
                                                                                          variable
value




        0.4
                                                                                              index_3

        0.2                                                                                   unemp


        0.0
               1980                1990                  2000              2010
                                              dates

                              (c) Sentiment corresponding to recession recovery




                                                       25
                                                                                                            j
                        Figure 4: Expectation Types in Michigan Data, k,
              0.6




                                                                       0.4
              0.4
                                               Class                                                                        Class
Probability




                                                         Probability
                                                   K1                                                                           K1
                                                   K2                                                                           K2
                                                   K3                                                                           K3
              0.2                                                      0.2
                                                   K4                                                                           K4




              0.0                                                      0.0

                    1   2              3   4                                     1       2              3           4
                            Response                                                         Response

(a) Better (1) or worse off (3) financially than (b) Will you be better (1) or worse (3) finan-
a year ago?                                      cially a year from now?
                                                                       0.8



              0.6
                                                                       0.6
                                               Class                                                                        Class
Probability




                                                         Probability




                                                   K1                                                                           K1
              0.4
                                                   K2                  0.4                                                      K2
                                                   K3                                                                           K3
                                                   K4                                                                           K4
              0.2                                                      0.2




              0.0                                                      0.0

                    1   2              3   4                                 1       2       3      4           5       6
                            Response                                                         Response

(c) Better (1) or worse (3) business conditions (d) Business conditions good (1) or bad (5) in
than a year ago?                                next 12 months?

                                                                       0.6
              0.8




              0.6
                                               Class                   0.4                                                  Class
Probability




                                                         Probability




                                                   K1                                                                           K1
                                                   K2                                                                           K2
              0.4
                                                   K3                                                                           K3
                                                   K4                  0.2                                                      K4

              0.2




              0.0                                                      0.0

                    1   2              3   4                                     1       2              3           4
                            Response                                                         Response

(e) Good (1) or bad time (3) to buy household (f) Expect more (1) or less (3) unemployment
items?                                        in the next year?




                                                        26
                                                                                                              j
                                        Figure 5: Belief Types in NLSYM Data, k,

              0.8                                                                        0.8




              0.6                                                                        0.6
                                                               Class
                                                                                                                                    Class
Probability




                                                                           Probability
                                                                     K1
                                                                                                                                        K1
              0.4                                                    K2                  0.4
                                                                                                                                        K2
                                                                     K3
                                                                                                                                        K3

              0.2
                                                                                         0.2



              0.0
                                                                                         0.0
                    1   2                        3         4
                                                                                                1         2              3   4
                            Response
                                                                                                              Response
(a) Rotter G: Getting what I want has to do with
luck?                                                                                    (b) Rotter H: Leadership determined by ability?

                                                 0.5



                                                 0.4



                                                 0.3
                                                                                                          Class
                                   Probability




                                                                                                                  K1
                                                                                                                  K2
                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                  K3



                                                 0.1



                                                 0.0

                                                       1       2                         3          4
                                                                   Response

                                  (c) Rotter K: What happens to me is in my control,
                                  or not?




                                                                          27
References
Airoldi, E., D. Blei, E. Erosheva, and S. Feinberg (eds.) (2015): Handbook of MIxed
  Membership Models and Their Applications, Chapman and Hall/CRC Handbooks of Modern
  Statistical Methods. CRC Press.
Airoldi, E., D. Blei, S. Fienberg, and E. Xing (2008): "Mixed Membership Stochastic
  Blockmodels," Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9, 1981­2014.
Airoldi, E. M., S. E. Fienberg, C. Joutard, and T. M. Love (2006): "Discovering latent
  patterns with hierarchical Bayesian mixed-membership models and the issue of model choice,"
  in In Data Mining Patterns: New Methods and Applications. Citeseer.
Anandkumar, A., D. P. Foster, D. J. Hsu, S. M. Kakade, and Y.-K. Liu (2012): "A Spec-
 tral Algorithm for Latent Dirichlet Allocation," in Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, pp. 917­925.
Bandiera, O., S. Hansen, A. Prat, and R. Sadun (2020): "CEO Behavior and Firm Perfor-
 mance," Journal of Political Economy, 128:4, 1325­1369.
Barto s, V., M. Bauer, J. Chytilova ´ , and F. Mate jka (2016): "Attention discrimination:
 Theory and field experiments with monitoring information acquisition," American Economic
 Review, 106(6), 1437­75.
Bhadury, A., J. Chen, J. Zhu, and S. Liu (2016): "Scaling Up Dynamic Topic Models," in
 Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web, pp. 381­390.
Blei, D., A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan (2003): "Latent Dirichlet Allocation," Journal of Machine
 Learning Research, 3, 993­1022.
Blei, D. M., A. Kucukelbir, and J. D. McAuliffe (2017): "Variational Inference: A Review
 for Statisticians," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 112(518), 859­877.
Blei, D. M., and J. D. Lafferty (2006): "Dynamic Topic Models," in Proceedings of the 23rd
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 113­120.
Bonhomme, S., T. Lamadon, and E. Manresa (2017): "Discretizing Unobserved Heterogene-
 ity," Discussion paper, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics no. 2019-16.
Bradley, J. R., S. H. Holan, and C. K. Wikle (2018): "Computationally Efficient Multi-
 variate Spatio-Temporal Models for High-Dimensional Count-Valued Data," Bayesian Analysis,
 13(1), 253­310.
Branch, W. A. (2004): "The theory of rationally heterogeneous expectations: evidence from
 survey data on inflation expectations," The Economic Journal, 114(497), 592­621.
Buntine, W. (2002): "Variational Extensions to EM and Multinomial PCA," in Machine Learning:
 ECML: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2430. Springer, Berlin.
Buntine, W., and A. Jakulin (2012):            "Applying Discrete PCA in Data Analysis,"
 arXiv:1207.4124.
Callegaro, M., and Y. Yang (2018): "The Role of Surveys in the Era of Big Data," in The
 Palgrace Handbook of Survey Research, pp. 175­192. Palgrave Macmillan.
Canny, J. (2004): "GaP: A Factor Model for Discrete Data," in Proceedings of the 27th Annual
 International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
 pp. 122­129.


                                             28
Caplin, A., and M. Dean (2015): "Revealed preference, rational inattention, and costly infor-
 mation acquisition," American Economic Review, 105(7), 2183­2203.
Card, D. (1995): "Using geographic variation in college proximity to estimate the return to
 schooling," in Aspects of Labor Market Behavior: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp, pp.
 201­222.
Carlson, J. A., and M. Parkin (1975): "Inflation expectations," Economica, 42(166), 123­138.
Carroll, C. D. (2003): "Macroeconomic expectations of households and professional forecasters,"
 the Quarterly Journal of economics, 118(1), 269­298.
Catania, L., and R. D. Mari (2020): "Hierarchical Markov Switching Models for Multivariate
 Integer-Valued Time Series," Journal of Econometrics, Forthcoming.
Davidson, R. G., S. Rutstein, J. Kiersten, S. Eldow, A. Wagstaff, and A. Amouzou
 (2007): "Socio-Economic Differences in Health, Nutrition, and Population Within Developing
 Countries," HNP, The World Bank.
Ding, C., T. Li, and W. Peng (2006): "Nonnegative Matrix Factorization and Probabilistic
  Latent Semantic Indexing: Equivalence, Chi-Square Statistic, and a Hybrid Method," in AAAI
  Proceedings of the 21st National Confererence on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 342­347, Boston,
  Massachusetts.
Dominitz, J., and C. F. Manski (2004): "How Should We Measure Consumer Confidence?,"
 The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(2), 51­66.
Erosheva, E. (2002): "Grade of Membership and Latent Structures with Application to Disability
 Survey Data," Ph.D Thesis, Department of Statistics, Carneige Mellon University.
Erosheva, E., S. Fienberg, and J. Lafferty (2004): "Mixed-membership models of scientific
 publications," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 101, 5220­5227.
Erosheva, E. A., S. E. Fienberg, and C. Joutard (2007): "Describing Disability Through
 Individual-Level Mixture Models for Multivariate Binary Data," The Annals of Applied Statistics,
 1(2), 502­537.
Falush, D., M. Stephens, and J. Pritchard (2003): "Inference of Population Structure Using
  Multilocus Genotype Data: Linked Loci and Correlated Allele Frequencies," Genetics, 164:4,
  1567­1587.
Filmer, D., and L. Pritchett (2001a): "Estimating Wealth Effects Without Expenditure Data-
  Or Tears: An Application to Educational Enrollments in States of India," Demography, 38:1,
  115­132.
Filmer, D., and L. H. Pritchett (2001b): "Estimating Wealth Effects Without Expenditure
  Data - or Tears," Demography, 38(1), 115­132.
Fox, E. B., and M. I. Jordan (2013): "Mixed membership models for time series," arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1309.3533.
Gillis, N. (2014): "The Why and How of Nonnegative Matrix Factorization," in Regularization,
 Optimization, Kernels, and Support Vector Machines: Learning and Pattern Recognition Series,
 pp. 257­291. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Goodman, L. (1974): "Exploratory Latent Structure Analysis Using Both Identifiable and Uniden-
 tifiable Models," Biometrika, 61(2), 215­231.



                                               29
         (1979): "On the Estimation of Parameters in Latent Structure Analysis," Psychometrika,
  44(1), 123­128.
Griffiths, T., and M. Steyvers (2007): "Topics in Semantic Representation," Pyschological
 Review, 114(2), 211­244.
Gross, J. H., and D. Manrique-Vallier (2014): "A Mixed Membership Approach to Political
 Ideology," in Handbook of Mixed Membership Models and its Applications, pp. 119­141. Chapman
 and Hall/CRC.
Hansen, S., M. McMahon, and A. Prat (2018): "Transparency and Deliberation within the
 FOMC: A Computational Linguistics Approach," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2), 801­
 870.
Hoffmann, T. (1999): "Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis," Proceedings of the 15th Annual
 Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 289­296.
Hofmann, T. (2001): "Unsupervised Learning by Probabilistic Latent Semantic Analysis," Ma-
 chine Learning, 42, 177­196.
Hoyer, P. (2004): "Nonnegative Matrix Factorization with Sparseness Constraints," Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 5, 1457­1469.
Huang, K., N. Sidiropoulous, and A. Swami (2014): "Non-negative Matrix Factorization Re-
 visited: Uniqueness and Algorithm for Symmetric Decomposition," IEEE Transations of Signal
 Processing, 62, 211­224.
Jasra, A., C. C. Holmes, and D. Stephens (2005): "Markov Chain Monte Carlo Methods and
  the Label Switching Problem in Bayesian Mixture Modeling," Statistical Science, 20, 50­67.
Kasahara, H., and K. Shimotsu (2009): "Nonparametric Identification of Finite Mixture Models
 of Dynamic Discrete Choices," Econometrica, 77(1), 135­175.
Ke, S., J. Montiel-Olea, and J. Nesbitt (2019): "A Robust Machine Learning Algorithm for
 Text Analysis," Working paper.
Kolenikov, S., and G. Angeles (2009): "Socioeconomic Status Measurement With Discrete
 Proxy Variables: Is Principal Component Analysis A Reliable Answer?," Review of Income and
 Wealth, 55(1), 128­165.
Lazarsfeld, P. (1950): "The Logical and Mathematical Foundation of Latent Structure Analy-
  sis," in Measurement and Prediction, vol. 14, pp. 362­412.
Linderman, B. S. W., M. J. Johnson, and R. P. Adams (2015): "Dependent Multinomial
  Models Made Easy: Stick Breaking with the Polya-Gamma Augmentation," arXiv:1506.05843.
Lovaton, D., A. McCarthy, P. Kirdruang, U. Sharma, and D. Gondwe (2014): "Water,
  Walls, and Bicycles: Wealth Index Composition Using Census Microdata," Minnesota Population
  Center Working Paper 2014-7.
Manski, C. F. (2004): "Measuring Expectations," Econometrica, 72(5), 1329­1376.
Masyn, K. (2013): "Latent Class Analysis and Finite Mixture Modeling," in The Oxford Handbook
 of Quantitative Methods, pp. 551­609.
McHugh, R. (1956): "Efficient Estimation and Local Identification in Latent Class Analysis,"
 Psychometrika, 21(4), 331­347.



                                              30
Moench, E., S. Ng, and S. Potter (2013): "Dynamic Hierarchical Factor Models," Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 95(5), 1811­1817, Columbia University, mimeo.
Moussaoui, S., D. Brie, and J. Idier (2005): "Non-Negative Source Separation: Range of
 Admissible Solutions and Conditions for Uniqueness of the Solution," Proceedings of IEEE In-
 ternational Conference on Acoustic, Speech, and Signal Processing.
Ng, S. (2015): "Constructing Common Factors from Continuous and Categorical Data," Econo-
 metric Reviews, 34(6-10), 1141­1171.
Pesaran, M. H. (1985): "Formation of inflation expectations in British manufacturing industries,"
 The Economic Journal, 95(380), 948­975.
Pesaran, M. H., and M. Weale (2006): "Survey expectations," Handbook of economic forecast-
 ing, 1, 715­776.
Pritchard, J., M. Stephens, and P. Donnelly (2000): "Inference of Population Structure
 Using Multilocus Genotype Data," Genetics, 155, 945­959.
Rao, C. R. (1945): "Information and the Accuracy Attainable in the Estimation of Statistical
 Parameters," in Breakthroughs in Statistics, pp. 235­247. Springer.
Ruiz, F. J., S. Athey, D. M. Blei, et al. (2020): "Shopper: A probabilistic model of consumer
 choice with substitutes and complements," Annals of Applied Statistics, 14(1), 1­27.
Shiller, R. J., F. Kon-Ya, and Y. Tsutsui (1996): "Why did the Nikkei crash? Expanding
  the scope of expectations data collection," The Review of Economics and Statistics, pp. 156­164.
Vyas, S., and L. Kumaranayake (2006): "Constructing Socio-Economic Status Indices: How
 to use Principal Components," Health and Policy Planning, 21(6), 459­468.
Wang, Y., and D. M. Blei (2018):           "The blessings of multiple causes," arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1805.06826.
Welling, M., and Y. W. Teh (2011): "Bayesian Learning via Stochastic Gradient Langevin
 Dynamics," in Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 681­688.
Wittenberg, M., and M. Leibbrandt (2017): "Measuring Inequality By Asset Indices: A
 General Approach with Application to South Africa," Review of Income and Wealth, 63:4, 706­
 730.
Woodbury, M., J. Clive, and A. G. Jr. (1978): "Mathematical Typology: A Grade of Mem-
 bership Technique for Obtaining Disease Definition," Computers and Biomedical Research, 11,
 277­298.




                                               31
