                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         LAUNCHING WITH A PARACHUTE:
                THE GIG ECONOMY AND NEW BUSINESS FORMATION

                                        John M. Barrios
                                       Yael V. Hochberg
                                           Hanyi Yi

                                      Working Paper 27183
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27183


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We thank Rustam Abuzov, Jonathan Bonham, Bruce Carlin, Florian Ederer, Alex Frankel, Jorge
Guzman, Danielle Li, Hong Luo, Song Ma, Gustav Martinsson, David Robinson, Scott Stern,
Joachim Tag, Toni Whited, and workshop participants at Yale University, MIT, Rice University,
and the KWC Conference on Entrepreneurial Finance for helpful conversations, comments and
suggestions. Esther Bailey and Yupeng Liu provided excellent research assistance. We are
grateful to the Startup Cartography Project and Jorge Guzman for the provision of data used in
this project. All errors are our own. Barrios gratefully acknowledges the support of the Stigler
Center and the Centel Foundation/Robert P. Reuss Fund at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. Corresponding Author: Yael Hochberg (hochberg@rice.edu), Rice
University, 6100 Main St. MS-531, Houston, TX 77005. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by John M. Barrios, Yael V. Hochberg, and Hanyi Yi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Launching with a Parachute: The Gig Economy and New Business Formation
John M. Barrios, Yael V. Hochberg, and Hanyi Yi
NBER Working Paper No. 27183
May 2020
JEL No. G39,J01,L26,O3

                                          ABSTRACT

The introduction of the gig economy creates opportunities for would-be entrepreneurs to
supplement their income in downside states of the world and provides insurance in the form of an
income fallback in the event of failure. We present a conceptual framework supporting the notion
that the gig economy may serve as an income supplement and as insurance against
entrepreneurial-related income volatility, and utilize the arrival of the on-demand, platform-
enabled gig economy in the form of the staggered rollout of ridehailing in U.S. cities to examine
the effect of the arrival of the gig economy on new business formation. The introduction of gig
opportunities is associated with an increase of ~5% in the number of new business registrations in
the local area, and a correspondingly-sized increase in small business lending to newly registered
businesses. Internet searches for entrepreneurship-related keywords increase ~7%, lending further
credence to the predictions of our conceptual framework. Both the income supplement and
insurance channels are empirically supported: the increase in entry is larger in regions with lower
average income and higher credit constraints, as well as in locations with higher ex-ante
economic uncertainty regarding future wage levels and wage growth.

John M. Barrios                                  Hanyi Yi
The University of Chicago                        Rice University
Booth School of Business                         6100 Main Street
5807 S Woodlawn Ave                              Houston, TX 77005
Chicago, IL 60637                                hy25@rice.edu
john.barrios@chicagobooth.edu

Yael V. Hochberg
Jones Graduate School of Business
Rice University
6100 Main Street, MS-531
McNair Hall Room 331
Houston, TX 77005
and Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and also NBER
hochberg@rice.edu
                                      1. INTRODUCTION

   As far back as Knight (1921), scholars have argued that bearing risk is one of the essential

characteristics of entrepreneurship. Because the capital markets provide too little capital to

entrepreneurs as a result of moral hazard and adverse selection problems (e.g., LeRoy and Singell

1987), entrepreneurs must finance themselves and bear the risk of failure. Empirical research on

the relationships between wealth constraints and entrepreneurship (Jensen et al. 2014), job

protection and entrepreneurial activity (Gottlieb et al. 2018), and unemployment insurance and

new business formation (Hombert et al. 2020) in countries outside the U.S. are consistent with this

view. Under a Knightian perspective, the relaxation of the personal liquidity constraint through the

provision of a channel for income supplement and/or through the provision of employment

fallbacks that serve as insurance for failed entrepreneurs should encourage additional

entrepreneurial entry. In this paper, we argue that the arrival of the platform-enabled, on-demand

gig economy, with its flexible work hours and low entry barriers, provides just such a supplement

to entrepreneurial income as well as insurance against entrepreneurial-related income volatility,

and empirically explore the effect of its arrival on the emergence of new entrepreneurial ventures.

   We focus on incorporated business starts, as the factors that drive entry into entrepreneurship

likely differ across the various types of entrepreneurship. While the income opportunities option

provided by the gig economy may entice risk-bearing would-be entrepreneurs to launch new

companies, at the same time, for individuals engaged in ad hoc self-employment, the gig economy

offers the potential for a steadier "employment"-like opportunity. Though technically every gig

economy worker is, in fact, self-employed, many of these individuals self-classify as "working for

Uber (Lyft)" and do not report themselves as self-employed in self-reported survey measures.

Burtch et al. (2018) utilize this fact to show that with the entry of the gig economy, self-reported

self-employment from the Current Population Survey--primarily unincorporated self-

employment--goes down, consistent with the notion of some self-employed workers transitioning

to working in the gig economy (and consequently classifying themselves as "working for Uber (or

                                                   1
Lyft)" rather than being self-employed). The effect of the availability of gig economy opportunities

on new (incorporated) business launches--which differ considerably from low-quality self-

employment, which is the source of the impacts in Burtch et al. (2018)--remains, however,

unexplored.

   We begin by presenting a conceptual framework to illustrate the likely effects of the arrival of

the on-demand platform-driven gig economy on (pecuniary) new business launch, motivated by

the Knight (1921) view that an individual's decision to enter entrepreneurship versus full-time

wage-employment is determined by the relative returns offered by the two choices. The

framework, which models new business launches as a function of the difference in average wages

earned under entry versus full-time employment as well as the volatility of entrepreneurial income

in the local region, suggests an income supplement effect and an insurance effect that both serve

to increase entrepreneurial entry when gig economy earning opportunities exist. Importantly, the

conceptual framework does not imply that these additional entering entrepreneurs will be gig

economy workers. Rather, the gig economy provides insurance and peace of mind in knowing that

it is there, if needed, and as such, affects expectations in the entry decision.

   We then turn to examine these predictions empirically. To do this, we utilize a relatively novel

dataset of actual new business registrations in a local region, provided by the Startup Cartography

Project (SCP) (http://www.startupcartography.com). Because a new company must not only

incorporate in a state jurisdiction (which may not be the state they operate in), but also register

there to do business with their local Secretary of State (where the business actually operates), and

because such registrations provide an actual operating address for the new company, utilizing

business registration data allows us to observe the full universe of newly incorporated businesses.

The SCP dataset provides us with counts, by zip-code and quarter, of all new for-profit businesses,

allowing us to observe entrepreneurial entry at the micro-level. Utilizing incorporated business

registrations rather than measures of "self-employment" both allows us to capture the type of

entrepreneurial entry we are most interested in (businesses who have taken a form required for

possible growth) as well as avoid the concern that any increase in measures of "self-employment"


                                                     2
may simply be capturing gig economy workers, who by definition are contractors and therefore

self-employed. Since, according to sources at Uber, individual drivers on ridehailing platforms in

the U.S. rarely, if ever, incorporate, 1 the newly registered incorporated businesses (and associated

SBA loans) should not be reflecting drivers incorporating to drive for ridehailing companies as

individuals.

    We utilize the arrival of ridehailing platforms as a proxy for the launch of the gig economy

writ large. 2 Ridehailing platforms such as Uber and Lyft allow drivers, once approved, to use their

own or rented cars to offer rides whenever they choose. There are no minimum hour requirements

and only modest constraints on maximum hours. Thus, drivers can work whenever they want to.

Moreover, the arrival of these platforms often heralds the arrival of other gig economy platforms

such as food delivery, errand running, or package delivery.

    A natural concern is that our proxy for gig economy arrival--ridehailing platforms--

specifically entered into "entrepreneurial" cities. This does not appear to be the case. Using a

hazard model approach, we document that the rollout timing of ridehailing platforms into cities is,

as expected, predicted by per-capita income, population size, and unemployment levels. It does

not, however, appear to be predicted by the levels of entrepreneurial activity within a city. Thus,

the identifying assumption that the treatment is unrelated to the outcome at baseline appears to

hold.

    We thus empirically use the arrival of UberX and Lyft to proxy for the appearance of gig

economy opportunities, exploiting their staggered entry dates into U.S. cities. We utilize a

difference-in-differences (D.D.) specification with fixed effects for location and time (quarter-

year) as well as location-specific linear trends. Our D.D. specification allows us to capture

macroeconomic changes, such as the Great Recession, technological improvements, as well as



1
  This fact is a primary consideration in much of the discussion over how such drivers should be classified--as
contractors or as employees. If drivers tended to incorporate, the contractual relationship assumed between the driver-
provider and the platform would be clear (contractor).
2
  While task-based employment existed well before the launch of Uber and Lyft, the arrival of internet ridehailing
platforms is generally viewed as an inflection point in the development of the gig economy.


                                                             3
city-specific conditions such as city topology, industry mix, and so forth. The location-specific

time trend captures location-specific pre-trends in our outcome variables that existed prior to the

arrival of ridehailing. To capture potential time-and-city varying confounders, such as population

changes or increases in employment or income, we further control for population levels and per

capita income. Our results are robust to the inclusion of a variety of additional controls as well as

location-specific quadratic trends and hold for different pre-period lengths as well as when we

restrict the sample solely to ever-treated locations. We find an increase of 4-6% in new business

registrations following the arrival of the gig economy in a city. The parallel trends observed in the

data further suggest that we are not simply picking up differential trends in new business formation

in the treated cities in the pre-period.

    Presumably, if the increase in new business launches is driven by the existence of gig economy

income fallbacks, then the intensity of ridehailing adoption in a city should be related to the

documented increase in our outcome variables. We proxy for the strength of ridehailing take-up in

a city using the intensity of Google searches for terms such as "Uber" and "Lyft" in the treatment

cities, a proxy that has been shown by past literature (e.g., Cramer and Krueger, 2016) to correlate

strongly with driver adoption of the platforms. When we substitute the treatment indicator for post-

gig economy-city with our ridehailing adoption intensity proxy for the city, we obtain similar

results to those in our main specifications, with entrepreneurial entry increasing in the intensity of

adoption of gig opportunities in the city.

    We next proceed to examine the financing channel for new businesses. As documented by

Guzmand and Stern (2019), the vast majority of new business launches are "traditional business

entrepreneurship" (TBE) of the type described by Knight (1921). 3 In contrast to innovation-driven

entrepreneurship (IDE) ventures, which are typically financed via equity by angel and venture



3
  In contrast, the high-growth, innovation-driven entrepreneurial activity that is typically financed by venture
capitalists conforms more closely to the non-constraint view of Schumpeter. Schumpeter (1934, 1942) argues that the
functions of the entrepreneur and the capitalist are separate. The entrepreneur plays the role of identifying potential
arbitrage opportunities in the economy, while the part of modern capital markets is to find a capitalist willing to bear
the risk for the entrepreneur.


                                                             4
capital investors who bear the primary risk associated with the venture, TBE ventures are typically

financed through entrepreneur wealth or through some form of debt, particularly small business

lending. Thus, we focus our attention on SBA loans. We match businesses registered in the prior

6 (or 12) months to data on SBA loans made under the SBA's 7(a) programs. Consistent with our

findings of a 4-6% increase in realized business registrations, we document a corresponding

increase of similar magnitude in small business lending to newly registered businesses after the

arrival of the gig economy.

   So far, the measures we have employed measure realized entrepreneurial activity. We next

proceed to explore whether the presence of gig economy income opportunities can also be seen in

indicators of interest in the possibility of launching a business. We measure entrepreneurial

interest (expression of interest in entrepreneurship) using google searches for terms related to

entrepreneurship, such as "how to start a business" or "how to incorporate." Consistent with our

prior findings, the D.D. specification documents an approximate 7-12% increase in entrepreneurial

interest surrounding the arrival of gig economy income opportunities in a city.

   Our conceptual framework outlines two potential mechanisms that could drive such increases

in entrepreneurial entry: an income supplement effect and an insurance effect. To test for evidence

consistent with these channels, we interact our post-ridesharing variable with two sets of measures:

(i) income levels and (ii) a proxy for the uncertainty of economic conditions. The former can

provide insight on the income supplement channel, while the second can provide insight regarding

the insurance channel: if the associations we document are driven by gig economy income

opportunities providing insurance against entrepreneurial-related income volatility, this insurance

should be more valuable in locations where the uncertainty of economic conditions is higher ex-

ante. We use the city-specific volatility of wage growth to proxy for the degree of economic

uncertainty present in the location.

   Consistent with the income supplement channel, we find that the documented patterns of

increased entrepreneurial entry are larger in cities with lower income levels. Consistent with the

notion of an insurance mechanism, we find that the effects of the arrival of the gig economy on


                                                   5
entrepreneurial entry are more pronounced in locations where uncertainty was higher ex-ante.

Thus, the empirical patterns in the data provide support for both mechanisms, consistent with the

conceptual framework.

   We go on to show that the pattern of where in the city these businesses open (geographic HHI)

does not change post-gig economy arrival, suggesting that we are not merely picking up an increase

in business opportunities due to the opening of new neighborhoods to transportation via

ridehailing. The mix of new business types (traditional business versus innovation-driven

business) also does not appear to be significantly altered by the arrival of the gig economy.

Furthermore, while our D.D. specification with city-specific linear trends is designed to control

for growth patterns in the city explicitly, we provide further evidence that the effect we document

is not simply a manifestation of differential overall economic growth patterns. Specifically, we

show that average weekly wages do not increase following the arrival of the gig economy, while

our entrepreneurial activity measures do.

   Finally, we round out our analysis by exploring heterogeneity in our outcomes across city

characteristics along education levels, race, and credit constraints. We find that our effects are

largest in areas with lower education levels, higher fractions of Hispanic population, lower

fractions of African-American population. When we look at credit constraints at the city level, we

find a U-shaped pattern suggesting the effects are larger both when the population of a location is

extremely credit-constrained and in locations where they face much lower constraints. This is

consistent on the supply side with a loosening of the credit constraint and with increases in demand

in less constrained areas.

   Our study offers several contributions to the existing literature. First and foremost, our results

speak to a growing literature on the factors that drive entry into entrepreneurship. Recently, there

has been a great deal of concern regarding a decline in entrepreneurial entry and business

dynamism (e.g., Decker et al. 2014), given the importance of entrepreneurial activity for economic

growth (e.g., Haltiwanger et al., 2013). As noted by Manso (2011, 2016), tolerance for failure is a

key driver of entrepreneurial entry; here, the gig economy provides the safety net that makes


                                                   6
experimentation "safe" to explore. Our findings are consistent with those found in other contexts

and countries when liquidity or credit constraints are relaxed, job protection is extended, or income

fallbacks are provided: for example, Jensen et al. (2014) show that a Danish mortgage reform that

increases credit by $30K leads to an increase in entry, while Gottlieb et al. (2018) show that

extended job-protected maternity leave in Canada increases the likelihood of entry, Bellon et al.

(2019) show that personal wealth windfalls from fracking increase entry into self-employment,

and Hombert et al. (2020) show that provision of unemployment insurance to those entering into

entrepreneurship increases new business formation. More broadly, our paper relates to a growing

literature on entrepreneurial entry barriers, including personal wealth, government regulation, tax

policy, and banking systems (see e.g., Evans and Jovanovic, 1989; Gentry and Hubbard, 2000;

Hurst and Lusardi, 2004; Klapper et al., 2006; Cagetti and de Nardi, 2006; Aghion et al., 2007,

and many more).

   Our study further contributed to a growing literature on social and economic impacts of

digitization (see e.g., Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 2014), both for worse (see, for example, Barrios

et al. 2019; Hasan and Kumar, 2019) and for better. In this category, our study also contributes to

a growing literature exploring the effects of the gig economy. Most closely related to our study is

Burtch et al. (2018), who examine the effect of the gig economy on Kickstarter projects and self-

reported self-employment measures. Our findings of increased entry for incorporated businesses

stand in contrast to their findings suggesting a move from ad hoc unincorporated self-employment

to working for gig economy platforms.

   In this vein, our work is closely related to studies such as Koustas (2018), Fos et al. (2019),

and Jackson (2019) who demonstrate that the gig economy can serve as an income fallback in

down states of the world such as unemployment or job loss. For ridehailing specifically, our work

also related to studies such as Hall and Krueger (2018) and Chen et al. (2018), who explore the

importance of flexibility to RH drivers. Our findings suggest that there are not only benefits to

those who provide services for gig economy on-demand platforms, but also for those outside the




                                                   7
platforms, as the existence of such opportunities provide insurance against volatility from

entrepreneurial-related income.

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the gig economy and outlines

our conceptual framework. Section 3 describes our data and sample. Section 4 presents our

empirical results. Section 5 concludes.


               2. THE GIG ECONOMY AND CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK


2.1.   The Gig Economy


    The advent of the smartphone and the complementary technological advancement have

reshaped the commercial landscape, providing consumers new ways to access the retail

marketplace and providing workers with easy access to a new source of flexible work

opportunities. The collection of markets that match providers to consumers on a gig (or job) basis,

in support of on-demand commerce, has been coined "the gig economy." Companies such as Uber,

Lyft, DoorDash, and Task Rabbit are prime examples of companies in this category that have

arisen from such innovation.

   In the basic business model of the gig economy, gig workers serve as contractors to an on-

demand company, providing services to the company's clients (Donovan et al., 2016). Prospective

clients request services through an online platform or smartphone application that allows them to

search for providers or to specify jobs. Providers (i.e., gig workers) engaged by the on-demand

company then provide the requested services and are compensated for the jobs they perform.

   While specific business models vary across the companies that control such platforms, with

few exceptions, on-demand platform companies do not view their service providers as employees,

but rather as independent contractors that utilize the platforms to obtain referrals and communicate

with clients. In addition, many on-demand platform-companies offer providers some ability to

select or refuse jobs, set their hours and level of participation, and control other aspects of their

work. As a result, in some ways, the gig economy can be viewed as an expansion of traditional



                                                   8
freelance work (i.e., ad hoc self-employed workers who generate income through a series of jobs

and projects). Gig jobs, however, do differ from traditional freelance jobs in a number of ways.

The user interface and brand built by the tech-platform company attracts clients, eliminating or

reducing entry costs for providers (gig workers). These platforms may also attract potential service

providers that have a wider variety of demographic, skill, and career characteristics. Because gig

workers do not need to invest in establishing a company and marketing to a consumer base,

operating costs may be lower, and as a result, participation in the gig market is often more

transitory than the traditional freelancing market of old.

    The advent of app platforms such as Uber, Lyft, and others makes it easy for prospective

providers to engage in gig work. These low barriers to entry allow gig work to substitute for other

employment in down states of the world (Fos et al., 2019), or to provide supplemental income

opportunities.

2.2.    Ridehailing


    We utilize the advent of ridehailing (RH) platforms as the harbinger for the launch of the wider,

platform-based on-demand gig economy. Uber was the first ridehailing firm in the United States,

launching in San Francisco in May 2010, and was followed two years later by Lyft and Sidecar.

Ridehailing then expanded rapidly across the country. By the end of 2014, RH firms operated in

80% of U.S. cities with a population of 100,000 or more. Much of the spread in RH was driven by

the convenience for users, stemming from new technology easing the matching of riders and

drivers and enabling seamless payment through an app. RH firms' exemptions from (or willful

disregard for) taxi and livery restrictions allowed them to expand supply during periods of high

demand and adjust prices to encourage more riders and drivers to participate in the market. 4 This




4
 Many major ridehailing companies adjust pricing in real time to better match supply and demand, charging higher
"surge pricing" fares during periods with high demand.


                                                         9
has, in turn, engendered backlash from advocacy groups and policymakers concerned with the

effects of RH technology in their cities. 5

2.3.     Conceptual Framework


      To better understand the potential effects of gig employment on entrepreneurial activity, we

develop a simple conceptual framework. Our conceptual framework is rooted in the Knightian

view that an individual's decision to enter entrepreneurship versus full-time wage-employment is

determined by the relative returns offered by the two choices. Returns confer utility, and agents

choose the option that maximizes their expected utility (Lucas, 1978; Kihlstrom and Laffont, 1979;

Jovanovic, 1982). In our case, the whether an individual chooses to launch a new business is the

result of an income choice that considers two elements that are theoretically impacted by the

introduction of the gig economy and its associated income opportunities: entrepreneurial profit

(), and the volatility of entrepreneurial income in the area ( ). Importantly, the decision relies

on expected returns, and as such, the framework does not necessarily suggest that entrepreneurs

will engage in gig work, so much as the option value of gig work affects their ex-ante decision to

enter.

      For notational purposes, we define the number of new business launches in city  in period 

as , and the new gig-economy technology as . New business launches can then be defined

as:



                                         , () =   (),  ()




5
  In many ways, ridehailing has become the modern poster child for the classic battle between what are argued to be
outdated regulations, supported by rent-seeking incumbents, and the introduction of a welfare-enhancing technology.
Many new technologies face frictions that slow diffusion (Grubler, 1991). Parente and Prescott (1994) argue that one
such friction is resistance on the part of sectoral interests. Indeed, emphasizing barriers to technology adoption,
economic historians, such as Rosenberg and Birdzell (1986), argue that the reason why the West grew rich before the
rest of the world was that active resistance to technology adoption was weaker there. Most economic histories of
technological adoptions provide cases in which adoption was met with fierce resistance (Mokyr 1990).


                                                          10
   where   () is defined as the difference between the income one earns as an entrepreneur in

the new business and the income from a full-time wage job, for individuals in city  in period 

(both potentially a function of whether the gig economy is available), and  is the volatility in the

income from engaging in the entrepreneurial activity in city  in period . Studies on

entrepreneurship have shown that new firm founders tend to come from the local area and same

sector as the firm founded (Dahl and Sorenson, 2012; Guzman, 2019). Moreover, local conditions

have been found to explain a large portion of new business entries (Glaeser and Kerr 2009). Thus,

it is reasonable to think of the new business launch choice in terms of the current wage under full-

time employment and the expected profits as an independent entrepreneur in the entrepreneur's

current location.

   To examine the expected changes in entrepreneurial activity with respect to gig opportunities,

we can derive the first order conditions of new business registrations with respect to gig

opportunities:


                                  ( )                        
                                         =              +              .
                                                             



                                    
   It is straight forward to see that  
                                        is positive. We define   as:



                                             =  -  ,



where  is income from the entrepreneurial activity and  is the wage income that can be

obtained under fulltime employment. Thus, an increase in  or a decrease in  increases

  and in turn increases the likelihood of new business launches. Intuitively, every additional

increase in the difference between entrepreneurial income and fulltime employment income will

increase the likelihood of an individual registering a new business.



                                                  11
                    
    Moreover,          is also likely to be positive, as the increased income opportunities in the
                   

downside case of the entrepreneurial activity leads to a higher expected income under

entrepreneurial activity. Formally we can define   as a function of gig-economy opportunities

 as:



                                              () = () - () .



    From the above equation, it is not unreasonable to think that income from fulltime job

employment is unlikely to be substantially affected by the advent of the gig economy. For example,

a person working full time has limited hours to earn via gigs. As such, we can assume that

(=1) = (=0) . The income that one earns as an entrepreneur, however, should be more likely

to be affected by the existence of gig opportunities, as these may serve to supplement income

during slow times or in failure. Thus, the potential entrepreneur's income is expected to be higher

under gig economy opportunities than without ((=1) > (=0) ). As a result, the benefit from

entrepreneurial income is larger with gig economy opportunities than without (  ( = 1) >

  ( = 0)). 6
                   
    In contrast,   
                      , will be negative, as increased volatility in entrepreneurial income will increase

the risk of earning income as an entrepreneur and would lead to less new business registrations.

To see this, we can define  :
                                       
                              (  ()) = -(  -   )2 (  ())   .

As  increases, risk-averse potential entrepreneurs should be less willing to leave their current

full-time employment to launch a new firm. Yet, the flexibility associated with gig employment

should allow entrepreneurs to increase their time spent on gig-activities in response to an


6
  Alternatively, one could assume that both fulltime and entrepreneurial income might be positively affected by the
gig economy, but the entrepreneurial income is likely to be more affected--and we should also thus see an increase
in ridehailing activity leading to an increase in new business launches.


                                                          12
unexpected decrease in entrepreneurial income, thereby decreasing income volatility (Farrell and
                                               
Greig, 2016). We should thus expect,               to be negative. We can formally see this by defining
                                               

 (  ( = 1)) and limiting the potential entrepreneur's low outcomes to  > -. Thus, we can

examine the effects of the side hustle on the volatility of entrepreneurial income formally as:

       ( = 0)
                             
                      =  (  -   )2   ()  
                           -
                                                                        
                      >  (  -   )2   ()   +  (  -   )2   ( )  
                                                                       -

                      =    ( = 1)

    From this derivation, it is straight forward to see that    ( = 1) <    ( = 0).

The reduction in variance brought about by the advent of gig opportunities would then imply that
                          
the overall effect of      
                                     should be positive--at least to the extent that the flexible income

opportunities from the gig economy are large enough to reduce the overall variance of expected

entrepreneurial income. Thus, under this simple conceptual framework, the overall effect of

ridehailing on new business launches is likely to be positive. We go on to empirically explore these

hypothesized effects.


                                          3. DATA AND SAMPLE


    Our sample consists of all incorporated "places" 7 in the continental United States with

population greater than or equal to 10,000 in 2010. 8 Our full sample covers the period 2000 to



7
  We use incorporated places, rather than Census Designated Places (CDPs), because CDP annual population estimates
are not readily available, except by individual place download, whereas population data is available for incorporated
places for mass download through the census.
8
  Some places in our sample had lower populations than 10,000 during the sample period, most notably during the
period of 2001­2010. We impose the cutoff on population as measured in 2010. As an example, consider Hutto, Texas,
a suburb of the Austin-RoundRock metro area. In 2001, Hutto had a population of 3,030, the lowest in our sample.
By 2010, it had grown to over 14,000, mimicking the growth of the Austin metro area. As it has population above
10,000 in 2010, it is included in our sample. Our results are robust to permutations to this cutoff.


                                                           13
2016; all results are robust to employing shorter pre-RH sample windows. The sample stops in

2016 due to that being the last year of availability in the SCP data. Our list of incorporated places

is obtained from the Census Bureau and covers all self-governing cities, boroughs, towns, and

villages in the United States. 9 (For ease of interpretation, we interchangeably refer to these as

"cities" or "locations" throughout the text.) Our observations are measured at the quarterly level.

The full sample contains 201,212 quarterly observations on 2,959 "places" from 2000 to 2016,

among which 1,193 adopt RH prior to 2016. Figure 3 shows the diffusion of RH across the United

States, by cities and population. Diffusion of RH across U.S. cities began slowly, accelerating

rapidly after 2013. Diffusion by population follows a standard S-curve, consistent with general

historical patterns of new technology diffusion. 10

3.1.     Ridehailing Launch and Driver Enrollment Intensity


     Data on RH launch dates for each city are obtained directly from Uber and Lyft. 11 The

companies provided dates of service launch for each type of service launched: (i)

UberBlack/UberTaxi, which allows customers to hail a livery or taxi vehicle; (ii) UberX/Lyft,

which allow customers to hail regular cars driven by driver-partners; and (iii) UberPool/Lyft Line,

which allow customers to share a hailed vehicle with others. We focus on UberX/Lyft and

UberPool/Lyft Line, as these are the services that opened up gig economy opportunities to any

driver meeting minimal requirements. 12 We merge these dates with Census Bureau's incorporated

place directory in 2010.

     While data on driver enrollment and usage is not publicly available, other researchers have

shown a strong correlation between Google trends for searches for RH keywords and actual driver

uptake (Cramer and Krueger, 2016). To measure the intensity of RH adoption, we thus follow the


9
  https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/data/developers/understandingplace.pdf
10
   In the Online Appendix, we further demonstrate the robustness of our results to using shorter pre-sample periods.
11
   In this version, we use the exact cities indicated by Uber and Lyft, even if we suspect or believe that the launch
covered adjacent cities as well (e.g., San Francisco launched in 2010, and there is no separate launch date for San Jose
or Palo Alto). Since this means some places we include in our control may in fact be treated in later years in the sample
as service expands slowly out beyond original boundaries, we are biasing against finding an effect of treatment.
12
   In contrast, driving for Uber Black or Uber Taxi required a chauffeur license and a black car or taxi medallion.


                                                             14
spirit of the work of Cramer and Krueger (2016) and Hall et al. (2018) and use Google searches

for the terms "Uber," "Lyft," and "rideshare." 13 The standard Google Trends index, which scales

results from 0 to 100 based on the most popular term entered, does not easily allow comparisons

across geographic areas and time periods. Instead, we use data from the Google Health Trends

API, which describes how often a specific search term is entered relative to the total search volume

on Google's search engine within a geographic region and time range, and returns the probability

of a search session that includes the corresponding term for that region and time period. This makes

comparisons across locations and time feasible. 14 We track trends for searches for these terms

using the Google Health Trends API for all Nielsen Designated Market Areas (DMAs) at monthly

frequency from January 2004 to December 2016. We aggregate the data to the quarter level and

match the DMAs to Census incorporated places using a crosswalk provided by Nielsen. Thus, in

specifications that use log search share as a proxy for driver enrollment intensity, we interpret the

coefficients in terms of percentage change in search share.

3.2.    Entrepreneurial Measures


     We utilize three main outcome measures for our analysis of entrepreneurial activity. The first

of these measures captures new business launches. The second provides a measure of financing

for the types of new businesses we would expect to see launched under the Knightian-inspired

conceptual model: small business loans to new businesses. Finally, we explore whether increased

interest in entrepreneurship is apparent more generally, utilizing internet search share for terms

related to starting a new business, a measure we term entrepreneurial interest.

3.2.1. New Business Launches




13
   We use the freebase identifiers for term "Uber" (/m/0gx0wlr) and "Lyft" (/m/0wdpqnj). Freebase identifiers denote
all searches that were classified to be about this topic.
14
   These probabilities are calculated on a uniformly distributed random sample of 10%-15% of Google web searches.
Mathematically, the numbers returned from the Google Trend API can be officially written as:
              [ , ] =  ( -  |   -  )  10
This probability is multiplied by 10 million in order to be more human readable.


                                                          15
    Our first outcome measure is the quantity of new business launches, measured using business

registrations by location and time period. For this purpose, we obtain data on new, for-profit

business registrations from the Startup Cartography Project (SCP, Guzman and Stern, 2019). The

SCP leverages business registration records, which are public records created when an individual

register's a new business as a corporation, LLC or partnership. Importantly, as noted by Guzman

and Stern (2019), while it is possible to found a new business without business registration (e.g.,

a sole proprietorship), the benefits of registration are substantial, and include limited liability,

various tax benefits, the ability to issue and trade ownership shares, and credibility with potential

customers. Furthermore, all corporations, partnerships, and limited liability companies must

register with a Secretary of State or equivalent in order to take advantage of these benefits: the act

of registering the firm triggers the legal creation of the company. As such, these records reflect the

population of incorporated businesses operating in a location (which may differ from their state of

incorporation) that take a form that is a practical prerequisite for growth.

    The SCP dataset provided to us covers 49 states plus the District of Columbia over the period

2001 to 2014, and 47 States plus the District of Columbia from 2015 to 2016. For each state, the

SCP data includes records on the complete population of firms satisfying one of the following two

conditions: (i) a for-profit firm physically located in the local jurisdiction, or (ii) a for-profit firm

whose jurisdiction is in Delaware but whose principal office address is in the local state.

    The SCP dataset provides a number of variables of interest to entrepreneurship researchers.

We focus here on two specifically: (i) the quantity of new business registrations in a Census

incorporated place in a given year and quarter, and (ii) an Entrepreneurial Quality Index (EQI),

which is a measure of average quality within any given group of firms, and represents a prediction

for the probability of a growth outcome for a firm within a specified population of start-ups in a

specific period (More information on this measure can be found in Guzman and Stern 2019).

3.2.2. Lending to New Businesses




                                                     16
     Our second outcome measure is the volume of lending under the Small Business

Administration's (SBA) 7(a) loan program. The Small Business Administration (SBA) 7(a) Loan

Guarantee program is one of the most popular loan programs offered by the agency. Under the

program, a 7(a) loan-guarantee is provided to lenders to make them more willing to lend money to

small businesses with weaknesses in their loan applications, such as new businesses startups that

lack the cash flow history to provide a lender with the assurance of continued ability to pay back

a loan. 7(a) loans may be used for such business purposes as purchasing land or buildings,

equipment, machinery or supplies; for long-term or short-term working capital; for refinancing; or

for the purchase of an existing business. They are limited to a maximum of $2 million, with an

SBA loan guarantee of 75%. The terms of SBA 7(a) loans are up to 25 years for real estate and

equipment and seven years for working capital, and interest rates are set and capped based on the

prime rate, the size of the loan, and the maturity of the loan.

     We utilize data on SBA lending under the 7(a)-guarantee program that is released quarterly

under the Freedom of Information Act. Use the business name and location for each SBA loan in

the dataset, the Startup Cartography Project then matched the SBA loans to their business

registration records in the same location, providing us with business registration data for

approximately half the loans in the dataset. As each business registration contains a date of

registration, for each location and quarter, we can then calculate two measures: the number of

loans made to new businesses registered in the prior six months, and the number of loans made to

new businesses registered in the prior twelve months. 15

3.2.3. Entrepreneurial Interest


     Our final outcome measure, which we dub Entrepreneurial Interest, utilizes the google Health

Trends interface to extract data on searches for entrepreneurship related terms such as "how to



15
 We use the Census 2010 zip-to-place crosswalk to match the zip of the SBA borrower to census places. In situations
where the zip of the borrower locates in multiple census places, we use the borrower city information to refine the
matching. Using this process, we are able to accurately match 95% of SBA loans to census places.


                                                          17
start a business" and "how to incorporate." 16 As previously noted, the Google Health Trends API

describes how often a specific search term is entered relative to the total search volume on Google

search engine within a geographic region and time range, and returns the probability of a search

session that includes the corresponding term, which makes comparisons across locations and time

feasible. We track trends for searches for these terms using the Google Health Trends API for all

Nielsen Designated Market Areas (DMAs) at monthly frequency from January 2004 to December

2016. We aggregate the data to the quarter level and match the DMAs to Census incorporated

places using a crosswalk provided by Nielsen.

       Using this data, we then define three outcome measures: (i) whether a city is in the top quartile

of cities for probability of search for entrepreneurship-related terms in that period; (ii) whether a

city is in the bottom quartile of cities for probability of search for entrepreneurship-related terms

in that period; and (iii) actual search share.

3.3.      Control Variables and City Characteristics


     We use a number of measures to explore heterogeneity by city characteristics and as control

variables in our models. We obtain annual city population estimates and population density from

the U.S. Census and annual county income per capita from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Controlling for population, per capita income, and unemployment rate--which vary by time and

location--are of first order importance as they provide a proxy for specific concerning

confounders.

     To examine how variation in individuals' credit constraints affect the impact of the gig

economy on entrepreneurship, we use a dataset of anonymized individual credit bureau records in

2010 to further construct several ex ante proxies for income and credit constraints. The credit

bureau data contain a 1% representative sample of all U.S. residents selected based on the last two

digits of their social security number. This sampling procedure produces a random sample of


16
   Specifically, we use the terms: "start a business," "start your own business," "start a company," "how to
incorporate," "entrepreneurship," and "become an entrepreneur."


                                                      18
individuals because the Social Security Administration sequentially assigns the last 4 digits of

social security numbers to new applicants regardless of geographical location. We calculate the

annual average personal income and credit score for each city, as well as the fraction of low income

and subprime borrowers. Following the cutoff used by the credit bureau, we identify an individual

as a subprime borrower if his or her credit score is below 660. Approximately 44% of individuals

in our sample are subprime.

    To explore heterogeneity by demographic characteristics, we develop city-level measures of

education levels using the Census Bureau's 5-year American Community Survey data. We obtain

both the fraction of individuals with a high-school degree and the fraction of individuals with a

bachelor's degree for each city in 2010. We also calculate county-level racial and ethnic

composition measures, such as the fraction of Hispanic population and the fraction of Black and

African American population, using Census Bureau's 2010 county population estimates.

3.4.   Economic Uncertainty


    Our conceptual model relates the economic uncertainty in an area and flexible gig-economy

opportunities to new business formation. Ideally, we would use variation in economic profits in an

area to proxy for economic uncertainty. Due to the lack of availability of quarterly data on business

profits, we use variation in wage growth as a proxy. Conceptually, we can think of economic

profits as reflecting demand shocks to industries, which in turn also lead to variation in wage

growth. More concretely, under a rent-sharing perspective, whenever there is a demand shock that

leads to change in profits, this change is shared between the firm and labor (Kline et al., 2019).

   To operationalize this economic uncertainty proxy by constructing a measure of the volatility

in wage growth in each location. We utilize data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)

Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) for this purpose. Wage growth volatility is

computed as the sum of the variances and covariances of the wage growth rate in the various

industry sectors, weighted by the employment share of each individual sector. We compute this

measure at the county level.



                                                   19
    For our computations, we derive a variance-covariance matrix from a trend-adjusted time

series of county-industry employment data. Mathematically, the measure of wage growth volatility

for the portfolio of industries in a given city is then expressed as:

                                   2
                                     =  2 2 +     
                                                       




where  denotes the proportion of total employment in industry j, 2 denotes the variance of

wage growth rate in industry j, and p denotes city.

    In Figure 2, we graph the relationship between our wage growth volatility measure and new

business registration. We absorb time and location. As can be seen from the scatter plot, the

relationship between wage growth volatility and entrepreneurial entry is negative, as expected.

3.5.   Summary Statistics


    Table 1, Panel A presents summary statistics for the places in our sample over the sample

period. The places average 54,348 in population and have an income per capita of $39,300. Prior

to the advent of ridehailing in 2010, 44.1% of borrowers in our sample places were subprime, 49%

were low income, 85.6% have at least a high school degree, and 28.6% have at least a Bachelors

degree. As can be seen from the distributional statistics in the table, there is wide variation across

all these characteristics across the sample. The table further presents summary statistics on our

entrepreneurial activity measures over the sample period.


                                   4. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS


    To assess the impact of the insurance against entrepreneurial income-related volatility on

entrepreneurial activity, we employ a standard generalized difference-in-differences approach. We

index cities by  and time by . We estimate models of the following form:

         log(1 + , ) =  +  + , +   +    + , ,




                                                    20
where , is one of our measures of entrepreneurial interest or activity in city  in quarter

 ,  is a city fixed effect,  is quarter-year fixed effect, , is a vector of time-varying, city

specific control variables (lagged one quarter), and   is a city-specific linear time trend. 17

     We use robust standard errors clustered at the city level. Our observations are at the quarterly

level and cover the first quarter of 2001 through the fourth quarter of 2016. For each outcome

measure, we present estimates for models estimated on the full sample (2001-2016), a subsample

using a shorter pre-period (2005-2016), and restricting the sample only to those cities that are ever-

treated by ridehailing during our sample period. This last specification is meant to assuage

concerns that our estimates may be driven solely by the differences between never-treated and

ever-treated cities.

4.1.     New Business Registration


     We begin by exploring new business launches, using the registrations of new companies. Table

2 employs our DD specification, where our outcome measure is the natural logarithm of one plus

the number of new business registrations in the city/quarter. For brevity, we report only the

coefficient on the variable of interest--    in the table. We report OLS

specifications, but our results remain robust to the use of count models instead (though we note

that interpretation of interaction terms in such models is not straightforward and cannot simply be

determined by the sign of the coefficient--see Ai and Norton 2003). We estimate four models:

column (1) presents estimates from the full sample period, column (2) shortens the sample pre-

period to post 2005, column (3) restricts to solely ever-treated cities, and column (4) uses only

ever-treated cities, but with the sample post-2005. The second pair of models are meant to assuage

concerns that any results might be driven solely by differences between ever-treated and never-

treated cities. 18


17
   For robustness, we also estimate all our models with the inclusion of a location-specific quadratic trend as well,
with qualitatively similar results.
18
   Appendix Tables A1 and A2 and Figure A1 present robustness to restricting the sample to post 2010 and adding a
quadratic trend. In Appendix Figure A2, we further examine the sensitivity of our coefficient estimates by removing


                                                           21
    Appendix Table A3 and Figures A3 and A4 further present robustness to adjustments for

staggered D-in-D models suggested by Goodman-Bacon (2018) and Borusyk and Jaravel (2017).

Borusyak and Jaravel (2017) explain that staggered difference-in-difference estimates can subject

to under-identification issues. Our results are robust to including a large set of control cities, which

mitigates the concern. However, because we include city-specific linear trends in our main

specification, the issue can arise again. Following the suggestion of Borusyak and Jaravel (2017),

in Appendix Table A3, we estimate difference-in-difference models where time effects are

identified solely from the control cities. Specifically, we use a two-step process. In the first stage,

we manually detrend outcome and control variables using the means of the variables estimated

from the control cities. In the second stage, we run our main specification using the detrended

variables, excluding time fixed effects. Figure A3 presents the Goodman-Bacon decomposition,

and Figure A4 presents the dynamic difference-in-difference coefficients omitting the relative time

coefficients from the year before treatment and the first year available, following the suggestion

of Borusyak and Jaravel (2017). Inferences remain unchanged.

    Across all four models, we observe a similar pattern. The coefficient on   

ranges from 0.03 to 0.06, depending on the sample employed, consistent with the arrival of the gig

economy being associated with an increase of approximately 3 to 6% in new business registrations.

Figure 2 graphs the coefficients at the annual level around the entry point; the graph suggests that

the parallel trends assumption holds.

    In the main models presented in Table 2, we employ the first launch of a RH service,

irrespective of the type of service, as our treatment date. Take-up of these services, however, is

likely to intensify over time. To explore this issue, we interact our  indicator with

the intensity of Google searches for ridehailing-related terms measure and re-estimate our models.

Table 3 replicates the models in Table 2, but with the addition of an additional interaction with

this adoption intensity proxy. The resulting estimates are consistent with an increase in business


one state at a time and re-estimating the specification. As the plotted coefficients suggest, our inferences remain
unchanged.


                                                          22
registrations following an increase in our Google Trends adoption intensity measure. For all four

models, the coefficient estimate on      is positive and statistically

significant. Thus, as our proxy for gig economy adoption intensity (Google trends search share for

ridehailing keywords) increases, so do new business launches. 19

     Certainly, ridehailing companies' choice of cities to launch in first was probably not random.

The main concern for our identification approach then centers around whether Uber and Lyft were

specifically selecting cities in which to roll out services based on the trends in entrepreneurial

activity and business registration in that city. To interpret our estimates with an eye towards

causality, business registrations themselves would ideally not be a predictor of entry. Table 4

presents estimates from a Cox proportional hazards model for ridehailing entry into cities. The

reported coefficient estimates are hazard ratios. We collapse observations at the city-year level to

calculate annual percentage changes in business registration, business registration per capita,

population, income, and unemployment rate. As can be seen from the table, while population and

income strongly predict entry timing, while there is no statistically significant loading on trends in

new business registrations.

4.2.    Loans to Newly Registered Businesses


     Next, we explore turn to our second outcome measure, which is based in the financing channel

for new businesses. We do this using SBA 7(a) small business loans to newly registered businesses,

as small, traditional businesses represent the vast majority of new business starts (as opposed to

innovation-driven startups, which are typically funded by venture capital and are much rarer).

     Table 5 presents estimates from models similar to those in Tables 2, using the SBA loan counts

to new businesses registered in the last 6 (Panel A) or 12 months (Panel B). Here, once again, we


19
  An ideal additional test would be to look at U.S. cities where RH was introduced and then withdrawn. Unfortunately,
these cities are few, and the circumstances do not allow for the types of tests we would want. For example, Uber and
Lyft both withdrew from the Austin market at one point in 2016 in a regulatory dispute, but at least five other RH
services were still operating and took up the slack. Uber and Lyft then returned to the Austin market within a year,
after Texas passed HB100, creating looser statewide rules that superseded Austin's (their return led to immediate
massive drops in volume for the competitors that sprung up in their absence). In Las Vegas, the other city we are
aware of, RH was introduced, then outlawed after only one month of service.


                                                           23
see that the emergence of the gig economy, in the form of entry of a RH platform, is associated

with an increase in loans to new businesses, consistent with--and of a magnitude corresponding

to--the increase in new business registrations suggested by the models in Table 4 and predicted

by the increase in entrepreneurial interest suggested by the models in Table 3. Thus, across both

of the outcome measures--realized starts and financing--we observe a consistent pattern: the

arrival of the gig economy is associated with an increase in entrepreneurial entry activity,

consistent with the hypothesis that the gig economy serves as an income supplement and/or

insurance against entrepreneurial-related income volatility.

4.3.      Entrepreneurial Interest


   As we have seen in the prior two subsections, the arrival of the platform-enabled gig economy

appears to be associated with a significant increase in entrepreneurial entry. We next turn to a

measure which may capture interest in considering entrepreneurial entry more broadly: internet

searches for terms and phrases directly related to launching a business--which we term

entrepreneurial interest. In Figure 3, we explore the relationship between entrepreneurship search

share and business registrations. Figure 3 presents a scatter plot of business registrations against

search share for entrepreneurial terms, for the pre-ridehail subsample and the post-ridehail

subsample. For both subsamples, the relationship is, as expected, upwards sloping. In the post-

ridehail subsample, however, the slope of the relationship steepens.

       Table 6 employs the natural logarithm of 1+search share for entrepreneurship-related terms as

the outcome measure for entrepreneurial interest. As before, column (1) presents estimates using

the full sample, column (2) restricts the sample to post-2005, column (3) restricts the sample to the

ever-treated sample of cities, and column (4) imposes both the post-2005 and ever-treated filters.

Regardless of specification, we observe a similar pattern of increase in search for entrepreneurial-

related terms after the arrival of the gig economy: the estimates suggest an increase in the range of

7% to 13% in the share of searches for entrepreneurship-related terms.

4.4.      Mechanisms: Income and Insurance


                                                    24
   We next proceed to dig deeper into the plausibility of the two mechanisms suggesting by our

conceptual framework. We begin by examining the income supplement channel. In Table 7 Panel

A, we employ two measures to test whether the effect of the arrival of the gig economy is, in fact,

larger in areas where the income supplement may be most valuable: areas with low personal

income pre-gig economy arrival. Panel A presents the results of fully interacted models, which

include the interaction of this measure with the    variable. We standardize

these measures to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one to ease the interpretation of

the coefficients. Because these proxies are measured once-per-city for the pre-period rather than

at the annual level, the lower order terms for the income measures themselves are absorbed in the

city FE. Consistent with the predictions of the conceptual model with regards to the income

supplement channel, we observe that the effects are higher in low-income areas, regardless of

which proxy is employed. A one standard deviation increase in the average ex-ante personal

income in a city is associated with a two percentage point reduction off the main  

 effect of 5 to 6%.

   Next, we turn to the insurance channel. Presumably, if the gig economy is acting as a form of

insurance for would-be entrepreneurs, we would expect its effects on entrepreneurial activity to be

stronger in locations where such insurance is more valuable: locations where economic uncertainty

(and in turn, entrepreneurial income uncertainty), is higher. In Table 7 Panel B, we utilize our

proxy for economic uncertainty--the volatility of wage growth in the location--and estimate

similar fully interacted models including the interaction of a standardized version of this measure

with the    variable into our models. We measure wage growth volatility for

each city using all quarters up to the quarter before entry (or all quarters, if no entry occurs during

the sample period). Because this measure in not at the annual level, but measured once per city,

the lower order term (pre-entry wage growth volatility itself) is absorbed in the city FE. Consistent

with our conceptual framework, the models in Table 7 indicate that in cities with higher ex-ante

economic uncertainty, the positive effects of the arrival of the gig economy are higher in cities

with higher ex-ante economic uncertainty, translating into an additional 1 to 2 percentage point


                                                    25
increase in new business registrations for a one standard deviation increase in ex-ante economic

uncertainty, on top of the main effect. This bolsters the view that the gig economy provides

insurance for would-be entrepreneurs.

4.5.   Nature of Entrepreneurial Activity


    Finally, we explore whether the gig economy has compositional effects on the type of business

launched. As noted by Levine and Rubinstein (2017, 2018) and Guzman and Stern (2019), there

is considerable heterogeneity in both the goal of entrants into entrepreneurship and in the types of

companies they launch. These range from small business entrepreneurs who undertake

entrepreneurship for non-pecuniary reasons, such as leisure or flexibility (Hurst and Pugsley,

2011), to entrepreneurs like Mark Zuckerberg or Peter Thiel, who launch innovation-driven

startups with the goal of high growth. Guzman and Stern (2015, 2019) combine the comprehensive

business registration data used earlier in this paper with predictive analytics to compute estimates

of entrepreneurial "quality" over time. For the purposes of our analysis, SCP provided us with

their Entrepreneurial Quality Index (EQI)--which measures the predicted probability that a new

business launched in a location and time period will have a high growth outcome--computed at

the county-quarter level. We can then use the EQI measure to assess compositional effects: if EQI

increases post-RH arrival, this suggests that the share of innovation-driven startups in a treated

location goes up post-gig economy arrival. If EQI decreases, it suggests the share of traditional,

small business entrepreneurship has gone up.

   In Table 8, Panel A, we estimate our models using EQI as the outcome variable. As can be

seen from the models in the table, we observe no significant change in EQI in the treated cities

post-gig economy arrival, suggesting that the composition of types of entrepreneurs in a city is not

significantly altered by the gig economy.

   In Panel B, we explore another aspect of the new entrepreneurial activity: geographic

dispersion across the city. One concern is that our prior estimations are picking up not a general

effect of the gig economy, but rather a specific effect of ridehailing, namely the ability of this new



                                                   26
transportation mode to open opportunities for businesses in new neighborhoods that previously

suffered from a lack of easy transportation access. In Panel B of Table 8, we estimate our DD

models using as an outcome measure the Herschman-Herfindahl Index by zip code within the city,

as a measure of geographic dispersion of where businesses launch. More specifically, the

dependent variable in Panel B measures the concentration of new business registration in a city-

quarter, measured using an HHI index that equals to the sum of the zip shares of business

registration in a city squared. We observe no significant change in geographic concentration in the

treated cities post-gig economy arrival--if anything, we see a slight increase in concentration--

suggesting that the geographic concentration of entrepreneurs in a city is not significantly altered

by the gig economy.

4.6.      Are We Just Capturing City Growth?


    One concern is that despite our strict specification, perhaps somehow, we are still just capturing

different trends in economic growth in cities. We can assuage these concerns directly. If our

findings were driven solely by improvements in economic conditions that are not captured by the

D.D. specification, we would expect to see a similar effect if we replaced our business registrations

outcomes with a measure such as local employment wages. In Table 9, we estimate models using

average weekly wage as the outcome measure, and in similar specifications to the previous tables.

Not only do we observe no corresponding increase in average weekly wages, but the coefficients

are, in fact, negative, suggesting that our observed increases in entrepreneurial activity are driven

by general growth in economic activity.

4.7.      Heterogeneity


       Finally, we explore whether the gig economy differentially bolsters entrepreneurial entry in

cities with different underlying demographic and socio-economic characteristics. Specifically, we

focus on education, race, credit constraints and income. In Table 10, we break out our results across

a variety of city characteristics. For each characteristic, we assign cities to quartiles based on the



                                                   27
measures for each characteristic calculated in 2010. We take these measures primarily from the

American Community Survey. We then re-estimate our models, interacting  

 with the four quartile indicators for each city characteristic. The specifications

include location and year-quarter fixed effects, a location-specific linear time trend, and control

variables.

     For education levels, we observe the gig economy effect on entrepreneurial entry is

concentrated in cities with a low fraction of population having obtained a high school (column (1))

or bachelor degree (column (2)). This would be consistent with the gig economy insurance effect

being more valuable for lower education entrepreneurs. When we look at race, we find the effect

is higher in cities with a higher fraction of Hispanic population (column (3)) and in cities in the

middle of the distribution for Black and African American population (column (4)). The effect is

actually negative and significant coefficient in cities in the top quartile of Black and African

American population share. We take no stance on the mechanism for the observed heterogeneity

for race; future research may wish to explore these patterns in more detail.

   We next turn to socio-economic characteristics. In columns (5) and (6), we look at credit

constraints, measured as the average credit score in the city (column (5)) and the fraction of

subprime borrowers (credit score below 660) in the city (column (6)). Our observed effects on

entrepreneurial entry are concentrated in the lowest and highest quartiles of credit score: the large

effect in the lowest quartile of credit score and highest quartile of the fraction of subprime

borrowers are consistent with the Knightian view of risk-bearing in entrepreneurship. We observe

an equally large in the least constrained areas (Q4 credit score, Q1 subprime fraction) where the

demand effect likely dominates.


                                        5. CONCLUSION


   Economists since Adam Smith have emphasized the importance of entrepreneurs and new

business formation to the economy. Policymakers continuously seek for ways to stimulate

entrepreneurial activity in their local regions. In this paper, we shed light on a development in the


                                                   28
digital economy that has positive spillover effects on entrepreneurial activity: the advent of on-

demand gig economy platforms. Our findings suggest that the provision of income supplements

and insurance against entrepreneurial-related income volatility serves to increase entrepreneurial

activity and galvanize would-be entrepreneurs to engage in new business formation.

   While much of the literature on the effects of the gig economy focuses on its direct impact on

gig workers, our work joins an emerging literature exploring the spillover effects from the advent

of large-scale gig platforms (e.g., Koustas, 2018; Fos et al., 2019). Our findings suggest that the

gig economy plays a substantial role in spurring entrepreneurial entry by providing a form of

insurance against entrepreneurial related-income volatility in the form of income fallbacks, and by

providing a potential income supplement to those who engage in entrepreneurial activity. Both

these mechanisms serve to reduce the risk of launching a new business. This benefit is particularly

strong in cities with worse socioeconomic conditions, where policymakers may be especially

interested in encouraging new entrepreneurial activity.




                                                  29
                                          REFERENCES

Aghion, Philippe, Thibault Fally, and Stefano Scarpetta. "Credit constraints as a barrier to the entry
and post-entry growth of firms." Economic Policy 22 (2007): 732-779.
Ai, Chunrong, and Edward C. Norton. "Interaction terms in logit and probit models." Economics
Letters 80 (2003): 123-129.
Barrios, John Manuel, Yael V. Hochberg, and Hanyi Yi. "The cost of convenience: Ridesharing
and traffic fatalities." Available at SSRN 3361227 (2019).
Bellon, Aymeric, Erik P. Gilje, J. Anthony Cookson, and Rawley Z. Heimer. "Personal wealth and
self-employment." Working paper (2019).
Borusyak, Kirill, and Xavier Jaravel. "Revisiting event study designs." Available at SSRN
2826228 (2017).
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee. "The second machine age: Work, progress, and
prosperity in a time of brilliant technologies." WW Norton & Company (2014).
Burtch, Gordon, Seth Carnahan, and Brad N. Greenwood. "Can you gig it? An empirical
examination of the gig economy and entrepreneurial activity." Management Science 64 (2018):
5497-5520.
Cagetti, Marco, and Mariacristina De Nardi. "Entrepreneurship, frictions, and wealth." Journal of
Political Economy 114 (2006): 835-870.
Chen, M, Keith, Judith A. Chevalier, Peter E. Rossi, and Emily Oehlsen. "The value of flexible
work: Evidence from uber drivers." NBER Working Paper No. w23296 (2017).
Cramer, Judd, and Alan B. Krueger. "Disruptive change in the taxi business: The case of uber."
American Economic Review 106 (2016):177­182.
Dahl, Michael S., and Olav Sorenson. "Home sweet home: Entrepreneurs' location choices and
the performance of their ventures." Management Science 58 (2012): 1059-1071.
Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. "The secular decline in
business dynamism in the US." University of Maryland Working Paper (2014).
Donovan, Sarah A., David H. Bradley, and Jon O. Shimabukuru. "What does the gig economy
mean for workers?" (2016).
Evans, David S., and Boyan Jovanovic. "An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under
liquidity constraints." Journal of Political Economy 97 (1989): 808-827.
Farrell, Diana, Fiona Greig. "Paychecks, paydays, and the online platform economy: Big data on
income volatility." Available at SSRN 2911293 (2016).
Fos, Vyacheslav, Naser Hamdi, Ankit Kalda, and Jordan Nickerson. "Gig-Labor: Trading safety
nets for steering wheels." Available at SSRN 3414041 (2019).
Gentry, William M., and R. Glenn Hubbard. "Tax policy and entrepreneurial entry." American
Economic Review 90 (2000): 283-287.




                                                   30
Glaeser, Edward L., and William R. Kerr. "Local industrial conditions and entrepreneurship: How
much of the spatial distribution can we explain?" Journal of Economics & Management
Strategy 18 (2009): 623-663.
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. "Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing." NBER
Working Paper No. w25018 (2018).
Gottlieb, Joshua D., Townsend, Richard R., and Xu, Ting. "Does career risk deter potential
entrepreneurs?" SSRN Working Paper (2018).
Guzman, Jorge. "Go west young firm: agglomeration and embeddedness in startup migrations to
Silicon Valley." Columbia Business School Research Paper (2019).
Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern. "Where is silicon valley?" Science 347 (2015): 606-609.
Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern. "The state of American entrepreneurship: New estimates of the
quantity and quality of entrepreneurship for 15 us states, 1988-2014." NBER Working Paper No.
w22095 (2019).
Hall, Jonathan V., and Alan B. Krueger. "An analysis of the labor market for Uber's driver-partners
in the United States." ILR Review 71 (2017): 705­732.
Hall, Jonathan D., Craig Palsson, and Joseph Price. "Is Uber a substitute or complement for public
transit?" Journal of Urban Economics 108 (2018): 36-50.
Hasan, Sharique, and Anuj Kumar. "Digitization and divergence: Online school ratings and
segregation in America." Available at SSRN 3265316 (2019).
Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda. "Who creates jobs? Small versus large
versus young." Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (2013): 347-361.
Hombert, Johan, Antoinette Schoar, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, "Can Unemployment
Insurance Spur Entrepreneurial Activity? Evidence from France." Journal of Finance
(forthcoming).
Hurst, Erik, and Annamaria Lusardi. "Liquidity constraints, household wealth, and
entrepreneurship." Journal of Political Economy 112 (2004): 319-347.
Hurst, Erik, and Benjamin W. Pugsley. "What do small businesses do?" NBER Working Paper
No. w17041 (2011).
Jensen, Thais Lærkholm, Søren Leth-Petersen, and Ramana Nanda. "Housing collateral, credit
constraints and entrepreneurship-Evidence from a mortgage reform," NBER Working Paper No.
w20583 (2014).
Jackson, Emilie. "Availability of the gig economy and long run labor supply effects for the
unemployed". Working paper (2019).
Jovanovic, Boyan. "Selection and the evolution of industry." Econometrica: Journal of the
Econometric Society (1982): 649-670.
Kihlstrom, Richard E., and Jean-Jacques Laffont. "A general equilibrium entrepreneurial theory
of firm formation based on risk aversion." Journal of Political Economy 87 (1979): 719-748.
Klapper, Leora, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan. "Entry regulation as a barrier to
entrepreneurship." Journal of Financial Economics 82 (2006): 591-629.


                                                  31
Kline, Patrick, Neviana Petkova, Heidi Williams, and Owen Zidar. "Who profits from patents?
Rent-sharing at innovative firms." Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (2019): 1343-1404.
Knight, Frank H., "Risk, uncertainty and profit." New York: Houghton-Mifflin (1921).
Koustas, Dmitri. "Consumption insurance and multiple jobs: Evidence from rideshare drivers."
Working paper (2018).
Levine, Ross, and Yona Rubinstein. "Smart and illicit: who becomes an entrepreneur and do they
earn more?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2017): 963-1018.
Levine, Ross, and Yona Rubinstein. "Selection into entrepreneurship and self-employment."
NBER Working Paper No. w25350 (2018).
Lucas Jr, Robert E. "Asset prices in an exchange economy." Econometrica: Journal of the
Econometric Society (1978): 1429-1445.
LeRoy, Stephen F., and Larry D. Singell Jr. "Knight on risk and uncertainty." Journal of Political
Economy 95 (1987): 394-406.
Manso, Gustavo. "Motivating innovation." Journal of Finance 66 (2011): 1823-1860.
Manso, Gustavo. "Experimentation and the returns to entrepreneurship." Review of Financial
Studies 29 (2016): 2319-2340.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. "The theory of economic development." Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press (1934).
Schumpeter, Joseph A. "Socialism, capitalism and democracy." Harper and Brothers (1942).




                                                 32
                                                    FIGURES




                                                      Figure 1
                                               Ridehailing Diffusion
This figure shows the diffusion of ridehailing across the U.S. by cities and population. The sample consists of all
census incorporated places in the United States. The navy (red) line graphs the percentage of cities (population) that
adopted ridehailing in each quarter between the fourth quarter of 2010 and the fourth quarter of 2017.




                                                           33
                          Panel A                                                       Panel B



                                                         Figure 2
                                         Difference-in-Difference Estimators
This figure displays the regression coefficient estimates for our three main outcomes and two-tailed 95% confidence
intervals based on standard errors clustered at the city level. The outcome variables in Panel A is the natural logarithm
of one plus new business registrations. The outcome variable in Panel B is the natural logarithm of one plus the number
of SBA loans issued to newly-registered business. To map out the pattern in the counterfactual treatment effects, we
regress the outcome variables on the lag and lead indicators (bunched by four quarters) of the ridehailing entry. The
sample includes all rideshare cities in years after 2005 (the specifications used in the Column (4) of Table 2 and Table
5A). The control variables include the natural logarithm of population, income per capita (lagged one quarter), and
unemployment rate (lagged one quarter). The vertical red line indicates the quarter of entry.




                                                             34
                                                       Figure 3
                         Relation between Search Activity and New Business Registration
This figure plots the relation between new business registration and entrepreneurship-related Google search share
before and after the entry of ridehailing. Blue points represent pre-ridehailing city-quarter observations. Red points
represent post-ridehailing city-quarter observations.




                                                           35
                                                     Figure 4
                    Relation between Wage Growth Volatility and New Business Registration
This figure plots the relation between wage growth volatility and new business registration. Wage growth volatility is
the weighted sum of the variances and covariances of wage growth rate in the sectors of the economy, weighted by
the employment share of each individual sector. Mathematically, it is expressed as:
                                         2
                                           =  2 2 +     
                                                             
where  denotes the proportion of total employment in industry j, 2 denotes the variance of wage growth rate in
industry j, and p denotes city.




                                                           36
                                                        Figure 5
                                         Heterogeneity by City Characteristics
This figure displays the regression coefficient estimates in Table 10 and two-tailed 95% confidence intervals based
on standard errors clustered at the city level. We break out the effect of rideshare entry by the fraction of population
in a city with high school degrees, the fraction of population in a city with bachelor's degrees, the fraction of Hispanic
population in a city, the fraction of black and African American population, average credit score, and the fraction of
subprime borrowers, i.e. borrowers with credit scores below 660. The outcome variable for all panels is the natural
log of new business registrations.


                                                             37
                                                    TABLES


                                                    Table 1
                                                Summary Statistics

  Variable                                               Mean            SD          P10      Median        P90

  Business Registration                                   133.7        391.2          5.0       47.0        283.0
  SBA Loans to New Businesses (Count)                       0.4          1.7          0.0         0.0         1.0
  SBA Loans to New Businesses (Amount $K)                 127.6        718.4          0.0         0.0       215.0
  Google Search Share                                     713.0        382.2        443.1       631.7     1109.8
  Population                                            54348.2       199878.5    11224.0     23398.0     93807.0
  Income Per Capita                                        39.3         12.2         26.5       37.1         55.1
  Credit Score                                            669.5         33.6        626.8       668.7       713.7
  Subprime Borrowers (%)                                   44.1         13.5         26.2       44.3         61.2
  Low Income (%)                                           49.1         12.1         32.4       49.6         64.4
  High School Degree (%)                                   85.6          9.3         74.1        87.4        95.4
  Bachelor's Degree (%)                                    28.6         15.1         12.9        24.7        50.6
  Black and African American Population (%)                11.9         12.2          1.1        7.7         27.3
  Hispanic Population (%)                                  15.8         16.3          2.2        9.1         40.9
  Wage Growth Volatility (%)                                0.6          0.4          0.3        0.6          1.2
  Entrepreneurial Quality Index                          0.0006        0.0014      0.0002      0.0004      0.0008


Notes: The sample contains 201,212 quarterly observations on 2,959 census incorporated places from 2000 to 2016.
Business Registration measures the number of new business registrations in a city-quarter. SBA Loan to New
Businesses (Count) measures the total number of SBA 7(a) loans issued to businesses registered within 12 months.
SBA Loan to New Businesses (Amount $K) measures the total amount of SBA 7(a) loans issued to businesses registered
within 12 months. Google Search Share measures the share of google search volume for the terms such as "how to
start a business". Subprime Borrowers measures the fraction of borrowers in a city-quarter that has below 660 credit
score. Wage growth volatility is the weighted sum of the variances and covariances of wage growth rate in the sectors
of the economy, weighted by the employment share of each individual sector. Entrepreneurial Quality Index measures
average entrepreneurial quality in a given city-quarter, as defined in Guzman and Stern (2019).




                                                           38
                                                          Table 2
                                     Gig Economy and New Business Registration


                                                               Log (1+New Business Registration)
                                                    (1)               (2)            (3)                  (4)
                                                  >2000              >2005          Treat = 1      >2005 & Treat=1


   Treat X Post                                 0.0389***           0.0676***      0.0527***         0.0594***
                                                 (0.0112)            (0.0121)        (0.0105)          (0.0108)
   Log Pop                                      0.7358***           0.3212***      0.7164***           0.1987*
                                                 (0.0928)            (0.1087)        (0.1189)          (0.1094)
   Log Income Per Capita (lag)                  0.5212***           0.5094***       0.2297***           0.0262
                                                 (0.0572)            (0.0668)        (0.0715)          (0.0728)
   Unemployment Rate (lag)                        0.0004            -0.0052**      -0.0125***        -0.0186***
                                                 (0.0018)            (0.0021)        (0.0021)          (0.0023)

   Observations                                  195,446             139,225         114,384            81,761
   R-squared                                      0.9590              0.9592          0.9665            0.9683
   City FE                                         Yes                 Yes             Yes               Yes
   Quarter FE                                      Yes                 Yes             Yes               Yes
   City Linear Trend                               Yes                 Yes             Yes               Yes

Notes: This table presents results from generalized difference-in-difference regressions. The dependent variable, Log
(1+New Business Registration), is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of new business registrations in a city-
quarter. Treat X Post is a dummy variable that equals one if city c adopted at least one ridehailing service (proxy for
gig economy arrival) at time t. Control variables in the regressions include the natural logarithm of population, income
per capita (lagged one quarter), and unemployment rate (lagged one quarter). Standard errors, adjusted for clustering
at the city level, are reported in parentheses. , , and  represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.




                                                              39
                                                   Table 3
                       Intensity of Gig Economy Adoption and New Business Registration


                                                                         Log (1+New Business Registration)
                                                                     (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)
                                                                                                          >2005 &
                                                                   >2000        >2005      Treat = 1
                                                                                                           Treat=1

Treat X Post X Log (Ridehailing-Related Search Share)             0.0772***     0.0765***      0.0660***     0.0664***
                                                                   (0.0109)      (0.0111)       (0.0111)      (0.0113)
Log Pop                                                           0.4114***     0.2942***      0.3274***        0.1712
                                                                   (0.0981)      (0.1087)       (0.1047)      (0.1097)
Log Income Per Capita (lag)                                       0.4415***     0.4587***        -0.0303       -0.0262
                                                                   (0.0630)      (0.0672)       (0.0702)      (0.0723)
Unemployment Rate (lag)                                             -0.0000       -0.0034     -0.0135***    -0.0164***
                                                                   (0.0021)      (0.0021)       (0.0023)      (0.0023)

Observations                                                       151,061       139,225        88,629         81,761
R-squared                                                           0.9598        0.9593        0.9685         0.9684
Lower Order Interaction Terms                                        Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
City FE                                                              Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Quarter FE                                                           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
City Linear Trend                                                    Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes

Notes: This table shows how the effect of ridehailing on new business registrations vary with the intensity of
ridehailing service. The dependent variable, Log (1+New Business Registration), is the natural logarithm of one plus
the number of new business registrations in a city-quarter. Log Ridehail Google Search Share is the natural logarithm
of Google search share for the terms "Uber," "Lyft," and "rideshare." Treat X Post is a dummy variable that equals
one if city c adopted at least one ridehailing service (proxy for gig economy arrival) at time t. Control variables in the
regressions include the natural logarithm of population, income per capita (lagged one quarter), and unemployment
rate (lagged one quarter). Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the city level, are reported in parentheses. , ,
and  represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                             40
                                                   Table 4
                          Modeling Ridehail Adoption: Cox Proportional Hazard Model


                                                             (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)
                                                                         Rideshare                       Rideshare
                                                          All Cities                      All Cities
                                                                           Cities                          Cities

Annual % Change in Business Registration                    0.9961          0.9941
                                                           (0.0056)        (0.0056)
Annual % Change in Business Registration Per Capita                                        0.9961          0.9942
                                                                                          (0.0056)        (0.0056)
Annual % Change in Pop                                   1.1977***         0.9191        1.1976***         0.9189
                                                          (0.0430)        (0.0566)        (0.0430)        (0.0566)
Annual % Change in Income                                1.2015***       1.1599***       1.2015***       1.1599***
                                                          (0.0483)        (0.0553)        (0.0483)        (0.0553)
Annual % Change in Unemployment Rate                       0.9657         0.8009**         0.9657         0.8009**
                                                          (0.0774)        (0.0790)        (0.0774)        (0.0790)
Log Pop                                                  1.7464***       1.3980***       1.7464***       1.3980***
                                                          (0.0437)        (0.0332)        (0.0437)        (0.0332)
Log Income Per Capita (lag)                              1.2486***       1.1739***       1.2486***       1.1739***
                                                          (0.0417)        (0.0382)        (0.0417)        (0.0382)
Unemployment Rate (lag)                                  1.3246***       1.1979***       1.3246***       1.1979***
                                                          (0.0485)        (0.0445)        (0.0485)        (0.0445)

Observations                                               41,664          23,950          41,664          23,950

Notes: This table presents results from proportional cox hazard model estimations. The reported coefficient estimates
are hazard ratios. We collapse observations at the city-year level to calculate annual percentage changes in business
registration, business registration per capita, population, income, and unemployment rate. All variables are
standardized to have a mean of 0 and standard deviation of one to facilitate comparison between estimated hazard
ratios. In Columns (1) and (3), we include all cities in our sample. In Columns (2) and (4), we limit the analysis to
cities that adopted rideshare during our sample period. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the city level, are
reported in parentheses. , , and  represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                            41
                                                       Table 5
                      Gig Economy and Small Business Loans to Newly Registered Businesses

Panel A: Firms Registered Within 6 Months
                                                         Log (1+ SBA Loans to Newly Registered Firms (<6M))
                                                       (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)

                                                     >2000             >2005           Treat = 1     >2005 & Treat=1


Treat X Post                                       0.0662***         0.0892***         0.0421***        0.0566***
                                                    (0.0082)          (0.0095)          (0.0093)         (0.0103)
Log Pop                                            0.1493***         0.4185***         0.1710***        0.5124***
                                                    (0.0414)          (0.0835)          (0.0533)         (0.1101)
Log Income Per Capita (lag)                        0.1573***         0.3872***         0.2024***        0.4891***
                                                    (0.0400)          (0.0487)          (0.0632)         (0.0787)
Unemployment Rate (lag)                              -0.0017          -0.0024*           -0.0022          -0.0034
                                                    (0.0012)          (0.0014)          (0.0018)         (0.0022)

Observations                                         198,238          142,017           115,024           82,401
R-squared                                             0.3942           0.4132            0.4578           0.4739
City FE                                                Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
Quarter FE                                             Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
City Linear Trend                                      Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes

Panel B: Firms Registered Within 12 Months
                                                        Log (1+SBA Loans to Newly Registered Firms (<12M))
                                                       (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)

                                                     >2000             >2005           Treat = 1     >2005 & Treat=1


Treat X Post                                       0.0838***         0.1136***         0.0552***        0.0759***
                                                    (0.0092)           (0.0107)         (0.0103)         (0.0115)
Log Pop                                            0.1769***         0.5245***         0.1960***        0.6084***
                                                    (0.0465)           (0.1070)         (0.0612)         (0.1418)
Log Income Per Capita (lag)                        0.2182***         0.5346***         0.2856***        0.6675***
                                                    (0.0446)           (0.0581)         (0.0712)         (0.0958)
Unemployment Rate (lag)                            -0.0028**         -0.0043***         -0.0038*        -0.0058**
                                                    (0.0013)           (0.0016)         (0.0021)         (0.0025)

Observations                                         198,238          142,017           115,024           82,401
R-squared                                             0.4291           0.4485            0.4934           0.5094
City FE                                                Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
Quarter FE                                             Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
City Linear Trend                                      Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes

Notes: This table presents results from generalized difference-in-difference regressions. The dependent variable is the
natural logarithm of one plus the number of SBA loans to firms that are incorporated in less than 6 months (Panel A)
or 12 months (Panel B). Treat X Post is a dummy variable that equals one if city c adopted at least one ridehailing
service at time t. Control variables in the regressions include the natural logarithm of population, income per capita
(lagged one quarter), and unemployment rate (lagged one quarter). Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the city
level, are reported in parentheses. , , and  represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.


                                                             42
                                                      Table 6
                              Gig Economy and Entrepreneurial Interest (Search Share)

                                                         Log (1+Google Search Share)
                                              (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)
                                                                                            >2005 &
                                            >2000            >2005          Treat = 1
                                                                                            Treat=1

          Treat X Post                    0.1136***        0.0677***       0.1237***        0.0619***
                                           (0.0121)         (0.0094)        (0.0148)         (0.0108)

          Observations                     153,853          142,017          89,269           82,401
          R-squared                        0.6140           0.6663           0.5875           0.6473
          Controls                          Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
          City FE                           Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
          Quarter FE                        Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
          City Linear Trend                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes

Notes: This table presents the effect of gig economy arrival on entrepreneurial intent, measured using google search
share for entrepreneurship-related phrases, such as "start a business", "how to incorporate", and "become an
entrepreneur". The outcome variable is the natural log of one plus google search share. Control variables in the
regressions include the natural logarithm of population, income per capita (lagged one quarter), and unemployment
rate (lagged one quarter). Standard errors, clustered at the city level, are reported in parentheses. , , and 
represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                          43
                                                                     Table 7
                                        Mechanisms for Growth in Entrepreneurial Entry
Panel A: Income
                                                                                    Log (1+New Business Registration)
                                                                    (1)                   (2)               (3)                       (4)
                                                                   >2000                >2005            Treat = 1              >2005 & Treat=1

Treat X Post X Personal Income                                   -0.0207**             -0.0185**              -0.0185**             -0.0143*
                                                                  (0.0083)              (0.0084)               (0.0082)              (0.0083)
Treat X Post                                                     0.0431***             0.0710***             0.0566***             0.0622***
                                                                  (0.0120)              (0.0129)               (0.0113)              (0.0117)
Log Pop                                                          0.7362***             0.3219***             0.7165***               0.1982*
                                                                  (0.0928)              (0.1088)               (0.1189)              (0.1095)
Log Income Per Capita (lag)                                      0.5263***             0.5177***             0.2380***                0.0377
                                                                  (0.0572)              (0.0668)               (0.0715)              (0.0725)
Unemployment Rate (lag)                                            0.0004              -0.0052**             -0.0125***            -0.0186***
                                                                  (0.0018)              (0.0021)               (0.0021)              (0.0023)

Observations                                                      195,379                139,177               114,384                81,761
R-squared                                                          0.9590                 0.9592                0.9666                0.9683
Controls                                                            Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes
City FE                                                             Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Quarter FE                                                          Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes
City Linear Trend                                                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes

Panel B: Wage Growth Volatility
                                                                                    Log (1+New Business Registration)
                                                                    (1)                   (2)               (3)                       (4)
                                                                   >2000                >2005            Treat = 1              >2005 & Treat=1

Treat X Post X Wage Growth Volatility                           0.0293***               0.0163**             0.0268***               0.0108*
                                                                  (0.0067)               (0.0065)              (0.0067)              (0.0064)
Treat X Post                                                    0.0339***              0.0652***             0.0484***             0.0580***
                                                                  (0.0115)               (0.0125)              (0.0108)              (0.0111)
Average Wage Growth                                             -0.0610***              -0.0389*                -0.0242               -0.0173
                                                                  (0.0192)               (0.0200)              (0.0242)              (0.0243)
Log Pop                                                          0.7258***             0.3151***             0.7032***               0.1932*
                                                                  (0.0925)               (0.1085)              (0.1185)              (0.1092)
Log Income Per Capita (lag)                                      0.5314***             0.5166***             0.2464***                 0.0352
                                                                  (0.0574)               (0.0670)              (0.0721)              (0.0735)
Unemployment Rate (lag)                                            0.0006              -0.0050**             -0.0122***            -0.0184***
                                                                  (0.0019)               (0.0021)              (0.0021)              (0.0023)

 Observations                                                         195,446            139,225               114,384               81,761
 R-squared                                                             0.9590             0.9592                0.9666               0.9683
 Controls                                                               Yes                Yes                   Yes                  Yes
 City FE                                                                Yes                Yes                   Yes                  Yes
 Quarter FE                                                             Yes                Yes                   Yes                  Yes
 City Linear Trend                                                      Yes                Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Notes: This table presents the heterogeneous effects of ridehailing on entrepreneurship by city average personal income and wage growth volatility.
The dependent variable, Log (1+New Business Registration), is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of new business registrations in a
city-quarter. Personal Income is standardized average personal income in a county using the credit bureau data. Wage growth volatility is the
standardized weighted sum of the variances and covariances of wage growth in the sectors of the economy, weighted by the employment share of
each individual sector as measured up until the quarter before RH entry. Both Personal Income and Wage growth volatility are standardized to have
a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. Because this measure in not at the annual level, but measured once per city as of 2010, the lower
order term is absorbed in the city FE. Treat X Post is a dummy variable that equals one if city c adopted at least one ridehailing service at time t.
Average Wage Growth is the quarterly weighted average wage growth in all industries in a city, weighted by the employment share of each industry.
Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the city level, are reported in parentheses. , , and  represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                            44
                                                                Table 8
                                  Gig Economy and the Nature of Entrepreneurial Activity

Panel A: Entrepreneurship Quality
                                                                           Entrepreneurship Quality Index
                                                         (1)                  (2)                   (3)                 (4)
                                                        >2000                >2005               Treat = 1        >2005 & Treat=1


Treat X Post                                          0.000004             -0.000015             0.000012             0.000006
                                                     (0.000021)            (0.000020)           (0.000021)           (0.000019)
Log Pop                                               0.000113              0.000000             0.000025             -0.000084
                                                     (0.000095)            (0.000123)           (0.000090)           (0.000116)
Log Income Per Capita (lag)                           0.000135              0.000156             0.000144             0.000193
                                                     (0.000119)            (0.000143)           (0.000172)           (0.000201)
Unemployment Rate (lag)                               -0.000000             0.000002            -0.000002             -0.000000
                                                     (0.000004)            (0.000005)           (0.000004)           (0.000006)


Observations                                           188,117              134,317              113,201               81,043
R-squared                                              0.2849                0.3272               0.2685               0.2891
City FE                                                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
Quarter FE                                               Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
City Linear Trend                                        Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes


Panel B: Entrepreneurship Concentration
                                                                           Business Registration Zip HHI
                                                         (1)                  (2)                   (3)                 (4)
                                                        >2000                >2005               Treat = 1        >2005 & Treat=1


Treat X Post                                          0.0036**              -0.0009              0.0032*               0.0008
                                                       (0.0018)             (0.0020)             (0.0018)              (0.0019)
Log Pop                                              -0.0513***             -0.0285             -0.0421**             -0.0413**
                                                       (0.0138)             (0.0191)             (0.0180)              (0.0197)
Log Income Per Capita (lag)                           -0.0226**             -0.0077               -0.0025              0.0017
                                                       (0.0110)             (0.0120)             (0.0110)              (0.0120)
Unemployment Rate (lag)                              0.0017***             0.0013**               0.0001               0.0001
                                                       (0.0005)             (0.0005)             (0.0005)              (0.0005)


Observations                                           195,446              139,225              114,384               81,761
R-squared                                              0.8675                0.8805               0.9328               0.9441
City FE                                                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
Quarter FE                                               Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
 City Linear Trend                                        Yes                  Yes                 Yes                   Yes
Notes: This table presents results from generalized difference-in-difference regressions. The dependent variable in Panel A is the
average entrepreneurial quality index defined in Guzman and Stern (2019). The dependent variable in Panel B measures the
concentration of new business registration in a city-quarter using an HHI index that equals to the sum of the zip shares of business
registration in a city squared. Treat X Post is a dummy variable that equals one if city c adopted at least one ridehailing service at
time t. Control variables in the regressions include the natural logarithm of population, income per capita (lagged one quarter), and
unemployment rate (lagged one quarter). Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the city level, are reported in parentheses. ,
, and  represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                    45
                                                         Table 9
                               Is the Increase in Entrepreneurship Due to City Growth?

                                                             Log Average Weekly Wage
                                         (1)                   (2)              (3)                      (4)
                                        >2000                 >2005          Treat = 1             >2005 & Treat=1

   Treat X Post                       -0.0093***           -0.0045***            -0.0079***           -0.0032***
                                        (0.0009)             (0.0009)              (0.0011)             (0.0009)
   Log Pop                             0.0262***            0.0576***             0.0250**             0.0646***
                                       (0.0095)              (0.0132)             (0.0123)              (0.0157)
   Log Income Per Capita (lag)        0.2597***             0.2202***            0.2603***             0.1865***
                                       (0.0140)              (0.0131)             (0.0144)              (0.0114)
   Unemployment Rate (lag)            -0.0033***           -0.0029***            -0.0022***           -0.0021***
                                       (0.0002)              (0.0002)             (0.0003)              (0.0003)

   Observations                         198,238              142,017              115,024                82,401
   R-squared                             0.9818               0.9793               0.9813                0.9785
   City FE                                Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
   Quarter FE                             Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
   City Linear Trend                      Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes

Notes: This table presents results from generalized difference-in-difference regressions. The dependent variable is the
natural logarithm of average weekly wage in a city in a given quarter. Treat X Post is a dummy variable that equals
one if city c adopted at least one ridehailing service at time t. Control variables in the regressions include the natural
logarithm of population, income per capita (lagged one quarter), and unemployment rate (lagged one quarter).
Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the city level, are reported in parentheses. , , and  represent statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                             46
                                                                                       Table 10
                                                                       Who are the new entrepreneurs?

                                                                     Education                              Race                  Credit Score
                                                               (1)               (2)                (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                                                                               Black and
                                                                                                                                          Fraction of
                                                          High School      Bachelor           Hispanic          African        Level
                                                                                                                                           Subprime
                                                                                                               American

                         Treat X Post X Q1                 0.1148***       0.1131***            0.0604           -0.0139     0.0690***     0.0435**
                                                            (0.0185)        (0.0246)          (0.0434)          (0.0179)      (0.0206)     (0.0178)
                         Treat X Post X Q2                   0.0100         0.0399*            -0.0371         0.1398***       0.0262       0.0147
                                                            (0.0227)        (0.0216)          (0.0290)          (0.0255)      (0.0204)     (0.0162)
                         Treat X Post X Q3                   0.0218          0.0224          0.0707***         0.0651***       0.0074       0.0223
                                                            (0.0162)        (0.0174)          (0.0185)          (0.0124)      (0.0159)     (0.0203)
                         Treat X Post X Q4                   0.0000          0.0005          0.0441***         -0.0419**     0.0465***    0.0700***
                                                            (0.0165)        (0.0149)          (0.0102)          (0.0193)      (0.0180)     (0.0206)

                         Observations                       195,446         195,446               195,446          195,446    195,379      195,379
                         R-squared                          0.9590          0.9590                0.9590           0.9591     0.9590       0.9590
                         Controls                            Yes             Yes                   Yes              Yes        Yes          Yes
                         City FE                             Yes             Yes                   Yes              Yes        Yes          Yes
                         Quarter FE                          Yes             Yes                   Yes              Yes        Yes          Yes
                         City Linear Trend                   Yes             Yes                   Yes              Yes        Yes          Yes

Notes: This table presents heterogeneous effects of ridehailing on entrepreneurship by city characteristics. The dependent variable, Log (1+New Business
Registration), is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of new business registrations in a city-quarter. Column (1) breaks out the effect by the fraction of
population in a city with high school degrees, column (2) by the fraction of population in a city with bachelor's degrees, column (3) by the fraction of Hispanic
population in a city, column (4) by the fraction of black and African American population, column (5) by average credit score, and column (6) by the fraction of
subprime borrowers, i.e. borrowers with credit scores below 660. Treat X Post is a dummy variable that equals one if city c adopted at least one ridehailing service
at time t. Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4 are indicator variables that take a value of one if a city's characteristics is in the respective quartile of distributions. Control variables
in the regressions include the natural logarithm of population, income per capita (lagged one quarter), and unemployment rate (lagged one quarter). Standard errors,
adjusted for clustering at the city level, are reported in parentheses. , , and  represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                                           47
                                                                     ONLINE APPENDIX

                                                                                  Table A1
                                                                     Robustness: Post-2010 Sample

                                                        Business Registration                 SBA Loans (<6m)               SBA Loans (<12m)
                                                         (1)              (2)                (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                       >2010      >2010 & Treat=1        >2010        >2010 & Treat=1    >2010      >2010 & Treat=1


                       Treat X Post                  0.0581***        0.0435***        0.0255**            0.0173       0.0389***      0.0293**
                                                      (0.0120)         (0.0107)         (0.0103)         (0.0110)        (0.0111)       (0.0119)
                       Log Pop                       1.1675***          0.0507           0.0721            0.0719         0.0397         -0.0828
                                                      (0.3423)         (0.2669)         (0.2198)         (0.2940)        (0.2404)       (0.3143)
                       Log Income Per Capita (lag)   0.3219***        0.4156***          0.1125           0.2865*         0.1135          0.3100
                                                      (0.1034)         (0.1247)         (0.0883)         (0.1704)        (0.0949)       (0.1886)
                       Unemployment Rate (lag)         -0.0016          -0.0015        0.0067***         0.0071**       0.0084***      0.0096**
                                                      (0.0048)         (0.0049)         (0.0024)          (0.0034)       (0.0027)       (0.0038)

                       Observations                    80,060           47,436           82,852           48,076         82,852         48,076
                       R-squared                       0.9606           0.9684           0.4414           0.4989         0.4789         0.5366
                       City FE                          Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes
                       Quarter FE                       Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes
                       City Linear Trend                Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes

Notes: This table presents results from generalized difference-in-difference regressions excluding the city-quarters on or before 2010 to avoid the influence of the
Great Recession. The dependent variable in Columns (1)-(2) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of new business registrations. The dependent variable
in Columns (3) and (4) is the natural logarithm of the one plus the number of SBA loans to firms that are incorporated in less than 6 months. The dependent
variable in Columns (5) and (6) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of SBA loans to firms that are incorporated in less than 12 months. Treat X Post is
a dummy variable that equals one if city c adopted at least one ridehailing service at time t. Control variables in the regressions include the natural logarithm of
population, income per capita (lagged one quarter), and unemployment rate (lagged one quarter). Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the city level, are
reported in parentheses. , , and  represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                                      48
                                                                                                   Table A2
                                                                                 Robustness: Including City Quadratic Trend
           y p         Q
                                             Log (1+New Business Registration)                  Log (1+SBA Loans to Newly Registered Firms (<6M))         Log (1+SBA Loans to Newly Registered Firms (<12M))
                                    (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)         (5)           (6)             (7)              (8)         (5)           (6)            (7)              (8)
                                                                                  >2005 &                                                   >2005 &                                                    >2005 &
                                  >2000           >2005          Treat = 1                     >2000         >2005         Treat = 1                     >2000         >2005         Treat = 1
                                                                                  Treat=1                                                    Treat=1                                                   Treat=1

Treat X Post                     0.0692***      0.0529***        0.0485***       0.0415***   0.0780***      0.0296***      0.0503***        0.0264**    0.1038***     0.0427***      0.0698***       0.0380***
                                  (0.0128)       (0.0110)         (0.0112)        (0.0099)     (0.0105)       (0.0107)      (0.0111)        (0.0113)     (0.0117)      (0.0116)        (0.0122)       (0.0123)
Log Pop                          0.5060***        0.1793         0.4562***         0.0987    0.2622***       0.2358**      0.2513***         0.1667     0.2778***        0.1674       0.2359**          0.0635
                                  (0.1117)       (0.1172)         (0.1248)        (0.1002)     (0.0776)      (0.1051)       (0.0899)        (0.1226)     (0.0939)      (0.1239)       (0.1091)        (0.1400)
Log Income Per Capita (lag)      0.4517***      0.1761***        0.2150***         0.0039    0.2999***      0.3754***      0.2952***       0.4777***    0.4214***     0.4634***      0.4249***       0.6542***
                                  (0.0559)       (0.0653)         (0.0619)        (0.0740)     (0.0461)      (0.0578)       (0.0715)        (0.0925)     (0.0540)      (0.0666)       (0.0852)        (0.1102)
Unemployment Rate (lag)         -0.0112***      -0.0058**       -0.0213***       -0.0061**    -0.0023*        -0.0009        -0.0014         0.0007    -0.0040***       -0.0027        -0.0034         -0.0018
                                  (0.0017)       (0.0025)         (0.0020)        (0.0026)    (0.0013)       (0.0016)       (0.0020)        (0.0023)     (0.0015)      (0.0017)       (0.0023)        (0.0026)

Observations                      195,446         139,225        114,384           81,761     198,238        142,017         115,024         82,401     198,238        142,017         115,024         82,401
R-squared                         0.9633          0.9661         0.9706            0.9726     0.4086         0.4338          0.4712          0.4947     0.4439         0.4698          0.5071          0.5309
City FE                            Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
Quarter FE                         Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
City Linear Trend                  Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
City Quadratic Trend               Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes

Notes: This table presents results from generalized difference-in-difference regressions. Panel A regressions does not include city-specific linear trend or quadratic trend. Panel B regressions include both
city-specific linear and quadratic trends. The dependent variable in Columns (1)-(2) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of new business registrations. The dependent variable in Columns (3)
and (4) is the natural logarithm of the one plus the number of SBA loans to firms that are incorporated in less than 6 months. The dependent variable in Columns (5) and (6) is the natural logarithm of
one plus the number of SBA loans to firms that are incorporated in less than 12 months. Treat X Post is a dummy variable that equals one if city c adopted at least one ridehailing service at time t. Control
variables in the regressions include the natural logarithm of population, income per capita (lagged one quarter), and unemployment rate (lagged one quarter). Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the
city level, are reported in parentheses. , , and  represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                          49
                                                       Table A3
                Staggered DiD Sensitivity Analysis: Estimate Time Effects Solely from Control Cities


                                            (1)                         (2)                          (3)
                                   Business Registration          SBA Loans (<6m)              SBA Loans (<12m)


Treat X Post                             0.0559***                    0.1072***                    0.1371***
                                          (0.0103)                     (0.0091)                     (0.0102)
Log Pop                                  0.6323***                    0.2708***                    0.3267***
                                          (0.1131)                     (0.0757)                     (0.0944)
Log Income Per Capita (lag)             -0.3471***                    0.3478***                    0.4010***
                                          (0.0523)                     (0.0392)                     (0.0457)
Unemployment Rate (lag)                 -0.0358***                    -0.0144***                   -0.0206***
                                          (0.0011)                     (0.0007)                     (0.0008)


Observations                              139,225                      142,017                      142,017
R-squared                                 0.9557                        0.4080                       0.4427
City FE                                     Yes                          Yes                          Yes
Quarter FE                                  No                           No                           No
City Linear Trend                           Yes                          Yes                          Yes

Notes: This table presents results from generalized difference-in-difference regressions, where all outcomes and
control variables are manually detrended using the means of the variables estimated from the control cities. Hence,
the time effects are identified solely from the control group. The sample is post 2005. The dependent variable in
Columns (1)-(2) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of new business registrations. The dependent variable
in Columns (3) and (4) is the natural logarithm of the one plus the number of SBA loans to firms that are incorporated
in less than 6 months. The dependent variable in Columns (5) and (6) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number
of SBA loans to firms that are incorporated in less than 12 months. Treat X Post is a dummy variable that equals one
if city c adopted at least one ridehailing service at time t. Control variables in the regressions include the natural
logarithm of population, income per capita (lagged one quarter), and unemployment rate (lagged one quarter).
Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the city level, are reported in parentheses. , , and  represent statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                            50
                          Panel A                                                     Panel B

                                                        Figure A1
                                            Robustness: Post-2010 Sample
This figure displays the regression coefficient estimates for our three main outcomes and two-tailed 95% confidence
intervals based on standard errors clustered at the city level. We exclude years on and before 2010 to avoid the
influence of the Great Recession. The outcome variables in Panel A is the natural logarithm of one plus new business
registrations. The outcome variable in Panel B is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of SBA loans issued to
newly-registered business (businesses that are registered within past 6 months). To map out the pattern in the
counterfactual treatment effects, we regress the outcome variables on the lag and lead indicators (bunched by four
quarters) of the ridehailing entry. The sample includes all rideshare cities in years after 2010. The control variables
include the natural logarithm of population, income per capita (lagged one quarter), and unemployment rate (lagged
one quarter). The vertical red line indicates the quarter of entry.




                                                            51
                                          Panel A: New Business Registration




                               Panel B: SBA Loans to New Registered Businesses (<6M)




                                                       Figure A2
                                    Robustness: Excluding One State at a Time
This figure examines the sensitivity of our estimates by plotting the coefficient on Treat X Post and its 95% confidence
interval after removing one state from the sample at a time and re-estimating the specification. The legend displays
the state that is removed from the sample for each coefficient estimate. The outcome variables are the natural log of
one plus new business registrations (Panel A) and the natural log of one plus SBA loans to new business registrations.
The sample includes all rideshare cities in years after 2005 (the specifications used in the Column (4) of Table 2 and
Table 5A). Control variables include the natural logarithm of population, income per capita (lagged one quarter), and
unemployment rate (lagged one quarter).

                                                            52
             Panel A: Business Registration                                   Panel B: SBA Loans



                                                     Figure A3
                   The Goodman-Bacon Decomposition of Staggered DiD Coefficient Estimates
This figure displays the decomposition of the staggered difference-in-difference coefficients using the method
suggested by Goodman-Bacon (2018). The outcome variables in Panel A is the natural logarithm of one plus new
business registrations. The outcome variable in Panel B is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of SBA loans
issued to businesses registered within six months.




                                                          53
                          Panel A                                                      Panel B

                                                         Figure A4
                             Staggered DiD Sensitivity Analysis: Changing Base Years
This figure displays the regression coefficient estimates for our three main outcomes and two-tailed 95% confidence
intervals based on standard errors clustered at the city level. We follow the suggestions of Borusyak and Jaravel (2017)
and use the first event year and the last event year before treatment as the base periods for estimation. The outcome
variables in Panel A is the natural logarithm of one plus new business registrations. The outcome variable in Panel B
is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of SBA loans issued to the newly-registered business. To map out the
pattern in the counterfactual treatment effects, we regress the outcome variables on the lag and lead indicators
(bunched by four quarters) of the ridehailing entry. The sample includes all rideshare cities in years after 2005 (the
specifications used in the Column (4) of Table 2 and Table 5A). Control variables include the natural logarithm of
population, income per capita (lagged one quarter), and unemployment rate (lagged one quarter). The vertical red line
indicates the quarter of entry.




                                                            54
