                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE LIFE-CYCLE GROWTH OF PLANTS:
                 THE ROLE OF PRODUCTIVITY, DEMAND AND WEDGES

                                         Marcela Eslava
                                       John C. Haltiwanger

                                       Working Paper 27184
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27184


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We thank Alvaro Pinzón and Nicolás Urdaneta for superb research assistance, and Innovations
for Poverty Action, CAF and the World Bank for financial support for this project. We also
thank DANE for permitting access to the microdata of the Annual Manufacturing Survey, as well
as DANE's staff for advice in the use of these data. The use and interpretation of the data are the
authors' responsibility. We gratefully acknowledge the comments of Virgiliu Midrigan, Venky
Venkateswaran, Ariel Burstein, David Atkin, David Baqaee, Steven Davis, Chad Syverson,
Robert Shimer, Diego Restuccia, Peter Klenow, Stephen Redding, Gabriel Ulyssea, Irene
Brambilla, Manuel García-Santana and those from participants at the 2017 Society for Economic
Dynamics Conference; 2017 meeting of the European chapter of the Econometric Society; 2017
NBER Productivity, Development, and Entrepreneurship workshop; the 2019 NBER Summer
Institute; the 2016 Trade and Integration Network of LACEA; and seminars at Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, Universitat Autónoma de Barcelona, the University of Chicago, UCLA, LSE,
Oxford and Universidad de Los Andes. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marcela Eslava and John C. Haltiwanger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Life-cycle Growth of Plants: The Role of Productivity, Demand and Wedges
Marcela Eslava and John C. Haltiwanger
NBER Working Paper No. 27184
May 2020
JEL No. E24,L24,O47

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a framework that uses price and quantity information on both firms' outputs and
inputs to assess the roles, on firm dynamics and welfare, of efficiency, input prices, demand/
quality, idiosyncratic markups, and residual wedges. Our strategy nests previous approaches
limited by data availability. In our application, demand/quality is found to dominate the cross
sectional variability of sales growth, while quality-adjusted input prices and residual wedges play
dampening roles, especially at birth. Markups play only a modest role for cross-sectional
variability of sales growth but are important in explaining welfare losses from revenue
productivity dispersion.


Marcela Eslava
Universidad de los Andes
Calle 19A # 1-37 Este. Bloque W of. 810
Bogotá, Colombia
meslava@uniandes.edu.co

John C. Haltiwanger
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
haltiwan@econ.umd.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27184
1     Introduction
A prevalent feature of market economies is wide heterogeneity of ...rm size, ...rm growth,
and a host of ...rm attributes correlated with size (e.g., productivity, exports, survival).
What are the sources of ...rm size and ...rm growth heterogeneity? How does the answer
matter for welfare? The macro literature on misallocation studies the role of produc-
tivity vs. remaining sources of dispersion, with special focus on wedges that distort the
size distribution of activity. Other literatures in macro, trade, and IO have focused on
the role of speci...c attributes of ...rms: demand (quality), markups, or costs. Hottman,
Redding and Weinstein (2016) recently integrated demand, markups and residual costs
into an estimation framework, but not wedges (i.e. departures from the model), ...nding
a dominant role for demand attributes. In the face of data constraints, assessing the
roles of all of these di¤erent margins of ...rms'primitives simultaneously has not been
possible. Productivity and wedges are typically identi...ed from structures that exploit
micro data on revenue and input expenditures, while structures that use product-level
data on output prices and quantities have been used to identify quality, costs and
markups.1
     Building on these distinct approaches, we develop a uni...ed conceptual, measure-
ment and estimation structure that integrates these di¤erent dimensions of data and
...rm attributes. Our framework takes advantage of data on output and input prices
and quantities to measure idiosyncratic demand shifters, markups, and two distinct
dimensions of idiosyncratic marginal costs: technical e¢ ciency and quality-adjusted
input prices. It accounts for the contribution of each of these attributes of ...rms to
...rm size and growth, while also allowing for wedges between the data and the behavior
predicted by the model. We apply this framework to the analysis of both growth over
the life cycle of manufacturing plants and welfare. Life cycle business growth is cru-
cially related to aggregate productivity growth (Hsieh and Klenow, 2014) and displays
wide heterogeneity across businesses (Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda, 2013; Eslava,
Pinzón and Haltiwanger, 2019). Our framework also lends itself to analyzing the impact
of di¤erent sources of heterogeneity across ...rms on welfare, and we use it to that end.
     We use detailed product-level data on quantities and prices for outputs and inputs
from the Colombian Annual Manufacturing Survey. This is a uniquely rich census of
non-micro manufacturing plants with data on quantities and prices, at the detailed
product class, for outputs and inputs within plants. We follow individual plants for
up to thirty years (1982-2012). The long time coverage allows us to investigate the
   1
     The misallocation literature is extensive. Prominent examples are Restuccia and Rogerson (2008);
Hsieh and Klenow (2009, 2014)) ; Guner, Ventura and Xu (2008); Midrigan and Xu (2013); Bartelsman
et. al. (2013); Bento and Restuccia (2017); Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2014). Quality is the focus
in Brooks (2006); Fieler, Eslava and Xu (2018); Hallak and Schott (2011) Khandelwal (2011); Kugler
and Verhoogen (2012); Manova and Zhang (2012). Production e¢ ciency vs. demand is emphasized
in Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008 and 2016), and Eslava et al. (2013). De Loecker and
Warzynski (2012) and De Loecker et al (2020) have focused on markups.


                                                 2
determinants of medium- and long-term life cycle growth.
     By technology or technical e¢ ciency we refer to a production function residual
(Foster, Haltiwanger and Syverson, 2008), where production in multiproduct plants
is plant-level revenue de   ated with a quality adjusted plant-level de    ator. Following
Redding and Weinsten (2020), our de       ator allows for product turnover and changing
appeal across products within the ...rm. On the demand side, we estimate plant-speci...c
demand function residuals, that identify greater appeal/quality as the ability to charge
higher prices per unit of a product (Hottman, Redding and Weinstein, 2016; Khandel-
wal,2011; Fieler, Eslava and Xu, 2018). Our speci...cation of demand and competition
allows for idiosyncratic markups, which can also be calculated using our data. Input
costs are directly measured from input price data, separately for materials and labor,
also permitting the construction of quality-adjusted input prices.
     Our approach requires, and the richness of the data permits, estimating the para-
meters of the production and demand functions. We introduce an estimation technique
that jointly estimates the two functions, bringing together insights from recent literature
on estimating production functions based on output and input use data, and literature
on estimating demand functions using P and Q data for outputs.2 The joint estimation
ensures consistency and separate identi...cation of demand vs. production parameters.
Moreover, the granularity of our data allows estimating di¤erent production and de-
mand elasticities for di¤erent sectors, and doing so without imposing constant returns
to scale. In contrast to much of the literature estimating demand functions in contexts
of multiple products, we also allow e¢ ciency and demand to be correlated, even within
...rms over time.
     After estimating plant-speci...c technical e¢ ciency, demand shifters, markups and
quality-adjusted input prices, we measure the contribution of each to the variability of
sales growth across plants over the life-cycle. Residual wedges in our framework corre-
spond to the gap between actual size at any point of the life cycle and size implied by the
model given measured attributes. Since we explicitly account for idiosyncratic (quality-
adjusted) input price and markup variability, the distribution of these wedges is not
adequately captured by revenue productivity dispersion (in contrast to the framework
proposed by Hsieh and Klenow'    s 2009, 2014, which is nested in our model).3
     Dispersion in demand shifters is the main driver of sales growth heterogeneity in
our data. Though a dominant role of demand shocks in accounting for life cycle growth
has been previously found (Hottman, Redding and Weinstein, 2016; and Foster, Halti-
wanger and Syverson, 2016) full-distribution accounting allows us to identify this role
   2
      For production function estimation, see, e.g. Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2015); De Loecker et
al. (2016). For demand function estimation see, e..g. Hottman, Redding and Weinstein (2016); Foster,
Haltiwanger and Syverson (2008).
    3
      These wedges are also frequently termed "distortions" , but we prefer the former term since the
idiosyncratic gaps we identify may represent sources of productivity or welfare loss that even the social
planner would face, as they may stem from constraints more technological than institutional in nature,
such as adjustment costs.


                                                   3
as stemming from extremely dynamic appeal in superstar plants. Moreover, our results
also point to technical e¢ ciency e¤orts as a necessary condition for success: rapidly
contracting technical e¢ ciency is the outstanding characteristic of the worst perform-
ers.
     We also ...nd that negatively correlated wedges reduce plant revenue variance by 12
percentage points over the ...rst twenty years of life, while heterogeneous input prices
reduce it by an additional 16%. For a subperiod where we can quality-adjust wages, we
...nd that the contribution of the latter is reduced by half after this adjustment.
     Correlated wedges are particularly large for plants with lowest productivity growth.
By age 20, in the absence of wedges, the top quartile of sales'predicted growth would
have grown close to seven-fold, rather than the actual ...ve-fold, while the bottom quartile
would have contracted markedly, rather than growing close to 40% as it did. Markup
dispersion, in turn, plays a negligible role for sales growth heterogeneity. The relative
importance of di¤erent sources of heterogeneity varies considerably over the life cycle.
For mature plants, most of the variation in life-cycle growth is explained by demand
and e¢ ciency, while for younger plants e¢ ciency and wedges (negatively correlated with
fundamentals) play a more important role in the decomposition of variance.
     A counterfactual analysis of the individual impact of wedges and fundamentals on
welfare highlights the value of disentangling the role of technical e¢ ciency vs demand,
and that of input prices and markups from residual wedges. Love of variety implies wel-
fare gains from heterogeneity in product demand (which re        ects heterogeneity in both
product quality and appeal). This welfare e¤ect turns out to be large. While markups
are unimportant for explaining cross-plant heterogeneity in growth, they turn out to
be crucial for welfare. Most of the welfare losses from revenue productivity dispersion
are explained by quality-adjusted input price and markup variability, each being as
important as the other. This is because, though markups exhibit little dispersion in the
overall cross-sectional distribution, a few plants with very large market shares weigh
heavily in aggregate welfare. Quality adjusting wages matters signi...cantly for size dis-
persion as noted above, but not so much for welfare, which is inherently size-weighted.
This suggests that, though an important fraction of wage dispersion re           ects quality
heterogeneity rather than some type of friction or distortion, it is the departure from
frictionless and distortionless labor markets that matters for welfare.
     Our contribution to the literature is multi-fold. First, we bridge the gap between
distinct approaches to the study of drivers of ...rm size and growth, which alternatively
focus on either productivity vs. wedges, or on the roles of demand, cost and markups.
Our framework builds on Hsieh and Klenow (2009, 2014)­        henceforth HK­   on the supply
side, and on Hottman, Redding and Weinstein (2016)­       henceforth HRW­     on the demand
side. Cost factors are found to play a more important role for sales growth variability
than would be identi...ed by the HRW approach alone, because the cost component in
that framework is a residual that lumps together e¢ ciency, input costs, and residual
wedges. The latter are negatively correlated with e¢ ciency so the composite contribu-


                                             4
tion is muted. Pooling ages, the contribution of the composite HRW "cost" residual to
the variance of sales growth is -12.2% in our data. Unpacking this, we ...nd it re    ects a
positive contribution of 15.4% of technical e¢ ciency, a negative contribution of -15.9%
from input prices and an additional drag of -11.7% from residual wedges. Importantly,
residual wedges are not inherently a cost/supply side factor so the composite HRW
"cost" residual may re    ect a host of factors as we discuss below. Relative to the impli-
cations of the HK decomposition, in turn, our approach yields insights masked by using
a composite productivity measure as well as a composite wedge measure. On the one
hand, the composite productivity measure is dominated by demand shifters relative to
technical e¢ ciency, where the former contributes over ten times more than the latter
to the dispersion of sales growth. On the other hand, composite HK wedges are a drag
of 40% on sales growth variability pooling ages, but unpacking we ...nd that 25% of
this 40% is due to input prices (and markups, but the latter play a negligible role in
this decomposition). The remainder is due to residual wedges. Related, idiosyncratic
input prices and markups explain about half of the welfare losses from composite HK
wedges (with residual wedges explaining the rest).
    Within the misallocation literature, recent contributions have increasingly focused
on decomposing size-to-productivity wedges into components such as adjustment costs,
information frictions, ...nancial frictions, labor market frictions (see, e.g., Asker et al.,
2014; David and Venkateswaran, 2018; Midrigan and Xu, 2014; Guner, Ventura and Xu,
2008). In a distinct but related vein, our results highlight that composite wedges can
be decomposed into idiosyncratic markups, quality-adjusted input prices and residual
wedges. Our ...ndings on the importance of input price heterogeneity (even adjusting
for quality) point to important sources of such heterogeneity, including frictions in the
markets for inputs as well as potentially monopsony power. Sorting this out should be
an important topic for future research.
    Second, we contribute to the literature on estimating production functions and to
that on estimating demand functions.4 Our joint estimation of the two functions is an
important novelty. It highlights the importance of relying on output price and quantity
information to distinguish revenue from production parameters, and the usefulness of
including information on the production process (inputs, in particular) to distinguish
demand from supply elasticities. Moreover, our approach to measuring plant-level pro-
duction for multiproduct plants underscores the need to take a stance on the structure
of demand, not only to measure plant output in the presence of multiple products, but
to even de...ne it.
    Third, we provide an alternative take on the role of markups in ...rm heterogeneity
relative to that in De Loecker et al (2018), who recover the markup without imposing
structure on the demand side. The need to take a stance on demand in our context
   4
    For production function estimation, we follow Olley and Pakes (1996); Levinsohn and Petrin (2003),
Ackerberg, Caves and Frazer (2015) , and De Loecker et al (2016). For demand estimation, HRW and
Foster et al (2008).



                                                  5
also re  ects the more general fact that the interpretation of markups depends on the
market structure. A residual approach using cost shares of revenue to identify markups
lead to markup measures that capture all factors driving cost share heterogeneity across
producers. Our approach to markups is closer to that in HRW or Edmond, Midrigan and
Xu (2019), which ties the markup to a speci...c demand system, and it is complemented
with our ability to separately measure demand elasticities, input price heterogeneity
and other sources of market power.
    Finally, our ...ndings contribute to the policy discussion regarding interventions to ad-
dress the limitations to business growth. Our results highlight that size-to-productivity
wedges are especially prevalent for young businesses, but also that dimensions internal
to businesses are even more important than wedges. On this internal side, the focus
has frequently been on e¤orts conducive to improvements in technical e¢ ciency. For
instance, research on managerial practices that impact productivity has focused on pro-
duction processes and employee management (e.g. Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007; Bloom
et al. 2016). Our approach highlights the multidimensional character of growth drivers
that are internal to the business, including the appeal to costumers and input prices
potentially a¤ected by its decisions. Our results align with those in Atkin et al (2016)
and Atkin et al (2019) in pointing at quality as crucial driver of business growth, and
at the fact that quality improvements may impose costs in terms of technical e¢ ciency.
    While the data infrastructure we use is very rich, it faces limitations particularly
with respect to the increasingly prevalent use of item-level price and quantity data as
in HRW. Our data are at detailed product class level for each establishment but not
at the item-level. While this prevents us from drawing the rich insights that emerge
from item-level data, the combination of price and quantity data for both outputs and
inputs at the product class level within establishments yields crucial new insights that
help to bridge the ...ndings of HRW with those from the large literature using revenue
and input expenditure data at the establishment level. We also ...nd it reassuring that
both qualitatively and quantitatively we generate results on the overall contribution
of demand and cost factors to the growth distribution across businesses that are con-
sistent with alternatively implementing the HRW approach.5 As we note above, our
data infrastructure and approach allow us to unpack their composite cost residual into
distinct e¢ ciency, input price and residual wedge components.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents our framework. We then explain
the data used in our empirical work, and the approach we use to measure fundamentals,
including the joint estimation of the parameters of production and demand, respectively
in sections 3 and 4 . Our main results are presented in section 5. Section 6 examines
   5
     Panel A of Table X of HRW shows that demand (combining appeal/scope) accounts for 107% of
...rm sales growth in their data, compared to our ...nding of 113% in the Colombian data (averaging
across the life cycle). Combined cost factors are a drag of -7% in HRW'      s application, while if we
combine the contributions of e¢ ciency, input prices and residual wedges that we ...nd for Colombia, we
account for about -13%.



                                                  6
the the value added of our approach relative to prior approaches. Welfare analysis is
presented in section 7. Section 8 concludes by providing a more comprehensive view on
the implications of our analysis, and on open questions for future research.


2       Decomposing ...rm growth into fundamentals vs
        wedges
We start with a simple model of ...rm optimal behavior given ...rm fundamentals, to
derive the relationship that should be observed between size growth and growth in
fundamentals as a ...rm ages. We also permit ...rm size to be impacted by wedges. For
consistency with the literature on business dynamics, in our theoretical analysis we refer
to a business as a "...rm" , even though the unit of observation for our empirical work
is an establishment or plant. The main fundamentals we consider are the e¢ ciency
of the ...rm'
            s productive process (which we term T F P Q as in Foster, Haltiwanger and
Syverson, 2008, though we generalize the concept to producers of heterogeneous goods)
and a demand shock.6 The conceptual framework below makes clear what we mean
by each of these, and the sense in which they are "fundamentals"       . Beyond measuring
T F P Q and demand shocks, we observe unit prices for inputs, in particular material
inputs and labor.
    In the model, the ...rm chooses its size optimally given T F P Q, demand shocks, input
prices and wedges. As a result, growth over its life cycle is driven by growth in each
of them. This is the basis of our analysis. In the spirit of a growth accounting exercise
the framework remains silent about the sources of growth of fundamentals, and rather
asks how the ...rm adjusts its size given those fundamentals, and contingent on survival
to each given age.7 However, we do explore the empirical cross-sectional relationship
between fundamentals and wedges. In the appendix, we also explore the relationship
between proxies for investment in innovation and lagged fundamentals. We focus on
decomposing the determinants of growth of surviving ...rms up to any given age, but
include robustness analysis of the determinants of survival in appendix H . Appendix
H shows that our main results are robust to consideration of selection issues. We
    6
     Hsieh and Klenow (2009, 2014) use the term T F P Q to refer to a composite productivity measure
that lumps together technical e¢ ciency and demand shocks. We refer to this composite concept further
below as T F P Q_HK , as a reference to Hsieh and Klenow. Haltiwanger, Kulick and Syverson (2018)
explore properties of T F P Q_HK using U.S. data.
   7
     For instance, the seminal models of Hopenhayn (1992) and Melitz (2003), and much of the work
that has since followed in Macroeconomics and Trade. Endogenous productivity-quality growth has
made its way to these models more recently (e.g. Atkenson and Burstein, 2010; Acemoglu et al. 2014;
Hsieh and Klenow, 2014; Fieler, Eslava, and Xu, 2016). The ...rm'   s e¤orts to strengthen demand may
include investments in building its client base (Foster et al., 2016), and adding new products and/or
improving the quality of its pre-existing product lines. Those to strengthen T F P Q may include
better management of the production process (e.g. Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007) or acquiring better
machines.


                                                 7
conclude that our ...ndings for plants that survive up to age t are largely driven by the
establishments that survive at least one more year.
    We don'  t explicitly model dynamic frictions but take the shortcut in recent liter-
ature on misallocation to permit wedges or distortions between frictionless static ...rst
order conditions and actual behavior (e.g. Hsieh and Klenow, 2009). Such distortions
and wedges might capture factors such as adjustment costs, information frictions and
distortions arising from the business climate.8 This shortcut enables us to use a simple
static model of optimal input determination to frame our analysis of growth between
birth and any given age. We permit the wedges or distortions to vary by ...rm age.
    For developing the theoretical predictions, we treat input prices as exogenous and
potentially idiosyncratic for the common composite input. Empirically we consider mul-
tiple inputs and make e¤orts to take into account input heterogeneity through quality
adjusting prices. Given that idiosyncratic input prices turn out to play a non-trivial
role empirically, we consider below the potential sources of the variation in input prices
even after adjusting for quality.

2.1     Firm Optimization
Consider a ...rm indexed by f , that produces output Qf t using a composite input Xf t
to maximize its pro...ts, with technology

                                   Qf t = Af t Xf t = af t At Xf t                                    (1)

     Af t is the ...rm'
                      s technical e¢ ciency, T F P Q, which has an aggregate and an idiosyn-
cratic component (At and af t ), while is the returns to scale (in production) parameter.
Equation (1) de...nes af t as the (idiosyncratic) e¢ ciency of the productive process: how
much output the ...rm obtains from a unit of a basket of inputs. Firm f may be uni- or
multi-product. Section 2.2 below discusses the de...nition of output Q for multi-product
...rms.
     We use a CES preference structure (speci...ed in more detail below) that yields
demand at the ...rm level to be given by:
                                                 1                  1
                                  Pf t = Df t Qf t = Dt df t Qf t                                     (2)
where Df t is a demand shifter, and          is the elasticity of substitution between ...rms .
                                                                             1=
                                                                        Et
Df t has aggregate and idiosyncratic components Dt = Pt                 Pt
                                                                                  and df t ; respectively.
   8
    This shortcut has limitations as the idiosyncratic distortions that we permit don' t provide the
discipline that formally modeling dynamic frictions imply. See, e.g., Asker, Collard-Wexler and De-
Loecker (2014), Decker et. al. (2017), and David and Venkateswaran (2018). But it has the advantage
in subsuming in a simple measure di¤erent types of frictions and distortions, including those that
capture dynamic considerations.



                                                 8
Et is aggregate (sectoral) expenditure, and the aggregate (sectoral) price index is given
          PNF          1   1
                             1

by Pt =          d   P
             f =1 f t f t      where NF is the number of ...rms in the sector.
    Firm appeal df t is measured from equation (2) as the variation in ...rm price holding
quantities constant, beyond aggregate e¤ects. We refer to df t generically as the ...rm' s
(idiosyncratic) demand shock, intuitively capturing quality/appeal as will become clear
in our discussion of demand primitives further below. Notice also that, multiplying (2)
by Qf t :
                                                                                    1
                                                          1
                                                     1
                                    Rf t = Dt df t Qf t       = Dt Q Q
                                                                     ft                                              (3)

where QQ                                                 1
          f t is quality-adjusted output de...ned as df t Qf t : The idiosyncratic component
of sales is, thus, driven by quality adjusted output. Using the CES preference structure
discussed in more detail below, from which demand equation (2) can be derived, it is
apparent that idiosyncratic ...rm sales are closely linked to consumer welfare. Conse-
quently, the distribution of ...rm sales growth is the central focus of our analysis of the
...rm growth distribution.
     Putting together technology and demand, the ...rm chooses its scale Xf t to maximize
pro...ts

                                                                                                1
                                                                              1     1
                                                                                           (1       )
         M ax (1         f t ) Pf t Q f t   Cf t Xf t = (1       f t ) D f t Af t       Xf t            C f t Xf t
           Xit




    taking as given Af t , Df t , and unit costs of the composite input, denoted Cf t . There
may be idiosyncratic revenue wedges f t , that create a gap between a ...rm'   s actual scale
and that which would be implied by the static model given its fundamental attributes.9
Such wedges capture, for instance, adjustment costs that may be present in terms of
changing the scale or mix of inputs or building up a customer base, product-speci...c
tari¤s, ...nancing constraints, information frictions, and size-dependent regulations or
taxes. Adjustment costs break the link between actual adjustment and the "desired
adjustment"   .10 Financing constraints may similarly limit the ability of the ...rm to
undertake optimal investments, and force it to remain smaller than optimal and even
potentially exit the market during liquidity crunches even if its present discounted value
is positive.11 The resulting f t may be correlated with plant fundamentals themselves.
   9
     As in Restuccia and Rogerson, 2009 and Hsieh and Klenow, 2009. Further below, we also consider
factor-speci...c distortions that, for given choice of Xit , a¤ect the relative choice of a given input with
respect to others.
  10
     See, for instance, Caballero, Engel and Haltiwanger (1995, 1997), Eslava, Haltiwanger, Kugler,
and Kugler (2010) and Asker et. al. (2014).
  11
     Gopinath et al. (2017), Eslava et al. (2018)


                                                          9
By their very nature, adjustment costs and ...nancing constraints are typically correlated
with plant fundamentals. Size-dependent regulations are another prominent example
of correlated wedges.12
    We allow ...rms to hold market power, so that a ...rm'   s market share may be non-
negligible. This also implies that, in choosing its optimal scale, a ...rm does not take
as given the aggregate price index, Pt . Under these conditions and the CES demand
structure developed in section 2.2, variability in markups across ...rms stems from market
power (i.e., ...rms take into account their impact on sectoral prices):
                                                                                       1
                                                       ft   =                                                                                             (4)
                                                                 (        1) (1            sf t )
                                                                                   R
   Where f t is the ...rm's markup and sf t = Eftt (proof: Appendix D). As in Hsieh
and Klenow (2009, 2014), marginal cost is de...ned inclusive of wedges, so that f t =
      Pf t
@CTf t
           1
             where CT is total cost.
 @Qf t
         (1   )

                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                         !           1

                                                                                                             Df t Af t
                                                                                                                         1                   1       (1   1
                                                                                                                                                              )
       Pro...t maximization yields optimal input demand Xf t =                         ,                                             1
                                                                      (1 f t )                           Cf t   ft

which is then used to obtain optimal output and sales as functions of fundamentals
(Df t , Af t , and Cf t ), wedges , and parameters. Subsequently dividing each optimal
outcome in period t by its optimal level at birth (t = 0), we obtain (see Appendix B):13

                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                 1
       Rf t           df t    1
                                   af t            2
                                                           pmf t          2
                                                                                   wf t             2
                                                                                                        ft
                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                             bt      ft
            =
       Rf 0           df 0         af 0                    pmf 0                   wf 0                 f0                       0   f0
                                                                                                                                                          (5)
                              1                                      1
       where      1   =            1       ,   2       =     1                1,   and we have further assumed Xf t =
                          1   (1       )
Kf t Lf t Mf t , so that Cf t is the corresponding Cobb-Douglas aggregate of the growth
of di¤erent input prices. Among input prices, two are observed in the data: the price
of material inputs, P mf t , and average wage per worker, Wf t . As noted above, df t and
af t are the idiosyncratic components of Df t and Af t . Similarly, pmf t and wf t are the
idiosyncratic components of P mf t and Wf t . Aggregate components, from Dt , At and
Ct are lumped into t and bt . Crucially, f t captures life cycle growth in idiosyncratic
                         0        0            f0
wedges, including those stemming from f t , from potential factor-speci...c wedges, and
  12
    E.g. Garcia-Santana and Pijoan-Mas (2014) and Garicano et al. (2016).
  13
    There is some slight abuse of notation here as t is used for calendar time and then for every ...rm
we create our life cycle measures by dividing its outcomes and determinants at some given age by
those outcomes and determinants at birth. We use the ratio of these variables at age t to age at birth
(t = 0).



                                                                         10
from measurement error and noise in fundamentals not observed by the ...rm at the time
of choosing its scale in each period.14
    Equation (5) is the focus of our analysis of the distribution of ...rm growth. We start
                                                                                    df t af t
with the growth of (idiosyncratic) attributes that we can measure. Among these, df      ; ,
                                                                                      0 af 0
 ft    w
      ft        pm
   , wf  ; f t are, respectively, life cycle growth in idiosyncratic demand shocks, T F P Q,
        0 pmf 0
 f0
markups, and shocks to wages and material input prices. The wedges that a ...rm faces
may be age-speci...c, and thus de-couple life-cycle growth in output from the growth of
those attributes.

2.2         CES Demand Structure
In this subsection, we show that the ...rm-level demand structure used above is con-
sistent with single-product producers as well as multiproduct producers using a CES
preference structure. Taking into account multiproduct producers is important in our
context,where two thirds of observations correspond to multiproduct producers. We
de...ne and measure ...rm-level output in a manner that allows for within ...rm changes
in product mix and product appeal over time. The theoretical structure is such that
we can measure output as revenue de        ated with an appropriate ...rm-level price index.
As long as di¤erent products within a ...rm are not perfect substitutes, that price index
re   ects product turnover and changing product appeal across existing products. To
accomplish this we use the CUPI approach developed by Redding and Weinstein (2020)
but also build on insights of Hottman et. al. (2016).
     Speci...cally, in the context of multiproduct ...rms we allow ...rm output Qf t to be a
                                                 0                   1 1
                                                   X               1
CES composite of individual products Qf t = @           df jt qf jt A , where qf jt is period t
                                                                                               f
                                                                                               t
sales of good j produced by ...rm f , the weights df jt reect consumers'relative preference
for di¤erent goods within the basket o¤ered by ...rm f , and f     t is the basket of goods
produced by f in year t. That is, consumers derive utility from a composite CES utility
function, with a CES layer for ...rms and another for products within ...rms. Consumer'   s
utility in this general CES structure in period t is given by:
                                                                                                      1
                         1+                                    M                  L
  14   ft       ft
                     1
                         ft
                              2
                                  ft
                                       1 (1
                                              ft)
                                                     1   (1+   ft   )   1
                                                                            (1+   ft   )   1
                                                                                               rf t
            =                                                                                         1
       f0                1+
                f0
                     1
                         f0
                              2
                                  0t    f0)
                                    (1+ M
                                       1 (1 1
                                              (1+ L
                                              0t )f0)
                                                     1  1
                                                          rf 0
  where f t , f t , and f t capture measurement error in, respectively, demand, technology and input
price shocks, and L and M are, respectively, wedges speci...c to labor and materials with respect to
capital.




                                                                                  11
                                                                                      !
                                                             X                    1
                                                                                          1

                             U (Q1t ; :::; QN t ) =                   df t Qf t               (6)
                                                               It
                                                           0                          1   1
                                                               X                  1
                                     where Qf t = @                   df jt qf jt A           (7)
                                                                  f
                                                                  t
                              NF t X
                              X
                      s:t:                   pf jt qf jt = Et ;                               (8)
                              f =1   f
                                     t
                                                 1
                                     Y k f    k      Y kI1 k
                                      df jt t   = 1;  dit t = 1                               (9)
                                         f                     It
                                         t


where pf jt is the price of qf jt ; and It is the set of ...rms in period t. We refer to df jt and
df t as, respectively product (within ...rm) and ...rm appeal or demand shocks, de...ned as
in equations (6) and (7): the weight, in consumer preferences, of product f j in ...rm f 0 s
basket of products, and of ...rm f in the set of ...rms. Given normalizations in equation
(9), product appeal df jt captures the valuation of attributes speci...c to good f j relative
to other goods produced by ...rm f , while ...rm appeal df t captures attributes that are
common to all goods provided by ...rm f , such as the ...rm'      s customer service and average
quality of ...rm f 's products, in a constant utility framework. Both ...rm and product
appeal may vary over time besides varying across ...rms.
     Equation (7) de...nes real output for a ...rm in this multiproduct framework. In a
multiproduct-...rm context it is not possible to de...ne real output in absence of assump-
tions about demand. The concept of real output "in theory equals nominal output
divided by a price index, but the choice of price index is not arbitrary: it is determined
by the utility function"(Hottman et al., 2016, page 1349). We de...ne the real output of
a multi-product ...rm as an aggregate of single-product outputs, in which each product
receives a weight equal to its appeal to costumers, relative to that of other products
within the ...rm. Given (9), this real output measure is normalized by the average ap-
peal of products within the ...rm. The crucial relevant assumption here is that products
within ...rms are not perfect substitutes so that tracking product turnover and changing
product appeal within ...rms is critical for measuring ...rm-level output.
     We assume the elasticity of substitution to be the same between and within ...rms in
a sector. This assumption implies we have a special case of a nested CES with a nest
for ...rms and another for products. Assuming the same elasticity simpli...es the analysis
substantially by abstracting from within ...rm cannibalization e¤ects in a multi-product
...rm setting as explored by Hottman et. al. (2016). As discussed above, our ...rms still
recognize their in    uence on the aggregate (sectoral) price level as they change their
scale yielding the ...rm-level variation in the markup. This simplifying assumption also

                                                      12
implies that in our estimation we can estimate the between ...rm elasticity of substitution
and then apply it for our measurement of ...rm-level price indices.
     Consumer optimization implies that the period t demand for product f j and the
...rm revenue are, respectively, given by


                                                     Pf t            pf jt          Et
                            qf jt = df t df jt                                                     (10)
                                                     Pt              Pf t           Pt
                                                     1               Et
                            Rf t = Qf t Pf t = df t Pf t                                           (11)
                                                                    Pt1
       where                                                       ! (1 1
                                             X                              )
                                                           1
                                    Pt =             df t Pf t                                     (12)
                                               It

Dividing (11) by Pf t and solving for Pf t ,15 we obtain
                                                      1                         1
                                   Pf t = Df t Qf t = Dt df t Qf t                                 (13)

where the ...rm-level price index is given by:
                                           0                       1 (1 1       )
                                               X
                                    Pf t = @         df jt p1
                                                            f jt
                                                                   A                               (14)
                                                 f
                                                 t

   Given the nested CES demand, the ...rm will charge the same markup on all prod-
ucts.16
   Observe that (13) is identical to (2). This consistency is important as we use (14) to
construct ...rm-level prices, using the CUPI framework of Redding and Weinstein (2020)
  15
      We follow Redding and Weinstein (2016) in our treatment of product entry and exit. They don'     t
formally model the decisions to add and substract products but rationalize the entry and exit of
products through assumptions on the patterns of product speci...c demand shocks. That is, they
assume products enter when the product speci...c demand shock switches from zero to positive and
exits when the reverse occurs. We rationalize product entry and exit in the same manner. We
consider multi-product plants mostly for the purpose of obtaining a plant-level price de       ator that
takes into account changing multi-product activity.
   16
      See Appendix S2 of Hottman et. al. (2016). In this nested environment the ...rm'    s optimization
problem can be decomposed into two steps. The ...rm ...rst chooses the composite index of products.
It then chooses individual products to minimize the composite total cost subject to the optimal level
of ...rm-level output. It is optimal for the ...rm to equate the ratio of marginal costs across products
to the ratio of marginal utilities. Since consumers maximization yields that the ratio of marginal
utilities across products is equal to the ratio of prices this implies the markups must be the same
across products. One important di¤erence with Hottman et. al. (2016) is that we don'            t permit
product-speci...c random cost shocks.


                                                     13
to express this price index in terms of observables. It is also useful to note that in
using (11) one obtains the analogous interpretation of measured ...rm appeal (df t ) used
by Hottman et al (2016): df t captures sales holding prices constant. This is akin to
quality as de...ned by Khandelwal (2010), Hallak and Schott (2011), Fieler, Eslava and
Xu (2016), and others. Foster et al (2016), in turn, interpret ...rm appeal as capturing
the strength of the business'client base.
     Given our assumption of the same elasticity of substitution between and within
...rms a natural question is whether ...rms still matter in this context. Firms do matter
in our framework for two reasons. First, our cost/production structure is at the ...rm-
level. That is, we specify the cost/production function as being based on total output
of the ...rm rather than product speci...c cost/production functions as in Hottman et. al.
(2016). We make this assumption for more than the convenience that our input and
input price data are at the ...rm level. Our view is that if one queried most ...rms (in
our case ­ really plants) to specify input costs (capital, labor, materials and energy)
on a product speci...c basis they would be unable to do so since costs are shared across
products (i.e., there is joint production). That is, a ...rm is not simply a collection of
separable lines of production. A second reason that ...rms matter here is some may be
large enough in the market that they don'    t take the sectoral output price as given. That
is, we depart from monopolistic competition. At a deeper level, ...rms are our object
of interest because they are clearly relevant empirical objects. For these reasons, we
specify a ...rm-level pro...t maximization problem but one that recognizes multi-product
producers for purposes of measuring ...rm-level price de     ators and in turn output.


3     Data
3.1     Annual Manufacturing Survey
We use data from the Colombian Annual Manufacturing Survey (AMS) from 1982 to
2012. The survey, collected by the Colombian o¢ cial statistical bureau DANE, covers
all manufacturing establishments (=plants) belonging to ...rms that own at least one
plant with 10 or more employees, or those with production value exceeding a level close
to US$100,000. Our sample contains 17,351 plants over the whole period, with 4,352
plants in the average year.17
    Each establishment is assigned a unique ID that allows us to follow it over time.
Since a plant's ID does not depend on an ID for the ...rm that owns the plant, it is not
modi...ed with changes in ownership, and such changes are not mistakenly identi...ed as
plant births and deaths. 18
  17
     We have constrained the sample to plants born after 1969, for greater comparability across plants
of the section of the life cycle that we characterize.
  18
     Plant IDs in the survey were modi...ed in 1992 and 1993. To follow establishments over that
period, we use the o¢ cial correspondence that maps one into the other.The correspondence seems to


                                                 14
    Surveyed establishments are asked to report their level of production and sales, as
well as their use of employment and other inputs, their purchases of ...xed assets, and
the value of their payroll. We construct a measure of plant-level wage per worker by
dividing payroll into number of employees, and obtain the capital stock using perpetual
inventory methods, initializing at book value of the year the plant enters the survey.
Sector IDs are also reported, at the 3-digit level of the ISIC revision 2 classi...cation.19
    A unique feature of the AMS, crucial for our ability to decompose fundamental
sources of growth, is that inputs and products are reported at a detailed level. Plants
report separately each material input used and product produced, at a level of disag-
gregation corresponding to seven digits of the ISIC classi...cation (close to six-digits in
the Harmonized System). For each of these detailed inputs and products, plants report
separately quantities and values used or produced, so that plant-speci...c unit prices can
be computed for both individual inputs and individual outputs. The average (median)
plant produces 3.56 (2) products per year and employs 11.15 (9) inputs per year (Table
2).
    Plant-speci...c unit prices on inputs at the product level imply that we directly ob-
serve idiosyncratic input costs for individual materials. Furthermore, by taking advan-
tage of product-plant-speci...c prices, we can produce plant-level price indices for both
inputs and outputs, and as a result generate measures of productivity based on out-
put, estimate demand shocks, and consider the role of input prices in plant growth.
Details on how we go about these estimations are provided in section 4. Our product
level data are not at the detailed UPC code level used by Hottman et. al. (2016),
which implies the limitations discussed in the introduction, but we observe them at
the plant-by-product-by-year level, which o¤ers key advantages relative to other data
sources. Unlike UPC codes, our product-level information is available by plant (physi-
cal location of production) rather than the aggregate ...rm, and is jointly observed with
input use by that plant. And, unlike transactions data for imports (used, for instance
by Feenstra, 2004, and Broda and Weinstein, 2006), we observe them not only at the
product level (at similar levels of disaggregations with respect to imports transactions
data) but by producer at a physical location.
    Importantly for this study, the plant's initial year of operation is also recorded­again,
una¤ected by changes in ownership­     . We use that information to calculate an estab-
lishment' s age in each year of our sample. Though we can only follow establishments
from the time of entry into the survey, we can determine their correct age, and follow a
subsample from birth. Based on that restricted subsample, we generate measurement
adjustment factors that we then use to estimate life-cycle growth even for plants that
be imperfect (as suggested by apparent high exit in 92 and high entry in 93), but even for actual
continuers that are incorrectly classi...ed as entries or exits, our age variable is correct (see further
below).
  19
     The ISIC classi...cation in the survey changed from revision 2 to revision 3 over our period of
observation. The three-digit level of disaggregation of revision 2 is the level at which a reliable corre-
spondence between the two classi...cations exists.


                                                   15
we do not observe from birth.20 We restrict all of our analyses to plants born after
1969. Our decomposition results are in general robust to using the subsample observed
from birth rather than the full sample, although estimated with less precision and for
a shorter life-span. About a third of plants in our sample are observed from birth.

3.2        Plant-level prices built from observables
A crucial feature of our theoretical framework is that it allows the evolution of the
plant size distribution to respond to changes in relative product appeal, both within
the plant and across plants. Output can be adjusted for appeal (or quality) di¤erences
across products within the ...rm by properly de       ating revenue with the exact plant level
                       P           1    (1
                                           1
                                             )
price index, Pf t =       f d
                             f jt pf jt        . Since the index depends on unobservable
                          t
and fdf jt g and thus cannot be constructed readily from observables, we use Redding
and Weinstein'  s (2020) CES Uni...ed Price Index (CUPI) approach as the appropriate
empirical analogue or our theoretical price index. The CUPI adjusts prices to take into
account the evolution of the distribution of in-plant product appeal shifters, emanating
both from changes in appeal for continuing products and the entry/exit of products.
    In particular, the CUPI log change in f 0 s price index is given by:
                                                        1
                 Pf t    X             pf jt k        f
                                                              k           1                 QRW            Qf ee
                                                      t;t 1
             ln        =   ln                                     +                   ln    ft      + ln   ft              (15)
                Pf t 1   f
                                      pf jt 1                                 1
                            t;t 1

      f                                                                                                                 Qf ee
 P t;t 1
             is   the set of goods produced by plant f in both period t and t                                      1.   ft      =
    f    sf jt
P t;t 1           is Feenstra'
                             s (2004) adjustment for within-plant appeal changes from the
  f     sf jt 1
   t;t 1
                                                                              !         1

                                    QRW
                                              Y                   sf jt           k    t;t 1   k
entry/exit of products.             ft    =              s
                                                                                                   is Redding-Weinstein'
                                                                                                                       s
                                                                     f
                                              f              f jt 1; t;t 1
                                              t;t 1
adjustment for changes in relative appeal for continuing products within the plant,
which deals with consumer valuation bias that a¤ects traditional approaches to the
empirical implementation of theory-motivated price indices.21 The derivation of the
CUPI price index is presented in Appendix A. The derivation requires imposing the
                                1
                   X       k t;t 1 k
normalization that     ln df jt      = 0: That is, the CUPI adjusts for relative appeal
                          f
                          t;t 1

  20
     See Appendix 1.2 for details.
  21
     Sato (1976) and Vartia (1976) show how the theoretical price index can be implemented empirically
under the assumption of invariant ...rm appeal shocks and constant baskets of goods. Feenstra (2004)
derives an empirical adjustment of the Sato-Vartia approach that takes into account changing baskets
of goods, keeping the assumption of a constant ...rm appeal distribution for continuing products. It is
this last assumption that the UPI relaxes.

                                                       16
changes within the plant, while average appeal changes for the plant are captured by
df t .                                                              2                       3
                                                                  Y
                                                                  t   Y               1

      Building recursively from a base year B and denoting Pf t =   4      pf jt  k t;t 1 k 5,
                                                                          pf jt 1
                                                                                                                 l=B +1   t;t 1

             Y
             t       h         i                            Y
                                                            t          h                 i
 QRW                     QRW                 Qf ee                          Qf ee
 ft     =                fl        and       ft        =                    fl               , we obtain:
            l=B +1                                         l=B +1

                                                                                                         1
                                                                           QRW           Qf ee               1
                               Pf t = Pf B                 Pf t            ft            ft                                       (16)
                                                                                 1
                                                                           Q         1
                                     = Pf B                Pf t            ft


   where Pf B is the plant-speci...c price index at the plant's base year B . We initialize
each plant's price index at Pf B , which takes into account the average price level in
year B and the deviation of plant f 0 s product'  s prices from the average prices in the
respective product category in that year. Details are provided in Appendix A.
   From (16), to move from our calculated Pf t to the exact price index Pf t , we need an
                                              1
                                     Q            1
adjustment for the factor            ft               , which depends on . In turn, the estimation of
requires information on Pf t (see section 4). We thus work initially with Pf t and carry
                                     1
                          Q              1
the adjustment factor     ft      into the derivations of section 4, where its contribution
to price variability is exibly estimated. In particular
                                                                                                 1
                                           Rf t                                      Q               1
                                   Qf t =            = Qf t                          ft                                           (17)
                                          Pf B P f t
   We take advantage of this expression in estimating both the production and demand
functions using observables. We similarly obtain a measure of materials by de        ating
material expenditure by plant-level price indices for materials, pmf t ; using information
on prices and quantities of material inputs at the detailed product class level. We
construct pmf t using an analogous approach to that used to construct output prices.
See Appendix A for details.22
  22
     In an alternative approach against which we compare our baseline quality-adjusted prices (adjusted
for quality di¤erences within the ...rm), we examine the robustness of our results to using "statistical"
price indices based on either constant baskets of goods, or on divisia approaches, and to the Sato-
Vartia-Feenstra approach. These are discussed in appendix I. We ...nd that the impact of de        ating
with quality-adjusted plant-level price indices is more important on the output relative to the input
side.




                                                                  17
4      Estimating T F P Q and demand shocks
Calculating T F P Q and demand shocks requires estimating the production and demand
functions, (1) and (13). Once the coe¢ cients of these functions have been estimated,
T F P Q is the residual from (1) and the demand shock is the residual from (13).
    We implement a joint estimation procedure. Jointly estimating the two equations
allows us to take full advantage of the information to which we have access to separate
supply from demand in the data. As a result, we can estimate production rather than
revenue elasticities, even for multiproduct plants, and simultaneously obtain an unbi-
ased estimate of . We impose a set of moment conditions that requires less structure
overall, and weaker restrictions on the covariance between T F P Q and demand shocks,
than other usual estimation methods of the demand-supply system in multiproduct
settings. This is in part possible thanks to the fact that we have access to price and
quantity information for both inputs and outputs. Data on inputs informs the estima-
tion directly about the production side, thus allowing us to separate it from demand
under weaker restrictions than if we only used information on prices and quantities
for outputs (as in, for instance, Broda and Weinstein, 2006, or Hottman, Redding and
Weinstein, 2016). On the production side, data on prices allows us to properly estimate
both production and revenue elasticities.
    Beyond the usual simultaneity biases and restrictions on supply vs demand , the
estimation of (1) and (13) faces the problem that, until we have an estimate of , we
                                                        Rf t
are unable to properly construct Pf t , and thus Qf t = Pf t
                                                             (see section 3.2). We therefore
                     s two separate components: Pf t and Q
need to rely on Pf t '                                     f t . We proceed in three steps
to address this limitation (details provided further below):

    1. Jointly estimate the coe¢ cients of the production function (1) and the demand
                                                           1                          1
                                     Rf t              Q     1            Pf t ( Q
                                                                                 f t)
                                                                                       1
       function (13), using Qf t = P P = Qf t          ft      and Pf t =       Pf B
                                                                                         as
                                         fB       ft
       the respective dependent variables / regressors of these two functions. We carry
         Q
         f t as a separate regressor in each equation to deal with potential biases from the
       measurement error induced by the­          at this point­still partial estimation of revenue
       de    ators. Similarly introduce separately Mf t and M        f t in the production function
                        materials expenditure        M
       (where Mf t =        PM PM
                                              , and f t is the adjustment factor for the prices of
                              fB    ft

       materials analogous to Q  f t see Appendix A). The joint estimation is conducted
       separately for each three-digit sector.

    2. Use the estimated demand elasticity b for the respective three-digit sector to
                                              1
                                  Q       b       1                   ft    R
       obtain Pf t = Pf B Pf t    ft    and subsequently Qf t = Pf     t
                                                                         . Proceed in an
       analogous way to obtain a quantity index for materials, Mf t .

    3. Using Pf t , Qf t ; Mf t (now properly estimated) and the estimated coe¢ cients of the

                                                       18
      production and demand functions, obtain residuals T F P Qf t and Df t . In estimat-
      ing T F P Qf t and Df t as residuals at this stage, we ...rst deviate Pf t , Qf t ; Mf t , Lf t
      and Kf t from sector*year e¤ects, so that from this stage on, only idiosyncratic
      variation in T F P Qf t and Df t is considered.

   We now explain step 1 in detail.

4.1      Joint production-demand function estimation
We jointly estimate the log production and demand functions:

                       ln Qf t =     ln Kf t + ln Lf t + ln Mf t + ln Af t                                  (18)
and
                                                   1
                                   ln Pf t =           ln Qf t + ln Df t                                    (19)
                    Rf t
   where Qf t =     Pf t
                           . Using (16) and (17), the system can be rewritten:

                                                          1            Q                   M
   ln Qf t =   ln Kf t + ln Lf t + ln Mf t +                      ln   ft             ln   ft   + ln Af t   (20)
                                                              1                   1
   and
                                               1                        Q
                      ln Pf t Pf B =               ln Qf t + ln         ft   + ln Df t                      (21)

    We estimate (20) and (21), which are transformations of the original production and
demand functions, rather than those original forms.
    The usual main concern in estimating these functions is simultaneity bias. In the
production function, this is the problem that factor demands are chosen as a function
of the residual Af t . A standard approach to deal with this problem is the use of proxy
methods as in Olley ad Pakes (1996); Levinsohn and Petrin (2003); Ackerberg, Caves
and Frazer (2015, ACF henceforth); De Loecker and Warzinski (2012); and many others.
In the demand function, simultaneity arises because both price and quantity respond
to demand shocks. Usual demand estimation approaches rely on assumptions regarding
orthogonality between demand and supply shocks at some particular level. Foster et
al (2008) impose orthogonality between the levels of T F P Q and demand shocks, while
in Broda and Weinstein (2006) and Hottman, Redding and Weinstein (2020) double-
di¤erenced demand and marginal cost shocks are assumed orthogonal.
    We build on these approaches, but take advantage of prices and quantities for both
inputs and outputs, and the consequent possibility of jointly estimating (20) and (21),
to relax the assumptions about covariance between demand and supply shocks that
identify the elasticity of substitution. We rely on exible laws of motion for T F P Q:

                                                   19
                              A       A                 A    2           A    3           A
                  lnAf t =    0   +   1 lnAf t 1   +    2 lnAf t 1   +   3 lnAf t 1   +   ft

    That is, Af t is the stochastic component of the innovation to T F P Q. Given this
structure, our identi...cation of production and demand elasticities ( , , , ) uses
standard GMM procedures, imposing the following set of moment conditions (further
details provided in Appendix F):
                                        2                    A3
                                         lnMf t 1            ft
                                        6 lnLf t            A 7
                                        6                   ft 7
                                        6 lnKf t            A 7
                                       E6
                                        6 lnDf t 1
                                                            ft 7
                                                             A7     =0                               (22)
                                        6                    ft 7
                                        4    ln Af t           5
                                             ln Df t

    As in ACF-based methods, we purge measurement error in a ...rst stage of the esti-
mation (Appendix F) and assume that, depending on whether inputs are freely adjusted
or quasi-...xed, they respond to stochastic innovations to T F P Q contemporaneously or
with a lag, respectively. We assume that materials are freely adjusted while the demand
for capital and labor is assumed quasi-...xed. Thus, in (22) we impose lagged materials
demand to be orthogonal to current T F P Q innovations, while L and K are required
to be contemporaneously orthogonal to A     f t . The assumption that K is quasi-...xed is
standard, as is that indicating that M adjusts freely.23 L is also assumed quasi-...xed in
our context because important adjustment costs have been estimated for the Colombian
labor market (e.g. Eslava et al. 2013). We thus follow DeLoecker et. al. (2016) in
treating L as quasi-...xed for purposes of estimation.
    The condition that Df t 1 must be orthogonal to A    f t identi...es , following the logic
that the slope of the demand function can be inferred taking advantage of shocks to
supply. Foster et al (2008, 2016) and Eslava et al (2013) relied on the same logic but
imposed orthogonality between demand and technology shocks in levels. This e¤ec-
tively precludes the possibility that ...rms endogenously invest in quality when they
perceive better returns (as would be the case with higher T F P Q) and correlations
between demand shifters and T F P Q shocks if greater quality is more di¢ cult to pro-
duce.24 Hottman, Redding and Weinstein (2016) and Broda and Weinstein (2006, 2010)
address these concerns by imposing orthogonality between double-di¤erenced demand
  23
     For ln Mf t 1 to be useful in the identi...cation of , it must be the case that input prices are highy
persistent. The AR1 coe¢ cient for log materials prices is 0.95 in our sample.
  24
     R&D decisions that are endogenous to current pro...tability and a¤ect future pro...tability, for
instance, are present in Aw, Roberts and Xu, 2011. Their framework does not separately identify the
demand and technology components of pro...tability, but both could plausibly respond dynamically.
In turn, the idea that quality is more costly to produce appears in Fieler, Eslava, and Xu (2018), to
characterize cross sectional correlations between quality and size.



                                                       20
and supply shocks (double di¤erencing over time and varieties). Imposing the orthog-
onality of the double-di¤erenced shocks is still a strong assumption. Given our ability
to specify demand and production separately given the price and quantity data of both
                                                 A
output and inputs, we impose E (ln Df t 1        f t ) which permits a correlation between
changes in T F P Q and demand even over time within the plant. While we are still
taking advantage of shocks to the supply curve to identify the elasticity of demand, we
only require that innovations in technical e¢ ciency in period t be orthogonal to demand
shocks in t 1:
    Notice also that T F P Q obtained as a residual from quality-adjusted Q is stripped
of apparent changes in productivity related to within-...rm appeal changes, eliminating
a source of correlation between appeal and e¢ ciency stemming from measurement er-
ror. Moreover, since we use plant-speci...c de     ators for both output and inputs, our
estimation is not subject to the usual bias stemming from unobserved input prices (De
Loecker et al. 2016).25
    We implement this estimation separately for each three digit sector of ISIC revision
3, adapted for Colombia (CIIU by its acronym in Spanish). The estimated factor and
demand elasticities are summarized in table 1 and listed in Appendix I. Our results
reveal slightly increasing returns to scale in production at the three-digits sector level
for most sectors. The estimated elasticity of substitution stands at an average of 3.15,
and varies substantially across sectors, from 1.23 for plastics to 7.59 in processed food.
The revenue function curvature parameter stands at an average 0.63. This parameter
in the literature usually ranges between 0.67 and 0.85. In HK, the combination of CRS
in production, CES demand and an elasticity of substitution of 3 implies a revenue
curvature parameter of 0.67. While our average estimated curvature of the revenue
function is not far from that imposed by HK, there is substantial dispersion across three-
digits sectors. We show below how ignoring this heterogeneity dampens the estimated
contribution of wedges to sales variability. It is encouraging that we obtain plausible
factor elasticities for most sectors at the three digits sector proxy methods are usually
implemented in estimations at the two-digit level, and frequently yield implausible
results­ in particular negative estimated factor coe¢ cients for several sectors­  at ...ner
levels of disaggregation.26
  25
     De Loecker et al (2016), use plant-level de   ators for output but not for inputs. This induces a bias
stemming from unobserved input price heterogeneity.
  26
     Still, if fully unconstrained, our joint estimation does deliver implausible results for a few sectors:
negative factor elasticities for some, and implausible curvature parameters of the revenue function for
others ( (1 1 ) > 0:9 or < 0:1). For those sectors, we assign the average production and demand
elasticites of the corresponding two digit sector.




                                                    21
                              Table 1. Factor and demand elasticities
          Sector                                                                         (1-1/)
         Average       0.28             0.12           0.61           3.47        1.01       0.63
           Min         0.05             0.06           0.36           1.53        0.91       0.31
           Max         0.50             0.29           0.85           7.61        1.08       0.88


5        Results
5.1       Outcome growth over the life cycle
We use the estimated demand elasticity b to construct ln Pf t = ln Pf B Pf t + b 1 1 ln Q
                                                                                        ft
                                Rf t
and subsequently recover Qf t = Pf t . We proceed in an analogous way to construct
                                                                                         R
pmf t and Mf t .27 To build idiosyncratic life cycle growth in revenue, Rf    t
                                                                             0t
                                                                                 , we ...rst de-
viate revenue from sector*year e¤ects and then obtain the ratio of current to initial
(idiosyncratic) revenue. All other outcome variables, in particular employment, capi-
tal, materials, output prices and input prices are also stripped from sector*year e¤ects
                                     Z t
before building life cycle growth ( Zf 0t
                                          for each variable Z ). Also, as previously stated,
when building T F P Q, D, and we only exploit idiosyncratic (i.e. within sector*year)
variation in the levels of outcomes. That is, from this point, we will be dealing ex-
clusively with the idiosyncratic component of life cycle growth, for both outcome and
fundamental variables.28
    We de...ne age as the di¤erence between the current year, t , and the year when the
plant began its operations, and de...ne the plant'   s revenue (or other attribute) level at
birth Rf 0 as the average for ages 0 to 2. By averaging over the plant'     s ...rst few years
in operation we deal with measurement error coming, for instance, from partial-year
reporting (e.g. if the plant was in operation for only part of its initial year).
    The solid black lines in Figure 1 present mean growth from birth for output, sales and
employment. As in the rest of ...gures throughout the paper, we use a logarithmic scale.
Revenue grows four-fold on average by age 25. For comparison with existing literature
                                                                                             L t
on life-cycle growth, the lower panel presents analogous results for employment: Lf           0t
                                                                                                 .
By age 10 the average establishment has almost doubled its number of workers, and 25
years after birth employment it has grown more than three-fold.29
    These average growth dynamics, however, hide considerable heterogeneity. Median
  27
     I.e. we use the same measurement approach incorporating multi-materials inputs to construct the
plant-level de  ator for materials, and use it to de ate expenditures in materials to arrive at materials
inputs. We use the same elasticity of substitution at the sectoral level for this purpose.
  28
     We also winsorize life cycle growth for each variable at 1% and 99% to eliminate outliers that may
drive the results of our decompositions.
  29                                            R a            L a                       R a
      For revenue and employment, we have Rf     f0
                                                    = 1:6 and Lff0
                                                                   = 1:4 when a = 5, Rf    f0
                                                                                              = 2:17 and
Lf a                             Rf a                Lf a
Lf 0   = 1:93 when a = 10, and   Rf 0   = 4:03 and   Lf 0   = 3:22 when a = 25.



                                                        22
                                                        Figure 1: Distribution of life cycle growth
                                                                                          Current to initial
                                        Output                                                      Sales                                                     Employment
                  13.5                                                        9.2                                                             6.7




                   5.5                                                        4.4
                                                                                                                                              3.5
      Log scale




                                                                  Log scale




                                                                                                                                  Log scale
                   2.4                                                        2.1
                                                                                                                                              1.9


                    1                                                          1
                                                                                                                                               1
                    .6                                                        .68

                   .38                                                        .46                                                             .68

                         0-2   6   10   14    18   22   26   30                     0-2    6   10   14     18   22   26   30                        0-2   6   10   14     18   22   26   30
                                             Age                                                         Age                                                            Age


                                                                                     Mean                       10th percentile
                                                                                     Median                     90th percentile
    Within sector*year.




growth (dashed line) falls under mean growth for all panels, highlighting the fact that it
is a minority of fast-growing plants that drive mean growth. Related, the distribution
of plant growth is highly skewed.It is this heterogeneity and its welfare implications
that we aim to explain in the analysis below.
    We emphasize that we can measure life cycle growth directly using longitudinal
data for each plant, rather than relying on cross-cohort comparisons. This approach
addresses some of the usual selection concern in the literature of business' life cycle
growth. Still, we can only characterize and decompose growth for survivors. Appendix
H describes life-cycle growth for exits-to-be, showing that the patterns in Figure 1 are
mainly driven by plants that will survive (so the exit bias is small).

5.2                Plant attributes
Table 2 presents basic summary statistics for (the idiosyncratic component of) sales
and our estimates of output, output prices, ln Af t ; ln Df t , wedges, markups and input
prices. We note that we have adjusted materials prices for quality, but have not done
the same for wages as yet due to data constraints. In section 7.1 we do quality-adjust
wages for a subperiod for which this is possible.
    Idiosyncratic dispersion in sales, output, output prices, T F P Q, demand, wedges
and input prices is large. T F P Q is strongly negatively correlated with output prices,
which is intuitive to the extent that more e¢ cient production allows charging lower
prices (consistent with ...ndings for Colombia in Eslava et al., 2013, and for commodity
like products in the US in Foster et al. 2008, 2016, though by contrast with those
products endogenous quality may be more relevant in our context). To the extent that
quality is more di¢ cult to produce, demand shocks and technical e¢ ciency may be


                                                                                                    23
                                                               Table 2. Descriptive statistics
                                            Panel A. Number of plants, number of products and materials per plant-year
                      Number of plants                 Number of products per plant                            Number of materials per plant
                      Total    Avg. year        Avg.           P25           P50           P75           Avg.          P25        P50          P75
                     17,351         4,352        3.56           1             2             5            11.15          5          9            14
                                         Panel B.Standard deviations and correlation coefficient for outcomes and fundamentals
                                                         (within sector*year, all variables in logs, average sector)
                               Standard                                   Output                       Demand                  Average                      Sales
                                                                                                                                             Markup
                               Deviation        Sales       Output         prices        TFPQ           Shock     Input prices  wage                       Wedge
        Sales                    1.426          1.000
        Output                   1.588          0.897         1.000
        Output prices            0.672          0.000        -0.427         1.000
        TFPQ                     0.841          0.160         0.440        -0.681         1.000
        Demand Shock             0.673          0.743         0.403         0.621        -0.287          1.000
        Input prices             0.640         -0.046        -0.106         0.152         0.327          0.063        1.000
        Average wage             0.422          0.606         0.523         0.054         0.120          0.483        0.001      1.000
        Markup                   0.029          0.625         0.566        -0.012         0.104          0.459       -0.034      0.400        1.000
        Sales Wedge              1.076         -0.176        -0.127       -0.070         -0.471         -0.194        0.008     -0.038       -0.056         1.000
        Note: The sample includes fewer plants than the original Manufacturing Survey, especially in the early years of the sample, due to the restriction of plants
        born after 1969.




negatively correlated. This is indeed the case in our estimates, also consistent with
Forlani et al. (2018). Though markups display only modest variation across plants,
they are positively correlated with T F P Q, D and wages. Especially interesting is the
negative and strong correlation of wedges with T F P Q and demand shocks, suggesting
that the plants with the best fundamentals are implicitly taxed the most.30 These basic
correlation patterns remain true for within-plant correlations, and are echoed in our
growth decompositions below.
    The within sector*year distributions of the evolution over the life cycle of funda-
mentals and wedges are displayed in Figure 2, including the life cycle growth of T F P Q
and demand shocks, markups, material input prices and wages. The average growth of
demand shocks dominates that of input prices, and both dominate the average growth
of T F P Q and markups over the life cycle. By age 25, T F P Q has barely grown on
compared to birth on average, while the demand shifter has grown on average close to
two-fold. Part of what is driving the contradicting T F P Q-demand patterns in Figure
2 is the evolution of the negative correlation between the life cycle growth of T F P Q
                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                       1       1
  30                                            level                         Rf t
       Log wedges are residuals: ln             ft      = ln     1 a 2 pm       2w        2        2
                                                                                                                   (see equation 5, where we
                                                               djt  jt   jt          jt       jt

ignore      t   since table 2 is based only idiosyncratic variation)



                                                                     24
                                                         Figure 2: Distribution of Fundamentals
                                                                                              Current to initial
                                                   TFPQ                                                      Demand shock                                                Input prices
                              3.3                                                            3.3                                                         3.3
                              2.2                                                            2.2                                                         2.2




                  Log scale




                                                                                 Log scale




                                                                                                                                             Log scale
                              1.5                                                            1.5                                                         1.5
                                1                                                              1                                                           1
                              .55                                                            .55                                                         .55
                               .3                                                             .3                                                          .3
                              .18                                                            .18                                                         .18
                                    0-2   6   10   14    18   22   26   30                         0-2   6    10   14    18   22   26   30                     0-2   6   10   14    18   22   26   30
                                                        Age                                                             Age                                                        Age


                                              Average wage                                                         Markup
                              3.3                                                            3.3
                              2.2                                                            2.2
                  Log scale




                                                                                 Log scale
                              1.5                                                            1.5
                                1                                                              1
                              .55                                                            .55
                               .3                                                             .3
                              .18                                                            .18
                                    0-2   6   10   14    18   22   26   30                         0-2   6    10   14    18   22   26   30
                                                        Age                                                             Age


                                                                                             Mean                                       10th perc.
                                                                                             Median                                     90th perc.
                 Within sector*year




and that of demand shocks. At age 3, the correlation is -0.191, moving to -0.289 at
age 10 and -0.349 at age 20. The rapid rise of product appeal/quality over the life
cycle comes at the cost of dampening the growth of T F P Q. The interplay between
output prices and demand shocks is also interesting: with growing output over the life
cycle, downward sloping demand would imply that the plant would have to charge ever
shrinking prices over its life cycle, unless the appeal of f to costumers changed over
time. We do not observe such fall in output prices, signaling increasing ability of the
...rm to sell more at given prices. By construction, this is what the life cycle growth of
the demand shock, D   d f t ; captures. Markups barely vary over the life cycle and across
deciles of the distribution, to the point that the variation is not observable to the naked
eye compared to the scale of variation of other fundamentals. As we will see below,
when we consider activity-weighted distributions and related measures (e.g., welfare),
markups play an important role as a relatively small share of very large plants have
very high markups.

5.3    Decomposing growth into fundamental sources
                                          ft                                                       R
We now decompose the variance of Rf        0
                                              into contributions associated with di¤erent
fundamental sources (equation (5)). We follow a two stage procedure, similar to that
in Hottman et al. (2016), whose details are provided in Appendix G. As we prove in
that Appendix, the contribution of growth in each (log) fundamental to the variance of
growth of (log) sales depends on the covariance and relative variances between the two.
In particular, the contribution of the life cycle growth of T F P Q to the life cycle growth
                                                                                                                                                                 ait
                                                                                                                   ait Rit                   std                 ai0
of sales is given by the product:                                            2               corr                     ;
                                                                                                                   ai0 Ri0                                       Rit          where                     2   is the structural
                                                                                                                                             std                 Ri0




                                                                                                                   25
parameter associated with T F P Q in the decomposition equation 5, reproduced below:

                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                      1
   Rf t            df t        1
                                        af t       2
                                                       pmf t    2
                                                                     wf t   2
                                                                                 ft
                                                                                        2
                                                                                            bt   ft
        =                                                                                                     (23)
   Rf 0            df 0                 af 0           pmf 0         wf 0        f0          0   f0

               1
where      1   =    ,    = 1 1 1 ; and and have been estimated as explained
              (1 1 ) 2
                   1
above. The contribution of other sources of growth is calculated in an analogous manner.
                                               1
                                         1
                          bt       ft
      The term                                     in (23) is calculated as a residual, since all of the other
                           0       f0

components are either measured or estimated. From equation (5) , error term ln f t
                                                                                       f0
captures life cycle growth in wedges, including distortions from regulations, adjustment
costs, and other factors, and measurement error. Because these wedges simply re       ect
the gap between actual growth and that predicted by fundamentals through the lens of
our model, they re   ect all sources for such gaps, including some that may be correlated
with fundamentals themselves. Thus, these wedges may imply exacerbated growth if
plants with better fundamentals also exhibit higher wedges than plants with worse
fundamentals, or dampened growth in the opposite case.
    We implement the variance decomposition by ages.31 Results are presented in Fig-
ure 3. We ...nd that the structural contribution of fundamentals, rather than residual
wedges, explains the bulk of sales growth over the life cycle. Taken together, funda-
mentals in fact account for more than 100% of the variance of growth across plants
within a sector (a fact we turn to further below). Averaging over ages, on a weighted
basis, we ...nd contributions of the demand shock, T F P Q, input prices, and structural
wedges, respectively equal to 1.13, 0.15, -0.16 and -0.12. That is, the demand shock is
over seven times as important as T F P Q to explain idiosyncratic sales growth . Input
prices make smaller, but far from negligible, contributions. Mechanically, this re   ects
the fact that, for the average sector and pooling across ages, the covariance of demand
shocks growth with sales growth is more than six-fold that between T F P Q growth and
sales growth, and the coe¢ cient associated with demand growth in equation (23) is
also much larger than that for T F P Q (Table 4). The signi...cant negative correlation
between T F P Q and demand shocks undoubtedly plays a role in these patterns. The
contribution of markups to the variance of sales growth is minimal, not even visible in
the graph, re   ecting market shares concentrated around zero and barely changing over
the life cycle in most sectors. A few plants in some sectors hold large market shares.
Though their low numbers imply that these plants do not play an important role in ex-
plaining the cross sectional distribution, we show in section 7 that their large markups
have crucial welfare implications.
    The dominance of demand-side fundamentals over supply side in explaining the
variance in sales resonates with recent ...ndings in the literature (Hottman et al. 2016,
 31
      See Appendix G for details.


                                                                    26
Foster et al. 2016). It is, however, noticeable that this ...nding survives the expansion of
the measurement framework to explicitly account for wedges. The availability of price
and quantity data together with data on input use, rare in the literature and enabled by
the richness of the Colombian data, is crucial to identify wedges from the gap between
actual growth and that predicted by fundamentals (see detailed discussion in section
6).
    Input prices, especially that of labor, play a dampening role for the variability of
sales. This is consistent with Table 2 that shows a positive correlation between input
prices and wages in particular with T F P Q and demand. The variation in wages across
plants might re  ect many factors, including the geographic segmentation of labor mar-
kets as well as institutional barriers or other frictions in the labor market. However,
the correlations in Table 2 suggest that wages variability might also rather re      ect un-
measured quality di¤erences since, by contrast to material inputs prices we are unable
to quality adjust wages for our entire sample period. Section 7.1 explores the role of
these di¤erent mechanisms for a subperiod in which quality adjustment is possible. Pre-
viewing those results, adjusting wages for labor quality reduces the contribution of wage
dispersion in accounting for sales growth heterogeneity and increases the contribution of
TFPQ. This is not surprising as adjusting for labor quality impacts the measurement
of technical e¢ ciency. The e¤ect of quality adjustment, however, is not large even for
T F P Q and wages, and does not a¤ect other components, so we proceed with our main
full sample results as a baseline that provides robust inferences.


                                            27
    Another important feature of these results is that the remaining wedge also con-
tributes negatively to the variance of life cycle growth of sales (or, equivalently, quality
adjusted output). That is, the di¤erent sources of wedges captured in this term dampen
the e¤ect of fundamentals growth on outcome growth, implying that high-productivity
high-appeal plants grow less relative to low-productivity and appeal plants than their
respective fundamentals would imply. The e¤ect is quantitatively large: pooling ages,
sales dispersion is dampened by about 12% with respect to that implied by fundamen-
tals. That is, Colombian manufacturing plants face signi...cant size-correlated wedges
that de-link actual growth from the fundamental attributes of plants.
    The contributions of these di¤erent factors to the life cycle growth of sales vary
signi...cantly depending on the horizon of growth considered. Demand becomes in-
creasingly important compared to T F P Q over longer horizons. This is because the
correlation between sales growth and T F P Q growth decreases for older plants, while
that between sales and demand remains fairly stable (Table 3). These patterns echo
the increasing negative correlation between T F P Q and demand shocks over the life cy-
cle. Wedges, interestingly, play a more important dampening role at the youngest ages.
That is, wedges dampen sales variability compared to that implied by fundamentals
more among young plants than among older ones (left panels of Figure 4), and this is
because their (negative) correlation with sales becomes increasingly loose as plants age.
    Appendix H shows that these general patterns are robust to selection, in the sense
of being similar for survivors-to-be and exits-to-be. However, T F P Q plays a relatively
more important role vis-a-vis demand for the latter than the former.


                                            28
       Table 3. Moments of the distribution of life cycle growth for sales and fundamentals (Average sector, age<=20)
   Life Cycle
   Growth of:               Age = 3 years                         Age = 10 years                    Age = 20 years
                                   Correlation with                      Correlation with                  Correlation with
                     St. Dev.                               St. Dev.                          St. Dev.
                                      sales growth                          sales growth                      sales growth
Sales                 0.393                 -                0.676                -            0.910                -
TFPQ                  0.369               0.242              0.581              0.152          0.764              0.126
Demand shock          0.210               0.683              0.378              0.696          0.505              0.678
Material prices       0.248               0.035              0.405              0.042          0.538              0.034
Wages                 0.224               0.240              0.314              0.285          0.349              0.340
Markup                0.002               0.549              0.005              0.481          0.008              0.448
Wedge                 0.645              -0.232              0.955             -0.197          1.164             -0.140
  Coefficients          1                   2                                                                       
(median sector)       2.546               1.526              1.013              2.496                0.618              0.255
Notes: the top panel of this table presents, standard deviations for the life cycle growth of different measured fundamentals, and
coefficients of correlation between them and the life cycle growth of sales, calculated across plants of the average sector. The bottom
panel presents coefficients used to calculate loading factors for the contribution of each fundamental in the life-cycle revenue
decomposition, for the median sector. The contribution of a given fundamental to life cycle growth is given by the product between the
corresponding loading factor, correlation coefficient, and standard deviation, divided by the standard deviation of sales. This calculation
of the contribution holds exactly within sectors, so appropriate caution is necessary in comparing Table 3 to Figures 3 and 4, where
sectors are pooled together.




     Figure 4 shows the mechanics behind the negative contribution of structural wedges:
the average gap between actual growth (black solid line) and that explained by funda-
mentals (grey solid line) is positive for plants with low predicted growth and negative
for those in the highest percentiles of predicted growth. Predicted growth corresponds
to growth in equation (23) setting f t = 0. Figure 4 implies that it is plants with
                                        f0
weak growth in fundamentals that are implicitly subsidized while those with strongest
fundamentals are implicitly taxed, especially at young ages.
     Figure 5 indicates that plants in the highest percentiles of predicted growth have
both higher average demand growth and higher average T F P Q growth than those with
low predicted growth. Interestingly, the superstar plants (those in the upper quartile
of growth in fundamentals) di¤er from the rest most clearly in terms of the growth of
demand. In the opposite end of the distribution, it is weak T F P Q growth that explains
why the bottom quartiles plants are classi...ed as such.
     We conduct a similar decomposition for the growth of output, rather that sales,
...nding very similar results. An exception is the fact that T F P Q plays, by far, the
predominant role in explaining the variance of output growth, with a contribution four
times as large as that of the demand shock. As in the case of sales, the structural
wedge dampens the variability of output growth, with an average contribution of -0.15.
Results for the output decomposition are presented in Appendix G along with a related
reduced form decomposition.


                                                                       29
                                                                         Figure 5: Life-cycle fundamentals growth
                                                                                  By predicted sales growth percentiles

                      1st quartile of predicted sales                2nd quartile of predicted sales               3rd quartile of predicted sales                     4th quartile of predicted sales
                2.5                                            2.5                                           2.5                                               2.5



               1.85                                           1.85                                          1.85                                              1.85



               1.35                                           1.35                                          1.35                                              1.35
           e
           l                                              e
                                                          l                                             e
                                                                                                        l                                                le
           a
           c                                              a
                                                          c                                             a
                                                                                                        c                                                 a
                                                                                                                                                          c
           s                                              s                                             s                                                 s
           g     1                                        g     1                                       g     1                                           g     1
           o                                              o                                             o                                                 o
           L                                              L                                             L                                                 L


                .75                                            .75                                           .75                                               .75

                 .6                                             .6                                            .6                                                .6


                .45                                            .45                                           .45                                               .45
                      2     8      14     20      26                 2     8      14     20     26                 2        8     14    20     26                      2     8           14        20   26
                                   Age                                            Age                                             Age                                                    Age



                                                                                   Demand shock                                 TFPQ
                                                                                   Input prices                                 Markup
        Idiosyncratic components




6        Robustness and the Value Added from Building
         Up Jointly from P, Q and inputs data
6.1        Value added of bringing P and Q data to the Hsieh-Klenow
           framework
In absence of data on input and output prices HK decompose revenue and revenue
growth into a measure of fundamentals that combines our T F P Q and D shocks, which
we label as T F P Q_HK , and a residual wedge that captures all determinants of size
other than e¢ ciency and demand.32 They start from revenue, which in our notation
                          1 1                  1 1
is given by: Rf t = Df t Qf t = Df t Af t Xf t     . With estimates of and one can
obtain the composite shock T F P Q_HK solely from revenue and input data as:
                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                   1                                               1
                                                                                                   1=(1                )                                 1
                                                        T F P Q_HKf t =                           Rf t                     =Xf t = Af t Df t                                                                 (24)
       Life cycle growth in revenue can then be expressed as:
                                                                                                                                                                            1        1

                                 Rf t                     T F P Q_HKf t                                  (1                     f t ) Cf 0                                   (                 )
                                                                                                                                                                       1         1       1
                                                                                                                                                    f0
                                      =                                                                                                                                                                      (25)
                                 Rf 0                     T F P Q_HKf 0                                  (1                     f 0 ) Cf t          ft
  32
    See the appendix to HK (2009) where they extend their model to account for D shocks. What
we label T F P Q_HK is what is called T F P Q by HK. Haltiwanger, Kulick and Syverson (2018) also
explore properties of T F P Q_HK constructed from revenue and input data compared to T F P Q and
demand shocks constructed from price and quantity data.

                                                                                                       30
     That is, the HK residual wedge is a composite measure of wedges, the "HK wedge"=
  ( 1 f t ) Cf 0 f 0
                          , just as TFPQ_HK is a composite measure of e¢ ciency and demand.
  (1 f 0 ) Cf t f t
A widely used implication of HK'             s framework is that wedges can be estimated from
                                                           R t
the idiosyncratic component of T F P R_HK = Xf              ft
                                                               . Replacing optimal input demand
                                 !    1
                       1 1         1 (1 1 )
                Df t Af t                                                 C
Xf t =                         1            we obtain T F P R_HKf t = 1f t f t , so T F P R_HK
            Cf t f t (1 f t )                                             ( f t)
variability re ects variation not only , but also in markups and input prices.33 We thus
observe that the composite wedges we obtain from (25) are analogous to those that can
be obtained from T F P R_HK but also that, given the importance of input variability
in our data to explain the growth distribution, T F P R_HK dispersion cannot be used
to infer the dispersion of .
    Figure 7, left panel, contrasts the by-age decomposition using the T F P Q_HK ap-
proach (grey lines) with that of our approach (black lines). To calculate T F P Q_HKf t =
         1
  1=(1       )
Rf t      =Xf t we use our estimates of , , , , and the implied X = Mf t Lf t Kf t . The
...gure shows that a non-negligible fraction of the variation explained by the composite
wedges in a two-way decomposition is due to the contribution of variable input prices
and markups (25% out of the 40% assigned to wedges in 7a). It is clearly instructive to
isolate the contribution of input prices and markups from residual wedges; input price
and markup variability may well be related to market distortions but may also re      ect
structural features (e.g., market segmentation) of input and output markets. Figure
7, however, also shows that the message that correlated wedges a¤ect young plants
the most is still present using the HK approach, since the contribution of input prices
and markups does not vary signi...cantly over the life cycle. Another important insight
from Figure 7 is that using T F P Q_HK misses the changing relative contribution of
demand vs. T F P Q over the life cycle; Figure 6 shows that the increasingly dominant
role of demand is driven by the upper quartile "superstar" plants while weak T F P Q
growth dominates the poorly performing lower quartiles. These insights about the rel-
ative role of T F P Q vs. demand, and the relevance of input prices and markups in the
HK composite wedge, are not possible in the two-way decomposition based on revenue
data.
     Another important gain of using detailed P and Q data stems from the ability to
estimate sector-speci...c parameters. Appendix C reports results with the composite
T F P Q_HK approach following the usual practice in the misallocation literature of
imposing monopolistic competition; = 1; , ,              equal to the corresponding cost
shares in each sector; and a common for all sectors. Results show that the estimated
contribution of wedges closely depends on the level and dispersion of         and of the
  33                                                                                 R
    If, as originally de...ned in Foster et al (2008), we rather de...ned T F P R as Xf t ; T F P R dispersion
                                                                                      ft
would also re   ect Af t and Df t dispersion. Their de...nition of T F P Rf t = Pf t Af t . T F P R_HKf t
corresponds to HK '   s de...nition if = 1.

                                                     31
                   Figure 7: Hsieh-Klenow and Hottman-Redding-Weinstein decompositions using the same
                                        elasicities used in the baseline decomposition

                           HK vs Baseline Decompositions                                                                         HRW vs Baseline Decompositions
       2.00                                                                                                  2.00



       1.50                                                                                                  1.50
                                                                                                         e
                                                                                                         c                                                                                               e
                                                                                                                                                                                                         c
                                                                                                         n                                                                                               n
                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                         i                                                                                               a
                                                                                                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                         a                                                                                               r
       1.00                                                                                                  1.00                                                                                        a
                                                                                                         V                                                                                               V
                                                                                                         f                                                                                               f
                                                                                                         o                                                                                               o
                                                                                                         n                                                                                               n
                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                         i                                                                                               o
                                                                                                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                         c                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                         c
       0.50                                                                                              a   0.50                                                                                        a
                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                         F                                                                                               r
                                                                                                                                                                                                         F

       0.00                                                                                                  0.00



       -0.50                                                                                                 -0.50



       -1.00                                                                                                 -1.00
               3   4   5    6    7    8   9   10   11   12    13      14   15   16   17   18   19   20               3   4   5    6   7   8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20
                                                      Age                                                                                               Age
                       TFPQ_HK            HK_Wedges          Demand              TFPQ                                        Markup               Demand                   Marginal cost HRW
                       Input Prices       Wedges             Markup                                                          TFPQ                 Input Prices             Wedges

     These figures reproduce the structural decomposition considering, alternatively, the components considered by Hsieh and Klenow (2009, 2014) and
     Hottman, Redding and Weinstein (2016). Components of our baseline decomposition (from Figure 3) are depicted in black if they are not also a
     component of the HK or HRW decomposition in the respective panel, while components of the HK and HRW are depicted in grey in the respective
     panel.




implied curvature of the revenue function. The estimated contribution of wedges grows
with in a manner that is not linear (see Figure C1 in Appendix C). For this reason, the
contribution of wedges is much lower when imposing a common equal to the average
of the that we estimate by sectors; because the contribution of wedges is larger in
sectors with low curvature, taking into account the dispersion of recognizes a more
dominant role for wedges. Appendix C provides further support for these claims
    Summarizing, there are three main messages about the value of P and Q output and
input data in our estimation. Using only revenue and input data (but the internally
consistent estimated demand and production elasticities) yields: 1) an inability to iden-
tify the distinct contributions of demand and T F P Q which have distinct contributions
over the life cycle and over di¤erent segments of the distribution of life cycle growth
rates; and 2) an inability to isolate the contribution of idiosyncratic input prices and
markups from residual wedges. Moreover, most of the literature using the HK method-
ology assumes the same elasticity of substitution for all sectors, and in general relies on
strong assumptions to estimate the coe¢ cients of the production function. Such con-
straints on measurement and estimation, most importantly ignoring that some sectors
exhibit large elasticities of substitution, leads to underestimations of the role of wedges.




                                                                                          32
6.2     Value added of bringing input data to the Hottman-Redding-
        Weinstein framework
The di¤erential contribution of demand vs. cost-side shocks to plant sales is explored
by Hottman, Redding and Weinstein (HRW, 2016). Using the demand structure that
we also impose in our baseline estimation, they decompose sales into the contributions
of observed prices and demand shocks estimated using the estimated elasticity of substi-
tution, and subsequently decompose price into the contributions of markups­  computed
as in equation (4)­ and residual marginal costs:
                                                           Pf t
                                          ft   =   @CTf t
                                                          (1      )   1
                                                   @Qf t
                                                                                  @CT
 where CT is total cost. These residual marginal costs, given by @Qfftt (1      ) 1 , thus
capture idiosyncratic variation in costs (from input price variability and technical e¢ -
ciency), as well as wedges. Importantly, wedges are not inherently driven by cost/supply
side factors. For example, they could re  ect the adjustment costs associated with build-
ing up a customer base. See Appendix K for greater details.
    Since we fully rely on HRW'   s demand structure, the contribution of the demand
shock and markup are, by construction, the contributions one would obtain in their
conceptual approach.34 The availability of data on input use and input prices, beyond
P and Q data on the output side which their approach already employs, allows us
to further decompose their marginal cost component into input prices, T F P Q and
wedges. The right panel of Figure 7 illustrates the by-age decomposition obtained in
our data with the HRW approach (components in grey) vs. our baseline decomposition
(components in black, plus demand and markup, which are separately identi...ed in both
HRW and our approach). As in their results for consumer goods in the US, demand
shocks explain the bulk of sales growth variation, and markups play a modest role.
But the negative,     at over ages, pattern estimated for the contribution of marginal
costs is a combination of the positive contribution of T F P Q and the dampening role
of wedges and input prices in the context of our application, each of them negatively
correlated with sales. The lumping together of cost, productivity and wedges also misses
the rich life cycle dynamics of each of these factors. Technical e¢ ciency becomes less
important as do wedges for older businesses in our baseline framework but this pattern
is missed completely in the HRW approach. Related, the increasing magnitude of the
inverse correlation between demand and T F P Q over the life cycle is missed in the HRW
approach.
  34
    By this we mean their conceptual approach to the decomposition of sales volatility. Given the dif-
ferences in their data infrastructure relative to ours, their identi...cation of the demand and supply/cost
components is related but distinct from our approach.




                                                      33
7     Welfare implications of heterogeneity in wedges
      and plant fundamentals
                 P              1 1
We use U =         It df t Qf t     in equation 6 to analyze welfare implications of het-
erogeneous wedges and fundamentals. Replacing equation 1 into this expression after
having inserted the optimal expression for Xf t , we obtain an expression for welfare
that, up to aggregate shocks, can be calculated from plant attributes and wedges that
we have estimated:
                        ! 1                                                             ! 1
        X             1           X                1+                                 1
  U=        df t Qf t           =    df t (df t 1 af t 2 pmf t 1 wf t 1 f t 1 t f t )       (26)
          It                           It

                                                              Qf t
where    ft    is the residual    ft   =            1+                                        . We build a series of coun-
                                            df t 1 af t   2 pm
                                                                 ft
                                                                      1w
                                                                        ft
                                                                             1
                                                                                 ft
                                                                                          1

terfactual welfare ratios, where welfare is compared to what its level would be in the
hypothetical e¢ cient situation where the composite (HK ) wedge is set to one:

                                                     P         count     count        1         1

                                  Ucount                  It d f t   Qf t
                                          =                                                                          (27)
                                 U HKef f             P            HKef f             1        1
                                                          It df t Qf t


    QHKef
     ft
          f
            is the value obtained by setting the composite HK wedge equal to one:
  pmf t 1 wf t 1 f t 1 f t = 1. Aggregate shocks t cancel out in expression (27). This
measure of welfare is for a single sector. We compute this ratio for the average sec-
tor including on a revenue-weighted basis. The latter is equivalent to Cobb-Douglas
aggregation across sectors neglecting any between sector aggregation e¤ects that arise
from goods in one sector being used in the production of other sectors. The approach
of using a nested CES within sectors with multi-product producers and Cobb-Douglas
aggregation between sectors is used in HRW.
     In di¤erent counterfactual cases we set df t , af t ,pmf t ,wf t , and/or f t to 1, keeping
  f t at its actual level. In another case, we set f t = 1, keeping the other components
at their actual levels. We compare our results for (27) to a benchmark case where the
numerator corresponds to actual welfare, that is, all plant attributes are at their actual
levels. Table 4 presents the results of this analysis.
     Panel A quanti...es the welfare gap attributed to the presence of HK wedges (the
benchmark case just described). Columns 1 and 2 show a large gap: for the average
sector, actual welfare is 28% of its e¢ cient level (what it would be in absence of HK
wedges). The ...gure is much lower (13%) on a revenue-weighted basis, because it is in
the largest sectors where wedges are largest. This is the case because large sectors tend
to display high elasticities of substitution. The implication of moderate curvature of the

                                                            34
revenue function also implies that optimality would shift more resources to the plants
with highest composite productivity (T F P Q_HK ), while in fact these sectors tend to
be large precisely because they are fractioning revenue in a large number of plants. As
a result, estimated wedges are large.
    Welfare losses associated to HK wedges in columns 1 and 2 of panel A are larger
to those usually obtained in the HK -based literature. Columns 3 and 4, show that
numbers closer to that tradition are obtained by using constant (average) production
and demand parameters in equations (26) and (27), as is frequently done in the litera-
ture, especially in the case of elasticities of substitution.35 Moreover, revenue weighting
reduces the size of the estimated welfare gap when using average parameters, while
the opposite is true when using sector-level parameters. These ...ndings point again at
the fact, discussed above, that wedges (and the associated losses) tend to be underes-
timated when imposing the same parameters to all sectors, speci...cally for sectors that
have larger-than-average elasticities of substitution, which also tend to be the largest
sectors (see also Appendix C). This highlights the quantitative importance of properly
estimating the parameters of the revenue function.36
    Panel B of Table 4 further analyzes the impact of shutting down variability in each
of the sources of plant heterogeneity considered in the analysis, individually and in
combinations. (Because the di¤erent components are correlated with each other, the
impact of shutting down two components simultaneously may be larger or smaller than
the sum of the impact of shutting them individually). The fact that consumers in our
model display love for variety tends to reduce welfare when T F P Q_HK variability
is shut down. On an unweighted basis, this reduces welfare from 28% to 12% of its
e¢ cient level. More interestingly, shutting down quality (or D) heterogeneity alone has
an impact almost as large as that of shutting down T F P Q_HK , highlighting again
the di¤erential role of T F P Q vs. demand, now in terms of welfare.37
    On a similar note, unpacking HK wedges into their components sheds light on
the sources of welfare losses from these wedges. In particular, heterogeneity in input
  35
     Plant attributes, however are kept at their measured levels, for which the sector level parameters
were used.
  36
     While it is not their primary focus, Baqaee and Farhi (2020) ...nd that taking into account hetero-
geneity in elasticities of substitution is important for their generalized measure of allocative e¢ ciency.
A core focus of Baqaee and Farhi (2020) is taking into account the input-output structure of the
economy in aggregating the impact of distortions at the economy-wide level. We don'         t explore such
implications but doing so would be of interest in future research with our data infrastructure with
price and quantity data for both outputs and inputs at the plant-level.
  37
     In results reported in Appendix L, we have also explored the e¤ect of shutting down variability
over the life cycle, i.e. maintaining dispersion at birth as the only source of plant heterogeneity.
Qualitative results are similar to those of shutting down both sources of heterogeneity in each plant
attribute. Interestingly, there are asymmetric e¤ects of collapsing the distribution of life cycle growth
at the upper or the lower end of the distribution: forcing fundamentals of high growth plants (75th
percentile) to grow at the mean level produces welfare losses that are proportionally larger than the
welfare gain from conducting the analogous exercise with low growth plants.


                                                    35
   Table 4: Counterfactual welfare relative to HK efficient welfare, setting specific plant attributes
   to constant mean value (=1).
                                          Sector-level Parameters             Average Parameters
                                                    Average Sector -                   Average Sector
                                         Average                           Average
                                                         Revenue                         - Revenue
                                          Sector                            Sector
                                                         Weighted                         Weighted
                                            (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)
                                Panel A: Actual to HK Efficient Welfare
                                           0.278           0.127            0.363            0.686
                             Panel B: Counterfactual to HK Efficient Welfare
                D+TFPQ (TFPQ_HK)           0.123           0.075             0.204           0.386
       Plant
                Demand Shock               0.126           0.108             0.260           0.480
    attribute
                Input prices + Markup      0.551           0.283             0.883           1.187
      set to
                Input prices               0.416           0.240             0.621           1.080
   counterfact.
                Markup                     0.338           0.144             0.479           0.735
        level
                Wedge                      0.490           0.365             0.545           0.537




prices and markups explains an important part of the welfare loss from HK wedges.
Collapsing them both to their mean value (of 1), while keeping T F P Q_HK at its
actual value, brings welfare to 55% of its e¢ cient level. Shutting down variability in
the residual wedge has a similar impact of moving welfare to 49% of the e¢ cient level.
And, this residual wedge has an individual impact that surpasses that of either input
prices or markups alone.
    Interestingly, though shutting down input prices alone has a larger impact than shut-
ting down markups alone, the latter also has important impact, increasing welfare from
0.28 to 0.34 of the e¢ cient level. This stands in contrast to the results of the decompo-
sition of cross-plant heterogeneity of Figure 3, where markups play a very modest role.
The reason is the combination of two facts: 1) while there is little variability in markups
because most market shares are close to zero, a few large plants exhibit large markups;
2) the decomposition of Figure 3 explains cross plant dispersion on an unweighted ba-
sis, while aggregate welfare in (26), by its very nature, "weights" plants according to
their appeal to consumers. Large markups thus play a much more important role in
explaining aggregates than in explaining cross-plant variation. Table 5 illustrates that
a few plants exhibit market shares well above their sectors' mean shares, despite the
very low variability in markups shown in Table 2.




                                                               36
      Table 5. Distribution of Largest Plants' Markup
             Relative to Sector*Year Average
                                 Pooling
   Percentile       Largest       Second        Third
   Average            1.26         1.07         1.05
   10                 1.04         1.02         1.02
   25                 1.07         1.04         1.03
   50                 1.13         1.06         1.04
   75                 1.24         1.10         1.06
   90                 1.56         1.14         1.08
   95                 1.97         1.16         1.10
   99                 3.21         1.20         1.12
   The table presents percentiles across sector-year
   combinations of the markups, relative to average,
   of the largest, second largest and third largest
   plant in the sector.




7.1     Robustness to quality-adjusting wages
Our counterfactual welfare analysis shows that heterogeneity in input prices implies
non-negligible welfare loses. Input price heterogeneity, as previously discussed, may re-
  ect input market frictions or accompanying distortions, as well as input heterogeneity.
Although we have adjusted materials prices for quality (within the plant) the same is
not true of wages, since the data does not break labor into skill categories for the full
extent of our estimation period. To address the relative importance of quality hetero-
geneity for labor, we now take advantage of data on broad skill categories available
for 2000-2012. The available skill categories are production workers without tertiary
education, production workers with tertiary education and administrative workers. We
construct, for that subperiod, quality-adjusted wages using an approach analogous to
that of we use to build quality-adjusted materials and output prices, and a quality-
adjusted labor input given by the payroll de   ated with our adjusted wages. T F P Q is
also re-calculated using this quality adjusted input. We conduct our welfare analysis
using these adjusted data. For completeness, we also conduct the sales growth decom-
position with this adjustment. Results are presented in Table 6.
    Implementing our decomposition with this alternative measure of wages rather than
the average wage per worker reduces the negative contribution of wages for 2000-2012
from -0.065 to -0.026, compensating it with a reduced positive contribution of T F P Q
(Panel A). That is, quality heterogeneity explains about half the dampening role of
unadjusted wages over the variance of sales. The remaining -0.026 is our estimate of
the dampening e¤ect of dispersion in quality-adjusted wages. The latter may stem from
frictions or from distortions in the labor market that accompany such frictions. For

                                                        37
          Table 6: Decomposition of life cycle growth and counterfactual welfare analysis to quality-
          adjustment of wages
                                                            Unadjusted wage         Q-adj. wage
                                                        1982-2012       2002-2012       2002-2012
                              Panel A: Decomposition of life cycle growth of sales
          TFPQ                                             0.154          0.287             0.244
          Demand shock                                     1.128          1.141             1.141
          ln pm                                           -0.078          -0.051           -0.051
          ln wage (unadjusted)                            -0.081          -0.065           -0.026
          ln markup                                       -0.006          -0.005           -0.005
          Wedge                                           -0.117          -0.307           -0.303
               Panel B: Actual to HK Efficient Welfare (sector level parameters, average sector)
                                                           0.278          0.296             0.299
          Panel C: Counterfactual to HK Efficient Welfare (sector level parameters, average sector)
                              D+TFPQ (TFPQ_HK)             0.123          0.278             0.295
                              Demand Shock                 0.126          0.262             0.288
            Plant attribute
                              Input prices + Markup        0.551          0.571             0.549
                set to
                              Input prices                 0.416          0.472             0.469
           counterfact. level
                              Markup                       0.338          0.332             0.336
                              Wedge                        0.490          0.491             0.506


example, market segmentation due to search frictions can enhance monopsony power.
We don'   t further explore such issues in our analysis but the ...nding that input prices
matter even after quality adjustment suggests this is an important area for future
research.
    Interestingly, the welfare e¤ect of input prices and markups is not much changed if
wages are quality adjusted (Panels B and C). That is, wage quality adjustment matters
signi...cantly for size dispersion, but not so much for welfare, which is size-weighted. This
suggests that wage dispersion a¤ects welfare mainly because it captures monopsony
power, or other frictions, associated to the largest ...rms, rather than because of the
extent to which it re     ects heterogeneity in the quality of the labor input.


8     Conclusion
Our use of product-level price and quantity data on outputs and inputs for plants
enables us to overcome a host of conceptual, measurement and estimation challenges
in the literature. However, our ...ndings raise a number of questions and point to
important areas for future research. First, while we are able to attribute a large part
of the role of HK wedges to input price and markups dispersion, our remaining wedges
are still a black box. Identifying the speci...c sources of wedges that dampen output
and sales growth especially for young plants, beyond input prices and markups that we
analyze, is one potential area of research. One natural candidate is adjustment costs
that especially impact young businesses. These may include the costs of developing
and accumulating organizational capital (such as the customer base). Our ...nding that

                                                     38
between-plant di¤erences in demand become more important in accounting for output
growth volatility for more mature plants is consistent with this hypothesis. Also, the
fact that we decompose composite productivity into its technical e¢ ciency and demand
components yields guidance as to the potential source of wedges dampening growth.
    Size-dependent policies and other characteristics of the regulatory environment are
another set of candidate explanations behind wedges. Colombia is a country that under-
went dramatic reforms over our sample period, some of them displaying cross-sectional
variability (such as product-speci...c reductions to import tari¤s in the early 1990s), and
thus o¤ers fruitful ground for investigating the impact of the regulatory environment
on life-cycle dynamics. Future work that explored the relationship between regulatory
and tari¤ reform and the evolution of the fundamentals and wedges we identify would
be of interest.
    Our ...ndings provide insights into the relative importance of the variance in funda-
mentals in explaining plant growth, inviting further research into the ultimate sources
of the variance in these fundamentals. While our current framework allows for wedges
that are correlated with current fundamentals, and in fact we ...nd that they are (in-
versely) correlated, we do not take explicit account of the endogenous response of the
variance of fundamentals over the life cycle to past performance and past wedges. Re-
search that sheds light on the endogenous determinants of the variance in the supply
side (T F P Q) and demand side fundamentals should have a high priority in future re-
search. In exploratory analysis shown in Appendix E we ...nd evidence that T F P Q and
demand shocks are highly persistent and part of this persistence re       ects that observ-
able indicators of endogenous innovation such as R&D expenditures are increasing in
lagged fundamentals. We also ...nd suggestive evidence that wedges in        uence the evo-
lution of fundamentals but the quantitative impact of lagged wedges on current period
fundamentals or current period R&D expenditures is relatively small.
    Another interesting area for future research is to explore approaches that take ad-
vantage of ...rm level prices on outputs and inputs to study the role of variation in
technology and markups at the plant-level. Recent analyses by DeLoecker, Eeckhout
and Unger (2020) highlight the potentially important role of markup dispersion across
producers. They present evidence of substantial dispersion in markups across producers
using an approach that is   exible on the structure of demand but that has the potential
limitation of attributing to markups variation that may come from the structure of
technology across producers. Our analysis using plant-level quality adjusted prices,
while more restrictive in the sense of imposing a given demand structure, highlights
challenges for pursuing this agenda. As we emphasize, even measuring plant-level
output and inputs for multi-product plants who use a variety of inputs requires tak-
ing a stand on the demand structure. Tackling technology and markup heterogeneity
in this multi-product, multi-input environment with ongoing quality change will be a
challenge.



                                            39
9    References
Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, Nicholas Bloom, and William R. Kerr, 2017. "Innova-
tion, Reallocation, and Growth.'NBER Working Paper No. 18993 (revised).
    Ackerberg, D. A., Caves, K. and Frazer, G., 2015, "Identi...cation Properties of
Recent Production Function Estimators." Econometrica, 83: 2411-2451.
    Adamopoulos , T., and D. Restuccia (2014) "The Size Distribution of Farms and
International Productivity Di¤erences," American Economic Review, Volume 104 (6) ,
pp. 1667-97.
    Asker, John, Allan Collard-Wexler and Jan De Loecker. 2014. "Dynamic Inputs
and Resource (Mis)Allocation,"Journal of Political Economy, 122(5), 1013-1065.
    Atkin, David, Amit Khandelwal and Adam Osman, 2019, "Measuring Productiv-
ity: Lessons from Tailored Surveys and Productivity Benchmarking" (No. w25471).
National Bureau of Economic Research.
    Atkin, David, Amit Khandelwal and Adam Osman, 2017, "Exporting and Firm Per-
formance: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment"Quarterly Journal of Economics:
Vol. 132 No. 2, Editor' s Choice.
    Baqaee, David and Emmanuel Farhi. 2020,"Productivity and Misallocation in Gen-
eral Equilibrium" Quarterly Journal of Economics:. (forthcoming).
    Aw, Bee Jan, Mark Roberts and Daniel Xu, 2011. "R&D investment, exporting and
productivity dynamics," American Economic Review, 101: 1312-1344.
    Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger and Stefano Scarpetta, 2013. "Cross-Country
Di¤erences in Productivity: The Role of Allocation and Selection," American Economic
Review, vol. 103(1), pages 305­ 334.
    Bento, Pedro and Diego Restuccia, 2017. "Misallocation, Establishment Size, and
Productivity," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Volume 9 (3), July 2017,
pp. 267-303.
    Bento, Pedro and Diego Restuccia, 2018. "On Average Establishment Size across
Sectors and Countries," NBER Working Papers 24968.
    Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen, 2007. "Measuring and Explaining Man-
agement Practices Across Firms and Countries," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Oxford University Press, vol. 122(4), pages 1351-1408.
    Bloom, Nicholas, Renata Lemos, Ra¤aella Sadun, Daniela Scur, John Van Reenen,
2016. "International Data on Measuring Management Practices," American Economic
Review, American Economic Association, vol. 106(5), pages 152-56, May.
    Buera, F.J, and R. Fattal. (2014) "The Dynamics of Development: Entrepreneur-
ship, Innovation, and Reallocation". Mimeo.
    Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, "Globalization and the Gains from Vari-
ety," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (2006), 541-86.
    Brooks, Eileen L. (2006). "Why don'   t ...rms export more? Product quality and
Colombian plants"  , Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 80, No. 1, pp. 160-178.


                                        40
    Caballero, Ricardo, Eduardo Engel and John Haltiwanger. 1995. "Plant-level Ad-
justment and Aggregate Investment Dynamics,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
2: 1-54.
    Caballero, Ricardo, Eduardo Engel and John Haltiwanger. 1997. "Aggregate Em-
ployment Dynamics: Building from Microeconomic Evidence," American Economic
Review, 87: 115-137.
    David, Joel and Venky Venkateswaran. 2018. "The Sources of Capital Misalloca-
tion," American Economic Review, (forthcoming).
    De Loecker, J. and F. Warzynski. 2012. "Markups and Firm-Level Export Status,"
American Economic Review 106(2): 2437-2471.
    De Loecker, J., P. Goldberg, A. Khandelwal and N. Pavcnik (2016) "Prices, Markups
and Trade Reform," Econometrica, Vol. 84, No. 2 (March), 445-510.
    De Loecker, J., J. Eeckhout, and G. Unger (2020). "The Rise of Market Power and
the Macroeconomic Implications", Quarterly Journal of Economics, (forthcoming).
    Decker, Ryan, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin and Javier Miranda. 2018. "Changing
Business Dynamism and Productivity: Shocks vs. Responsiveness." NBER Working
Paper No. 24236.
    Edmond, C. V. Midrigan and D. Xu (2018) "How costly are markups," NBER
Working Paper No. 24800
    Eslava, M., J. Haltiwanger, A. Kugler and M. Kugler (2013) "Trade Reforms and
Market Selection: Evidence from Manufacturing Plants in Colombia," Review of Eco-
nomic Dynamics, 16, 135-158.
    Eslava, M., J. Haltiwanger, A. Kugler and M. Kugler (2010) "Factor Adjustments
After Deregulation: Panel Evidence from Colombian Plants,"Review of Economics and
Statistics, 92, 378-391.
    Eslava, M., J. Haltiwanger, A. Kugler and M. Kugler (2004) "The E¤ects of Struc-
tural Reforms on Productivity and Pro...tability Enhancing Reallocation: Evidence from
Colombia,"Journal of Development Economics, 75 (2), 333-372.
    Eslava, M. John Haltiwanger and Alvaro-Jose Pinzon (2018) Job Creation in Colom-
bia vs the U.S.: 'Up or out Dynamics'Meets '   The Life Cycle of Plants'
                                                                       . SSRN Working
Paper.
    Feenstra, Robert C., "New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International
Prices," American Economic Review, 84 (1994), 157-177
    Fieler, C., M. Eslava and D. Xu (2018) "Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Input
Linkages: Theory and Evidence from Colombia," American Economic Review, 108(1),
109-146
    Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2008. "Reallocation, Firm
Turnover, and E¢ ciency: Selection on Productivity or Pro...tability?" American Eco-
nomic Review, 98 (1): 394-425.
    Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson (2016) "The slow growth of
new plants: learning about demand?" Economica 83(329) 91-129.


                                         41
    Garcia-Santana, M., & Pijoan-Mas, J. (2014). The reservation laws in India and the
misallocation of production factors. Journal of Monetary Economics, 66, 193-209.
    Garicano, L., Lelarge, C., & Van Reenen, J. (2016). Firm size distortions and the
productivity distribution: Evidence from France. American Economic Review, 106(11),
3439-79.
    Gervais, A. (2015) Product quality and ...rm heterogeneity in international trade.
Canadian Journal of Economics, 48(3), 1152-1174.
    Gopinath, Gita, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina Villegas-
Sanchez. 2017. "Capital Allocation and Productivity in South Europe." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 132 (4): 1915-1967.
    Guner, N., G. Ventura and D. Xu (2008) "Macroeconomic Implications of Size-
Dependent Policies,"Review of Economic Dynamics, 11 (4), 721-744.
    Hallak JC, Schott PK. 2011. Estimating Cross-Country Di erences in Product Qual-
ity. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1): 417-74.
    Hottman, Collin, Stephen J. Redding and David E. Weinstein, 2016. "Quantify-
ing the Sources of Firm Heterogeneity," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Oxford
University Press, vol. 131(3), pages 1291-1364.
    Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2013) "Who Creates Jobs?
Small vs. Large vs. Young." Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), 347-361.
    Haltiwanger, John, Robert Kulick, and Chad Syverson (2018), "Misallocation Mea-
sures: The Distortion that Ate the Residual," NBER Working Paper No. 24199.
    Hopenhayn, H (2016) "Firm Size and Development." Economía, vol. 17 no. 1, 2016,
pp. 27-49.
    Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow (2009) "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP
in China and India,"Quarterly Journal of Economics. 124 (4): 1403­   48.
    Hsieh, Chang-tai and Peter Klenow (2014) "The life cycle of plants in India and
Mexico," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3): 1035-84.
    Khandelwal, Amit (2011) "The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders," Review of
Economic Studies, Oxford University Press, vol. 77(4), pages 1450-1476.
    Kugler, M. and E. Verhoogen (2012) "Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality."
Review of Economic Studies, vol. 79 no. 1, pp. 307-339
    Levinsohn, J. and Petrin, A. (2003) "Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs
to Control for Unobservables," Review of Economic Studies 317-342
    Manova K, Zhang Z. 2012. Export Prices across Firms and Destinations. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 127.
    Melitz MJ. 2003. The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggre-
gate Industry Productivity. Econometrica. 71: 1695-725.
    Midrigan, Virgiliu, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2014. "Finance and Misallocation: Evidence
from Plant-Level Data." American Economic Review, 104 (2): 422-58.
    Olley, S. and Pakes, A.(1996) "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommuni-
cations Equipment Industry"   . Econometrica 64:1263-1295


                                        42
   Redding, Stephen and David E. Weinstein (2020) "Measuring Aggregate Price In-
dexes with Taste Shocks: Theory and Evidence for CES Preferences", Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 135(1), 503-560, 2020.
   Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson. 2008. "Policy Distortions and Aggregate
Productivity with Heterogeneous Plants,"Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(October):
707-720.
   Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson. 2017. "The Causes and Consequences of
Misallocation,"' NBER Working Paper No. 23422, National Bureau of Econonomic
Reserach, Inc.




                                        43
