                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                     PUBLIC PROCUREMENT IN LAW AND PRACTICE

                                            Erica Bosio
                                          Simeon Djankov
                                         Edward L. Glaeser
                                           Andrei Shleifer

                                       Working Paper 27188
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27188

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2020


The authors are from the World Bank, the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Harvard
University, and Harvard University, respectively. We want to thank Marwa Abdou, Souad Adnane,
Yuriy Valentinovich Avramov, Ogma Bale, Elodie Bataille, Liliya F Bulgakova, Édgar Chávez,
Albert Nogues i Comas, Kimberly Suarez Contreras, Nadine DiMonte, Viktoriya Ereshchenko, Maria
Antonia Quesada Gámez, Emilia Galiano, Marko Grujicic, Youmna Al Hourani, Maksym Iavorskyi,
Charlotte Nan Jiang, Victoria Khaitina, Anouk Leger, Joseph Lemoine, Tiziana Londero, Raman Maroz,
Nikiforos Meletiadis, Margherita Mellone, Nuno Filipe Mendes Dos Santos, Inés Zabalbeitia
Múgica, Sarah Kouhlani Nolla, Nadia Novik, Marion Pinto, Greta Polo, Oleksandra Popova,
Parvina Rakhimova, Nathalie Reyes, Silvia Carolina Lopez Rocha, Lucia Arnal Rodriguez, Enrique
Orellana Tamez, Erick Tjong, Judith Trasancos, Ferihane Ben Yedder, Farrukh Umarov, Yulia
Borisovna Valerio, Rongpeng (Tiffany) Yang, Marilyne Youbi, Philip Zager, Dou Zhang and
Muqiao (Chloe) Zhang for excellent research assistance, as well as seminar participants at the
Blavatnik School of Government at Oxford University, the London School of Economics and the
Peterson Institute for International Economics for their comments. We also benefited from
significant help from Valeria Perotti, Utkarsh Saxena, and Yang You, and from comments by Oriana
Bandiera, Emanuele Colonnelli, Decio Coviello, Francesco Decarolis, Josh Schwartzstein, Giancarlo
Spagnolo, and Dev Patel. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27188.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Erica Bosio, Simeon Djankov, Edward L. Glaeser, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public Procurement in Law and Practice
Erica Bosio, Simeon Djankov, Edward L. Glaeser, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 27188
May 2020
JEL No. D73,H11,H57,K42

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine a new data set of laws and practices governing public procurement, as well as
procurement outcomes, in 187 countries. We measure regulation as restrictions on discretion of
the procuring agents. We find that laws and practices are highly correlated with each other across
countries, better practices are correlated with better outcomes, but laws themselves are not
correlated with outcomes. To shed light on this puzzle, we present a model of procurement in
which both regulation and public sector capacity determine the efficiency of procurement. In the
model, regulation is effective in countries with low public sector capacity, and detrimental in
countries with high public sector capacity because it inhibits the socially optimal exercise of
discretion. We find evidence broadly consistent with this prediction: regulation of procurement
improves outcomes, but only in countries with low public sector capacity.


Erica Bosio                                     Edward L. Glaeser
World Bank                                      Department of Economics
2121 Pennsylvannia Avenue, NW.                  315A Littauer Center
MSN F 3K-234                                    Harvard University
Washington, DC 20433                            Cambridge, MA 02138
ebosio@worldbank.org                            and NBER
                                                eglaeser@harvard.edu
Simeon Djankov
London School of Economics                      Andrei Shleifer
and Political Science                           Department of Economics
Houghton Street                                 Harvard University
London                                          Littauer Center M-9
WC2A 2AE                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
s.djankov@lse.ac.uk                             and NBER
                                                ashleifer@harvard.edu
I. Introduction

The world spent $11 trillion on public procurement in 2018, amounting to 12 percent of global
GDP (Figure 1). Public procurement's share of GDP typically rises with per capita income and
represents more than one-tenth of national output for all rich countries, including 24 percent in
Switzerland, 21 percent in the Netherlands, and 18 percent in Hong Kong and Singapore.
Governments everywhere purchase vast amounts of goods, services and public works from private
firms, even in sectors such as healthcare and defense that are state-run.

       Figure 1: Public Procurement as a Share of GDP.




       On the border between public and private sectors, procurement is particularly vulnerable
to misconduct. Private companies have strong incentives to bribe public officials to increase
payments, to cut out competitors, or to accept inferior quality. Procurement contracts face the same
challenges of renegotiation and non-verifiable quality as bedevil private contracting (Hart and

                                                 2
Moore 1988, Hart, Shleifer, and Vishny 1997). But unlike the private buyers, public agencies
often lack the incentives and administrative capacity to handle these challenges.

       The vulnerability of public buyers to private subversion has led every country to restrict
the discretion of procuring entities in what they buy and pay. But while the regulation of the
private sector empowers public officials and often enables them to extract bribes in exchange for
regulatory relief (Djankov et al. 2003), the regulation of government constrains officials. Public
procurement regulations reduce the discretion of buyers, typically with the intent of reducing
corruption. But what do they really accomplish?

       In this paper, we provide a panoramic overview of procurement laws and practices across
187 countries. As part of its Doing Business project, the World Bank administered a new module
on procurement. Respondents in each of the countries (typically eight to twelve professionals
ranging from public procurement lawyers to road construction companies and procuring entities)
were presented with a hypothetical $2.5 million road maintenance project. They were asked about
the rules that would govern the procurement of such a project. Based on their answers, we construct
measures of laws governing procurement, covering transparency, competition, exclusion of
bidders, and integrity of contracts. Respondents also described whether and how procurement
practices differed from the laws, so we can create corresponding measures of regulatory practice.
In addition, respondents answered questions about the outcomes of the procurement process. These
include typical problems in the Process of procurement, such as corruption, favoritism, collusion,
and absence of competition, but also problems with the project itself ­ the Product of procurement
-- including time delays, cost overruns, and low quality. In Section II, we describe the survey and
how we aggregated the answers to create indices of regulation in law and practice, but also
corruption and the quality of both Process and Product.

       Section III presents several novel facts in these data. Countries that regulate one dimension
of procurement are more likely to regulate others as well. Richer countries regulate procurement
less than poorer ones by law, but have practices that are more restrictive on procurement entities
than their laws. For example, poorer countries are more likely to have rules on running transparent
auctions, while richer countries are more likely to actually run them. At the same time, laws do
predict practice. For example, the correlation between transparency laws and practice is 0.67.

                                                 3
       We focus on three outcomes from the survey: i) perceived corruption, ii) an index of
Process covering favoritism, collusion, and absence of competition, and iii) an index of Product
covering cost overruns, time delays, and low quality. The correlation coefficient between Process
and Product is 0.60. Corruption is associated with bad Process and Product. Richer and better
governed countries have less corruption, and better Process and Product. The survey measures are
also correlated with two external measures of road quality: the World Economic Forum's (WEF)
survey question on the quality of roads in a country, and average speeds between major cities
calculated by Google Maps. The correlation between Product and the WEF road quality measure
is 0.45 (Figure 2). These measures of road quality also rise with income.

       Figure 2: Correlation between Quality of Product and WEF Road Quality




       We then document that procurement practice is strongly positively correlated with Process
and Product. Laws, however, are not. Section III raises a puzzle. Laws predict practice. Practice


                                                4
predicts outcomes. But laws do not predict outcomes. To understand these facts, Section IV
proposes a model of regulation of public procurement we then use to make sense of the data.

       The model considers a simple infrastructure procurement situation in which a Procuring
Entity (PE) faces two bidders, with different costs and quality levels. One bidder is an Insider,
who can engage in corrupt bargaining with the PE. The other bidder is an Outsider, who is bound
by an external constraint not to bribe. We consider two institutional settings: regulation and
discretion. Under regulation, the PE must run a second price auction and accept the low bid
regardless of the quality level. Under discretion, the PE has the power to exclude a bidder on the
basis of alleged lower quality. Quality is not, however, externally verifiable and this power enables
the PE to exclude the higher quality Outsider in exchange for a bribe from the Insider.

       We assume that the PE maximizes a weighted average of social welfare and bribes. The
weight the PE places on social welfare is higher in countries with more accountable governments.
We also assume that such governments increase the cost of bribing to the bidder. In a poorly
governed country, it may be easy to just pay cash. In a better governed country, the bribes may
take the form of gifts or favors valued by the PE at less than their cost.

       In this model, the advantage of discretion is that it enables the PE to eliminate low quality
bidders. The advantage of regulation is that it prevents the PE from excluding a high quality
Outsider in exchange for a bribe from the Insider. When government effectiveness is high,
discretion dominates regulation, because the PE only excludes low quality bidders from the
auction. When it is low, regulation dominates discretion, because discretion leads to corruption.

       The case for discretion becomes stronger when quality is endogenous, because the threat
of exclusion stops bidders from cutting cost by cutting quality. In a sense, the regulated PE
becomes a sitting duck for bidders who can game the fixed system. Nonetheless, when government
effectiveness is low, regulation delivers higher social welfare than discretion.

       We also consider theoretically an auction in which the PE chooses the level of
transparency, subject to regulation. The PE may choose to be non-transparent (not inform
outsiders about the auction) in exchange for a bribe to reduce competition. The model predicts that
in well-governed countries, transparency will be high in practice even without regulation. In
poorly-governed countries, transparency will be low in practice even with regulation.
                                                  5
       In Sections V and VI, we test four implications of the model. We first document that
regulation of procurement is associated with less corruption. The raw correlation between
procurement regulations and corruption is negative, and becomes stronger when we control for the
level of GDP, human capital, or government effectiveness. Since procurement regulations are more
prevalent in poor and poorly governed countries, failure to control for the level of development
mutes the connection between laws and corruption. As the model predicts, procurement regulation
is associated with less corruption in the procurement process.

       We then examine the model's implication that practices are more restrictive than laws in
high public sector capacity countries, and vice versa in low capacity ones. We measure the level
of public sector capacity either with human capital or with a survey measure of government
efficiency. We find that laws are typically more restrictive than practice in low human capital
countries, and the reverse in high human capital ones.

       In Section VI, we turn to the predictions for Process and Product. The model predicts that
Process and Product improve with government effectiveness regardless of the laws on the books.
This prediction clearly holds in the data. But the correlation between laws and these outcomes is
negligible. This leads us to the model's main prediction that reconciles our findings: laws should
be positively associated with outcomes in low effectiveness countries and negatively in high
effectiveness ones. In fact, the univariate correlation between the laws index and the Product index
is 0.30 in low human capital countries and -0.32 in high human capital ones.

       We also test this prediction with continuous interactions between public sector capacity
and laws. The interactions are statistically strong and economically meaningful. The interaction
between laws and human capital has a significant correlation with all but one of the six components
of the Product and Process indices. The correlation of laws with favoritism, low quality and cost
overruns is always more negative in better educated countries, and statistically significant at the
1% level. The correlation of laws with time delay, collusion and lack of competition is also
negative, but statistically insignificant at conventional levels.

       Section VII concludes. Procuring entities are typically highly regulated, but while these
regulations are associated with less corruption, they are not associated with improvements along
other dimensions. That presents a puzzle because laws predict practice and practice predicts

                                                   6
outcomes, but laws do not predict outcomes. The resolution of this puzzle is that the overall
relationship between laws and outcomes misses critical heterogeneity. Laws improve outcomes
when public sector capacity is low, and harm outcomes when public sector capacity is high. As a
result, regulation of procurement helps, but only in poor countries.

Literature Review

This paper contributes to several strands of a large literature on government procurement and
performance. Public procurement has been found to suffer from bid rigging (Porter and Zona 1993,
Conley and Decarolis 2016), cost overruns (Flyvbjerg 2003), favoritism towards politically
connected bidders (Burgess et al. 2015, Mironov and Zhuravskaya 2016, Baranek and Titl 2020),
lack of transparency (Coviello and Galiarducci 2014), collusion between politicians and firms
(Coviello and Gagliarducci 2017), and simply bad choices (Bandiera et al. 2009). Corruption has
also been found to be common in procurement (DiTella and Schargrodsky 2003, Olken 2007,
Collier et al. 2015, Colonnelli and Prem 2020, and Lichand and Fernades 2019), particularly when
contracts are renegotiated (Huysentrust 2001, Decarolis 2014, Decarolis and Palumbo 2015, and
Campos et al. 2019). Our data addresses the prevalence of cost overruns, favoritism, collusion, and
corruption in procurement. We also measure renegotiation.

       The tradeoff between rules and discretion has been a central topic of research on
procurement. Kelman's (1990, 2002) early work stressed the costs of rigid regulations in the U.S.
government procurement, and made the case for discretion. More recently, research on the
potential benefits of discretion has progressed rapidly (Spagnolo 2012, Szucs 2017, Coviello et al.
2018, Rasul and Rogger 2018, Best et al. 2019, Bandiera et al. 2020, Decarolis et al. 2020a, and
Decarolis et al. 2020b). Our paper does not have the compelling sources of exogenous variation
found in these studies, but our geographic and theoretical focus is broader, as we cover 187
countries and the complete path of the procurement process.

       We also follow the broad literature that connects the quality of government with human
capital, education, and other characteristics across countries (Barro 1999, La Porta et al. 1999,
Milligan et al 2004, Barro and McCleary, 2005, Glaeser, Ponzetto, and Shleifer 2007, Pande 2011,
Barro 2013, Botero et al 2013, Decarolis et al. 2019). The interaction between the quality of
government employees and the benefits of regulating them is a central theme of this paper.

                                                 7
        Our paper is most closely linked to the literature that gave birth to the Doing Business
Report, which examines regulation around the world (Djankov et al 2002, Djankov et al 2003a,b,
Botero et al 2004, and Djankov et al 2008a,b). We build on this work by focusing on the regulation
of government rather than that of the private sector. The factors that shape the regulation of
government are different from those shaping the regulation of the private economy.

        Lastly, our paper contributes to the literature on corruption. The theoretical studies have
focused on the determinants for corrupt behavior (Banfield 1975, Shleifer and Vishny 1993).
Empirical studies have focused on the magnitude of corruption (Svensson 2003, Sequiera and
Djankov 2014, Olken et al 2018), political connections as channels for corruption (Fisman 2001
and Faccio 2006), transparency of politicians' incomes as a barrier to corruption (Djankov et al
2010, Banerjee et al 2012), or administrative design to reduce bribes (Bertrand et al 2007, Duflo
et al 2012). We show that corruption is reduced by regulatory constraints on the behavior of
procuring entities both by law and in practice.



II. Data

The Case Study

The analysis in this paper is based on a new World Bank dataset which describes the regulation of
public procurement in 187 countries in 2019. This section describes the survey (including its
respondents) and the variables we use in the empirical analysis. Our analysis is based on a fictitious
case study of a government agency procuring road resurfacing works. The type of road works was
determined through an empirical study of road-related projects completed by the World Bank over
the last twenty years, also known as Road Cost Knowledge System (ROCKS). We use the ROCKS
database to motivate our case facts. 2

        The survey respondents are presented with detailed assumptions on the contract, the road,
the procuring entity (PE), the bidder, and the procurement process. The contract entails the


2
 Overall, 1,800 projects covering 89 countries are documented in the ROCKS database. It covers the initial
product documents for each project, various interim progress reports, the completion report, the procured
and contracted amount and time commitment, as well as the actual time and cost spent on completing the
project (Bosio et al., 2018).
                                                     8
resurfacing of 20 km of a two-lane flat road with an asphalt overlay of 40 to 59 mm (or its most
common equivalent in the country). The road connects the economy's largest business city to
another city within the same state, region or province. The road is not a highway, nor is it operated
under concession. The value of the contract is $2,500,000 and the contract does not include any
other work. This represents the median value of road resurfacing contracts documented in the
World Bank's ROCKS database (Bosio et al. 2018), and we take it to be representative of the
typical public road works contract around the world. 3

        The PE choosing the contractor for this project is a government agency, typically the
Ministry of Transportation, and is the sole financer of the works. To make the case study
comparable across countries, the contract is assumed to be tendered through an open, unrestricted,
and competitive public call for tenders. The process ends with the contract awarded to BidCo, a
firm whose bid satisfies all technical and administrative criteria. BidCo is a privately and
domestically-owned medium sized Limited Liability Company (or its most common legal
equivalent). BidCo operates in the economy's largest business city, is in good standing with all
relevant authorities, and has all the licenses and permits required to operate. BidCo is registered
with the PE and has already participated in similar bidding processes in the past 5 years.

        The hypothetical contract abstracts from a number of issues important in public
procurement. First, it focuses exclusively on procurement of works and excludes the procurement
of services and goods. Second, we do not allow for the road to be a highway, to exclude roads
operated under concession. Third, we do not allow for the road to be a street within the boundaries
of a city, because many cities around the world would not conduct open tendering for such a
contract, but rather carry out this maintenance in-house or through direct award. Fourth, we assume
that the value of the contract is $2,500,000 and only examine the rules that apply to the open
tendering of a contract of such value. 4 Fifth, our data underestimates the complexity of public
procurement by assuming that the works are procured through an open tendering procedure, i.e. a


3
  One may wonder whether $2.5 million is too low a cutoff for rich countries. Among the 37 OECD
members, 20 have no regulatory thresholds or thresholds below $2.5 million, and the remaining 17 have
higher thresholds at which somewhat more onerous rules apply. On net we think having a fixed size project
everywhere is preferred.
4
  In countries that are members of the European Union, this contract is below the threshold of 5,350,000
for the applicability of the EU Directive 2014/24/EU on public procurement.
                                                    9
competitive procedure in which any qualified company can submit an economic offer. All other
types of procurement, including direct award, framework agreements, negotiated procedures,
restricted tendering, etc. are excluded by design. Sixth, BidCo has already worked with the PE and
has already participated in similar bidding processes in the past 5 years. This assumption eliminates
the pre-registration process common in many countries.

The Questionnaire

The data on the road resurfacing case study was collected in two rounds ­ in 2018 and 2019 ­
through questionnaires disseminated to 190 countries. Three countries (Libya, the Maldives, and
Syria) have not completed an open tendering procurement procedure for road works in the past 5
years and are excluded from the analysis. The final sample includes 187 economies: 58 high-
income, 53 upper-middle-income, and 76 low and lower-middle-income countries.

       The questionnaire was completed by over 1,200 professionals involved in the procurement
activity, including (1) lawyers; (2) construction and engineering firms; and (3) procuring entities.
Whenever possible, we compared the answers from people in the same country and collected all
the pertinent legal documents that the respondents identified. Lawyers answered primarily
questions related to the legal framework. Construction and engineering firms answered questions
about practice, focusing on the actual application of public procurement regulation. These experts
were also essential for us to understand phases of the project in which lawyers are less involved
(such as quality control, inspections and payments). PE's reported on both laws and practice. The
World Bank team then contacted different respondents in a country to reconcile their answers,
which sometimes differed because of misunderstandings.

       The questionnaire provided to these respondents was divided into 4 parts, following the
four main chronological stages of the typical public procurement process (Figure 3). Across all
parts, respondents are presented with 4 types of requests: (1) to indicate which rules regulate each
stage of public procurement; (2) to outline the procedures that would be followed in the award and
execution of a contract for the resurfacing of a flat two-lane road; (3) to indicate how long each of
these procedures would take; and (4) multiple-choice questions on the frequency of certain
occurrences in public procurement, such as collusion or bribery.



                                                 10
Figure 3: Chronological evolution of the public procurement process.



                                             · Tendering
                                             · Bid collection
                                             · Opening /
    Pre-      · Needs Assessment               evaluation                         · Renegotiations               · Inspections
                                   Bidding                            Execution                        Payment
  Bidding     · Budgeting                    · Award / signing                    · Contract changes             · Invoicing
                                             · Commencement
                                               of works




            The pre-bidding stage describes the administrative process that the PE goes through to
identify its procurement needs and secure the related funds. Respondents are asked to indicate how
the contract value is normally estimated, and whether it is published in the tender documents. We
also ask whether the PE needs to set aside all necessary funds before advertising the opportunity
or can do so without having secured the budget.

            The bidding stage describes how the procurement method is chosen, how the information
related to the tender is made publicly available and how bids are collected from the private sector.
Within this stage, the bid opening, evaluation and contract signing phases concern the criteria used
to evaluate bids and award the contract. Respondents are asked which procurement method would
most commonly be used for a routine contract for road resurfacing, and whether price would be
the most common criterion for the award of such contract. They also describe how the process
would evolve and the most common sources of delay.

            The execution stage describes the procedures from when the contractor receives a notice
to proceed until when the works are completed, including requirements on contract amendments.
Respondents estimate how often, and by how long, the execution of the contract is delayed by
changes in contract terms resulting from contract renegotiations or additional works requests. They
also indicate the laws that regulate sub-contracting and the disclosure requirements on BidCo if it
decides to subcontract part of the works during the life of the contract.

            Finally, the payment stage measures the law and practices around the timeliness and
frequency of payments. Respondents estimate the frequency of inspections and how often
disagreements on such inspections would delay the execution process. Respondents provide an
estimate of how long it takes to collect payment from the procuring entity.

                                                                 11
        The questionnaire is organized chronologically to facilitate the respondents' thinking about
the public procurement process. However, the questions are organized around four main themes:
(1) transparency; (2) competition; (3) limits to exclusion; and (4) integrity of contract. Questions
on transparency ask about the level of public availability of key documents. Questions on
competition ask which rules are in place to broaden participation in the tendering process.
Questions on the limits to exclusion ask whether there are rules in place making it more difficult
for the PE to exclude bidders without justifying the exclusion or publishing the reasons. Finally,
questions on the integrity of the contract ask about events that may take place during the life of the
contract, including payment, the ability to add subcontractors, renegotiation after the contract is
signed, as well as change in project specifications (Table 1).                     Appendix A describes the
construction of all the variables in detail, and presents many illustrations and examples.

Table 1: Explanatory Variables, By Law and In Practice
                                                TRANSPARENCY
                          LAW                                                      PRACTICE
 By law, do procurement plans need to be made publicly       In practice, are procurement plans made publicly
 available by the Procuring Entity?                          available by the Procuring Entity?
 By law, do model procurement documents and materials        In practice, are model procurement documents and
 / standard contract conditions need to be made publicly     materials / standard contract conditions made publicly
 available by the Procuring Entity?                          available by the Procuring Entity?
 By law, do tender notices need to be made publicly          In practice, are tender notices made publicly available
 available by the Procuring Entity?                          by the Procuring Entity?
 By law, do tender documents and technical                   In practice, are tender documents and technical
 specifications need to be made publicly available by the    specifications made publicly available by the Procuring
 Procuring Entity?                                           Entity?
 By law, do notices of award / bidding results need to be    In practice, are notices of award / bidding results made
 made publicly available by the Procuring Entity?            publicly available by the Procuring Entity?
 By law, does the contract need to be made publicly          In practice, are contracts made publicly available by the
 available by the Procuring Entity?                          Procuring Entity?
 By law, does the legal framework regulate the need to       In practice, are the results of contract renegotiations
 make contract renegotiations publicly available?            made publicly available?
                                                 COMPETITION
                           LAW                                                      PRACTICE
 According to the legal framework, is open tendering the     In practice, is open tendering the most common method
 default method of procurement for a contract like the       of procurement for a contract like the one described in
 one described in our case study?                            our case study?
 According to the legal framework, after the
 advertisement of an open tendering procedure, can the
                                                             In practice, does the Procuring Entity avoid requiring
 Procuring Entity require bidders to participate in a
                                                             bidders to participate in a prequalification process?
 prequalification process before submitting an economic
 offer?



                                                        12
Does the legal framework prohibit dividing contracts to         In practice, does the Procuring Entity avoid dividing
circumvent thresholds for open tendering?                       contracts to circumvent thresholds for open tendering?
According to the legal framework, is there a minimum
time limit between the advertisement of the tender              In practice, does the Procuring Entity advertise
notice and the submission deadline for an open                  procurement opportunities long enough to maximize
tendering procedure like the one described in our case          competition?
study?
Does the legal framework require the Procuring Entity
to proceed to bid opening immediately after the deadline        In practice, is bid opening carried out immediately?
for bid submission has been reached?
Is there a standstill (or pause) period between public
notice of award and contract signing to allow                   In practice, does the filing of a complaint against the
unsuccessful bidders to challenge the award decision            award suspend the procurement process?
that suspends the procurement process?
                                            LIMITS TO EXCLUSION
                          LAW                                                          PRACTICE
Does the legal framework establish the minimum                  In practice, does the Procuring Entity avoid defining
content of the tender notice and tender documents?              technical specifications to benefit a specific bidder?
Is the Procuring Entity required to make clarifications         In practice, does the PE avoid informal meetings with
provided to bidders publicly available?                         individual bidders?
According to the legal framework, is price the award
                                                                In practice, does the PE keep the award criterion
criterion to be used by the Procuring Entity for a
                                                                unchanged after the bids are opened?
contract like the one described in our case study?
Does the legal framework establish a criterion to               In practice, is it rare that bidders submit recklessly low
identify abnormally low bids?                                   bids to win the tender?
                                                                In practice, if a bidder submits a bid with a non-
Does the legal framework define what constitutes a non-
                                                                substantial error, is it given the opportunity to rectify
substantial error?
                                                                such error before disqualification?
                                           INTEGRITY of CONTRACT
                         LAW                                                            PRACTICE
                                                                In an open tendering procedure, does the Procuring
Is the Procuring Entity required to have already
                                                                Entity award a contract after having already set aside all
allocated budget to a specific project before tendering?
                                                                the necessary funds?
                                                                Does the Procuring Entity avoid employing
Does the law regulate the selection, disclosure and
                                                                subcontractors that were neither properly selected nor
liability of subcontractors?
                                                                disclosed during the tender process?
By law, can additional works be procured through direct         In practice, is the usage of direct awards to procure
award?                                                          additional works avoided?
                                                                Does the Procuring Entity avoid using the renegotiation
Does the law regulate the scope, limits and disclosure of
                                                                process to increase the price or the scope of the project
contract renegotiations?
                                                                without another competitive process?
During the execution of the contract, does the legal
framework establish a timeframe within which the                In practice, does BidCo receive payment within the
Procuring Entity must process the payment once an               timeframe established by the legal framework?
invoice is received?
According to the legal framework, is the company
entitled to claim interest on late payments if the              In practice, does BidCo receive interest on late
Procuring Entity does not pay within the legally                payment?
established timeframe?


                                                           13
       A central feature of our design is to ask questions about both the laws regulating
procurement and its actual practice. The laws questions elicit mandatory rules in each country as
the process moves along. These questions describe the ways in which the regulations reduce the
discretion of the PE. The "practice" questions mirror the "law" questions and are used to gauge
the actual application of the law. The coding of practice parallels that of laws: the less discretion
the PE exercises in reality, the higher is the practice score.

       As an example, the questionnaire asks whether, by law, the PE is required to publish tender
notices and documents online. The corresponding "practice" questions ask whether these notices
and documents are indeed published. If such publication is meant to be online, the team checks
whether this happens. Other practice questions measure the frequency of applying a particular
provision in the law. For example, the questionnaire asks whether, by law, open tendering is the
default method of procurement. The mirror practice question inquires how often open tendering is
used to procure road resurfacing works.

       The regulation index mirrors the four themes around which the questionnaire is organized:
transparency, competition, limits to exclusion, and integrity of contract. The Law and Practice
indices are sums of their four sub-indices (Transparency, Competition, Limits to Exclusion, and
Integrity of Contract) and vary between 0 and 4, with higher values representing more regulation
or less discretionary practice. On the Laws index, Greece scores highest (3 out of possible 4),
followed by Rwanda (2.98), Italy, and Latvia (both at 2.92). At the other end, Israel scores 0.31,
followed by Kiribati (0.45). On the Practice index, Estonia scores highest with 3.55, followed by
Slovenia (3.52) and Hong Kong (3.40). At the other end, Palau only scores 0.20, followed by
Myanmar and South Sudan at 0.31.

       The questionnaire also elicits expert opinions about outcomes. We convert these answers
into three outcome variables (Table 2), whose construction is also described in Appendix A:
corruption, Product, and Process. The question for corruption in procurement asks how often
private sector companies resort to informal payments in return for help from public officials in
circumventing public procurement rules. Product quality in the procurement context reflects the
time to completion, cost overruns, and the low quality of actual works. The efficiency of Process

                                                  14
covers favoritism, collusion, and the absence of competition in procurement. Notice that we code
the inputs into the measures of outcomes literally, so higher scores refer to worse outcomes (e.g.,
more corruption, longer delays, higher cost overruns). However, we reverse the signs on the
aggregate outcome measures, so higher scores reflect better Product and Process.



Table 2: Outcome Variables, Corruption, Quality of Product, Efficiency of Process




       The scoring of outcomes leads to an unsurprising list of best and worst countries. On
corruption, the worst are Burundi, Cameroon, and Ivory Coast, and the best are Australia, Canada,
and Finland. On Product, the worst are Venezuela, Haiti, and Timor Leste, and the best are
Singapore, Korea, and Australia. On Process, the worst are Niger, Lao, and Myanmar, and the
best are Germany, Denmark, and Norway. We next turn to a more formal analysis.



III. Correlations in the Data

       In this section, we examine four broad aspects of the data. First, what are the patterns in
the laws governing public procurement? These include transparency, competition, exclusion, and
integrity of contract, as well as an overall regulation index. Do countries that score high on one
element of these regulations also perform well on others? Do these laws vary systematically with
the level of economic development? Second, what are the corresponding facts about practice? Are
practices for different aspects of procurement regulation correlated with each other, and how do
                                                15
          they vary with per capita GDP? Third, are laws correlated with practices? In principle one can
          imagine that countries ignore the laws and have a laxer and more discretionary practice of
          procurement, or alternatively that countries in practice introduce constraints that are not mandated
          by the law. Fourth, how our measured procurement outcomes -- corruption, Process, and Product
          -- vary with laws and practice, but also with the level of development?

          The Structure of Laws and Practice

          Table 3 presents the correlations between the four measures of regulation of procurement, the laws
          index, and the log of per capita income. Across countries, different aspects of regulation of
          procurement are strongly positively correlated with each other. But we also get the first surprising
          result: regulation is generally less restrictive in richer countries: the correlation coefficient with
          per capita income is -0.217, so richer countries give their PE's more discretion. They are
          particularly prone to have fewer laws regulating competition and integrity of contract.

          Table 3: Correlations Between Components of the Law Index
                                  Transparency     Competition    Integrity of Limits to Exclusion
                                                                                                            Log GDP           Laws
                                      Laws           Laws        Contract Laws        Laws
  Transparency Laws              1.000
  Competition Laws               0.502***        1.000
  Integrity of Contract Laws     0.502***        0.513***        1.000
  Limits to Exclusion Laws       0.251***        0.121*          0.223***          1.000
  Log GDP                        -0.0824         -0.322***       -0.237***         0.0590                1.000
  Laws                           0.784***        0.749***        0.824***          0.502***              -0.217***      1.000
                   Table 4 shows that practices across multiple dimensions of procurement regulation are
          highly positively correlated with each other. We also find that practices are less discretionary in
          richer countries, with correlation coefficient of 0.445 ­ the opposite of the finding for laws.

          Table 4: Correlations Between Components of the Practice Index
                                                                       Limits to
                                    Transparency      Competition                      Integrity of
                                                                       Exclusion                            Log GDP      Practice
                                      Practice         Practice                      Contract Practice
                                                                        Practice
Transparency Practice              1.000
Competition Practice               0.399***        1.000
Limits to Exclusion Practice       0.0486          0.197***           1.000
Integrity of Contract Practice     0.177**         0.293***           0.586***      1.000
Log GDP                            0.170**         0.189***           0.417***      0.438***             1.000
Practice                           0.604***        0.687***           0.694***      0.730***             0.445***     1.000




                                                                 16
       Figure 4 shows that procurement laws and practice are correlated across countries. Going
a step further, if we regress practices on laws and logGDP, we find

                                  . 46      . 26         1.21
                     =                   +         () -
                                 (.07)     (. 03)       (. 31)

There are 187 observations and the r-squared is .36. Both income and laws have a large role in
explaining the variation of regulatory practice across countries. The relationship between laws
and practice holds not only for the overall regulatory index, but also for its Transparency and
Competition components, as illustrated in Table 5.



Figure 4: Procurement Law and Practice Are Correlated




                                               17
Table 5: Correlations between Components of the Law and Practice Indices
                                   Transparency          Competition            Limits to          Integrity of
                                      Practice            Practice          Exclusion Practice   Contract Practice
                                     0.875***
 Transparency Laws
                                      (0.066)
                                                          0.619***
 Competition Laws
                                                           (0.080)
                                                                                 0.0702
 Limits to Exclusion Laws
                                                                                 (0.110)
                                                                                                      0.077
 Integrity of Contract Laws
                                                                                                     (0.054)
                                     0.043***             0.062***              0.086***            0.069***
 Log GDP
                                      (0.010)              (0.012)               (0.014)             (0.010)
 R2                                    0.505                0.274                 0.176               0.201
 N                                      187                  187                   187                 187




Outcomes
The survey delivers three procurement related outcomes: corruption, Process, and Product. Figure
5 shows the relation between Product and Process. Table 6 presents the correlations between these
three outcomes as well as with log per capita GDP and two external variables: the World Economic
Forum survey measure of road quality and the average speed between major cities from Google
Maps. The three outcomes are highly correlated with each other across countries, and they are all
better in richer countries. The two external measures of road quality are also highly correlated with
our survey measures and with national income.

        Are these outcomes correlated with the laws and practice of procurement regulation? Table
7 shows the correlations between corruption, Process, and Product for both laws (odd columns)
and practice (even columns). Corruption is negatively correlated with both laws and practice, but
the correlation with practices is stronger. Both Process and Product are robustly positively
correlated with all the practice variables. In contrast, the correlations with the laws variable are
weak, and often negative: countries with more legal controls of PE's have no better and perhaps
worse outcomes.

Table 6: Correlations between Outcome Variables and Income per Capita
                              Efficiency of Quality of
                                                              Corruption   Road Quality    Aspeed       Log GDP
                                 Process     Product
Efficiency of Process         1
Quality of Product            0.597***     1

                                                         18
Corruption             -0.550***   -0.565***      1
Road Quality           0.327***    0.454***       -0.464***     1
Aspeed                 0.177**     0.191**        -0.316***     0.370***     1
Log GDP                0.455***    0.534***       -0.669***     0.688***     0.496***     1



Table 7: Correlations between Law and Practice and Outcome Variables
                                               Efficiency      Efficiency     Quality       Quality
                 Corruption    Corruption
                                               of Process      of Process    of Product    of Product
                 and Laws     and Practice
                                               and Laws       and Practice   and Laws     and Practice
 Overall Index      -0.115     -0.617***         -0.092        0.471***        -0.063      0.583***
 Transparency     -0.236***    -0.344***         -0.026          0.130*        0.0294      0.258***
 Competition        -0.044     -0.368***        -0.129*         0.182**        -0.075      0.203***
 Limits to
                   -0.078      -0.451***         0.030         0.475***        0.056          0.518***
 Exclusion
 Integrity of
                    0.009      -0.495***        -0.117         0.498***      -0.152**         0.619***
 Contract


Figure 5: Correlation between Quality of Product and Efficiency of Process




                                                 19
        Table 8 presents these correlations for the components of Process and Product, looking
only at the overall law and practice indexes. In every case, practice is negatively associated with
these adverse outcomes. Laws, however, are not consistently associated with outcomes.

Table 8: Correlations between Law and Practice and Outcome Components
              Favoritism      Collusion    No Competition       Time          Overrun    Low Quality
 Laws       0.184**        0.026           0.037            -0.0621       0.077          0.138*
 Practice   -0.323***      -0.426***       -0.509***        -0.597***     -0.341***      -0.391***
        Corruption, Process, and Product all improve with income, and with better regulatory
practice, but not with laws. These findings set up the central quandary of our paper. Laws strongly
predict practice. Practice strongly predicts outcomes, including corruption, Process, and Product
quality. Yet laws have very limited predictive power for outcomes. Starting with the theory in the
next section, we seek to resolve this fundamental puzzle.



IV. A Model of Procurement
We examine the impact of regulating a government buyer, the procurement entity (PE), on the
procurement process, procurement outcomes, and corruption. Like our data, the model
distinguishes laws governing procurement, which we see as restrictions on PE's discretion, from
procurement practice, which need not coincide with laws.

        A road can be built either by an "Insider" who has cost  and delivers quality  , or an
"Outsider" with cost of  and quality  . The contractor is paid by the PE, and consumer surplus
is defined as Quality ­ Payment. We assume that only the Insider can bribe the PE; the Outsider
is either bound by external rules or is not in a relationship of trust with the PE. We define the PE's
objective as ( - ) + , where  refers to side-payments made by
the Insider to the PE. The parameter  captures the extent to which the PE internalizes social
welfare, which in turn reflect the quality of public institutions in a country.

        We focus on a second price auction, which means that the bidder who offers to build the
road at a lower cost wins regardless of quality, under two alternative institutional arrangements.
The first is regulation. In our basic model, we define regulation to mean that the PE is not allowed
to exclude buyers from the auction. The alternative is discretion, which in our model is the absence
of regulation. If the PE has discretion, she may exclude either bidder because of allegedly low

                                                  20
quality. Quality levels are known to both bidders and the PE, perhaps from experience, but they
are not legally verifiable. Discretion to exclude cannot then in practice be made contingent on
bidder quality. We later also examine a model of regulation of transparency, i.e., whether the PE
informs the outsider about the auction. Transparency is different from exclusion in that in practice
there can be either more or less transparency than is legally required.

       The upside of discretion is that PE may exclude a lower quality bidder who would
otherwise win the auction by bidding less. The downside of discretion is that the PE may exclude
the Outsider and make a corrupt deal with the Insider. We analyze the relationship between
regulations and the overall quality of public institutions, captured by  . When we turn to the
empirical predictions of the model, we measure  across countries as higher overall government
efficiency or as higher levels of human capital.

       Regulation in this model is meant to capture the legal rules described in Section II,
particularly the ease of exclusion. We assume that this rule binds, so the model cannot explain why
in some countries, exclusion is restricted by law but common in practice. Discretion can lead to a
divergence between rules and practice. Discretionary power is given to exclude low quality
bidders, but can be used to exclude Outsiders. When the PE chooses to exclude a higher quality
bidder, we can point to a divergence between rules and practice.

       The model delivers a version of all three outcomes: corruption, Process, and Product.
Corruption results from the PE making deals with the Insider. Bad Process (favoritism and absence
of competition in the data) is unduly favoring the Insider by excluding the Outsider. Process may
be poor even if the excluded Outsider delivers lower quality, because the benefits from including
him may exceed the higher prices in a one-bidder auction. Product is captured by final quality and
price, which in the data are measured as low quality and cost overruns. Poor Product manifests
itself if the PE selects the Insider with poor quality. Product is equivalent to consumer welfare in
the model, defined as quality minus price.

       We assume that there is a maximum possible payment for the service  , and that
min [,  ] >  > max[,  ], so that it is always optimal to build and that both builders are
willing to build for a fee of  . All parameters are common knowledge.


                                                   21
       In a regulated second price auction with no exclusion, both bidders accurately report their
bids and neither has a reason to bribe the PE. They do not benefit from knowing the bid of the
other firm, and the PE cannot exclude either bidder. Since rules are obeyed, this model
automatically delivers the result that regulation reduces corruption. The regulated second price
auction does not, however, maximize consumer surplus, both because it ignores quality and
because the winning bidder usually earns profits.

       When the PE has discretion, the Insider can bribe the PE either to keep him in the auction
when he delivers low quality, or to exclude the Outsider. In negotiations over bribes, we assume
that the PE has bargaining power  , so the Nash bargain maximizes:                        ( -
 ) ( -  )1- , where  and                                             are the PE's welfare and the
Insider's profits in a bargain, and  and  are the PE's welfare and the Insider's profits if no
bargain is reached. The bargain may involve a bribe from the Insider to the PE, but not from the
PE to the Insider. We assume that a bribe of B costs the Insider  , with  > 1. The parameter 
captures the waste involved in bribes that do not involve direct cash transfers, such as quasi-legal
gifts, campaign contributions, or favors. Stronger institutional environments have a higher value
of both  and . Empirically, we also identify higher values of national human capital with higher
values of  and .

       At the negotiation stage, the PE can commit to exclude the Outsider or include the Insider
in exchange for a bribe, but cannot threaten to take any action that is not in her ex post interest. If
the bargaining fails, the PE optimizes her own welfare which with no bribe coincides with social
welfare, defined as consumer surplus. Denote  =  -  the quality gap between outsiders and
insiders. We then have (all proofs appear in Appendix B):

Proposition 1: If 0 <  , then discretion increases welfare by excluding the low quality Outsider
if < -( -  ), decreases welfare by excluding the Outsider if -( -  ) < <
 1                                                               1
 - 1 ( -  ), and has no impact on welfare if >  - 1 ( -  ).

       If 0 >  , then discretion increases welfare by excluding the low quality insider if >
                      -  -
  -  +                      ,        , decreases welfare by excluding the outsider if  < 1 and
                                
      -                                                                          -
<           , and has no impact on welfare if  > 1 and <  -  +                        .
                                                                                  

                                                  22
       Figures 6 and 7 illustrate the different possibilities shown in Proposition 1. Figure 6 shows
the case in which the Outsider has lower costs, and would win the auction if not excluded. The
horizontal axis is , which reflects the quality of government or the innate accountability of the
PE. The vertical axis plots , the quality advantage of the Outsider.



Figure 6: Outsider as the Lower Cost Bidder




       In the top region, where the quality advantage of the Outsider is high, discretion delivers
the same welfare as regulation. In this region, the PE always includes such a high quality Outsider
in the auction, even though the Insider offers bribes to exclude him. The region becomes smaller
when  is low, and it disappears entirely when  equals zero.

       In the middle region, discretion leads the PE to exclude the Outsider, which is a bad
outcome. The price always rises. Quality also falls if > 0. In this region, if  < 1 and > 0,
discretion creates a divergence between law and practice: the PE is meant to exclude low quality
                                                23
bidders, but in practice excludes the higher quality Outsider in exchange for a bribe. If  > 1,
then the PE only excludes the Outsider with lower quality than the Insider, so law and practice are
aligned. Yet that exclusion may still be socially suboptimal if > -( -  ), because the gain
in quality does not offset the higher price that must be paid in a less competitive auction.

       In the bottom region, where < -( -  ), discretion also leads the PE to exclude the
Outsider, but the Outsider's quality is so low that this outcome is socially optimal. Practices align
with laws. Moreover, there are no bribes because the PE cannot commit to leave the Outsider in
the auction, and therefore cannot extract any rents. If we had a distribution of values of , then at
low levels of  efficient exclusion would be rare relative to the inefficient exclusion of higher
quality Outsiders. For higher levels of , efficient exclusion becomes the norm so that practices
and laws are more aligned.

       Figure 7 shows the case where the Insider is the lower cost bidder (0 <  ).

Figure 7: Insider as the Lower Cost Bidder




                                                 24
        In this case, there are also three regions. When  is above the downward sloping curve,
discretion leads to better outcomes because the low-quality Insider is excluded from the auction.
In this region, there are no bribes and laws and practices are aligned. Once again, as  falls, this
region becomes smaller and as  goes to zero, it disappears.

        When  < 1 and  is below the downward sloping curve, discretion leads to bad
outcomes because the Outsider is excluded. This region features the mismatch between laws and
practice that the model predicts would appear in weak governance regimes. The PE is supposed to
exclude low quality bidders, but instead excludes high quality outsiders in exchange for bribes. In
this region, bribes do not change the identity of the winner relative to the regulated second price
auction ­ the Insider wins in either case -- but they raise the price. The PE uses discretion to favor
the Insider and creates a non-competitive auction, which we measure as inferior Process. Product
(and consumer welfare) also decline because discretion leads to a higher price for the same road.

        When  > 1 and  is below the downward sloping curve, discretion is irrelevant. An
accountable PE does not exclude the Outsider when the Outsider's quality advantage is modest,
and so the regulated second price auction is replicated even with discretion. 5 With strong enough
institutions, practices and laws are aligned, since discretion is used only to exclude the low quality
Insider, and not to exclude the Outsider in order to increase Insider profits.



Regulation with Endogenous Quality

The case for discretion, as opposed to regulation, becomes stronger when firms know the rules and
can respond by changing quality or cost or both. Discretion enables PEs to guard against
opportunism because regulation makes them a fixed target for optimizing bidders. 6 We follow
Hart, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) and assume that the Insider, but not the Outsider, can take an



5
  Discretion produces the same consumer welfare in this region, but for a small parameter range it transfers
wealth from the insider to the PE. The Insider bribes the PE to keep him in the auction, despite low quality.
In this case laws and practice diverge slightly, but Product does not get worse relative to the regulated
outcome.
6
  This is very closely related to the idea of judicial discretion and common law, where judges are often
allowed to use broad principles such as fiduciary duty to adjudicate disputes. In civil law judges rely on
more precise legal rules, which opens opportunities for manipulation (see La Porta et al. 1998, 2008).
                                                     25
action that reduces both costs and quality, e.g. by using inferior materials. This action is taken
before any bidding or negotiation and requires an effort of  , which is arbitrarily small. This effort
is only used in the model to break ties, and is subsequently treated as a minute fixed cost.

       The Outsider's quality and costs remain at  and  . If the Insider does not invest  , we
assume his quality is also  and his costs are  + . If the insider invests  , his quality falls to
 -  and costs fall to  - . We assume that >  -  + , so it is optimal to exclude
the Insider who has cut costs and quality from the auction. In a second price auction, quality choice
generates a race to the bottom, since the insider cuts costs to win the auction. Consumer welfare
then equals  -  -  . Proposition 2 details outcomes when the PE has discretion and can reject
a bidder with low quality.

       Proposition 2: If the PE has discretion, then (i) if  > 1, the Insider does not cut quality,
                                                                                - +
loses the auction, and consumer welfare is  -  - , (ii) if 1 >  >                   
                                                                                          , the Insider

does not cut quality, the Outsider is excluded, the Insider wins the auction, and consumer welfare
                                   - +
is  -  , and (iii) if  <               
                                             , the Insider cuts quality, the Outsider is excluded, the

Insider wins the auction, and consumer welfare is  -  -  .

       The gains from discretion are highest when  > 1 because, in that case, the threat of
exclusion stops the Insider from cutting quality. The auction remains competitive and delivers a
                                           - +
high quality product. When 1 >  >              
                                                       , the Insider still does not cut quality but the

Outsider is excluded from the auction. Discretion leads to higher quality but also higher prices.
Because >  -  + , the gain in quality is higher than the loss in price. In this region,
the PE cares enough about social welfare, so that bargaining induces the Insider to internalize the
social welfare losses that come from cutting quality.

                  - +
       If  <          
                             , discretion leads to a corrupt bargain between the Insider and the PE.

The PE cares too little about social welfare to forgo bribes to get higher quality, so the Insider cuts
quality. The quality delivered is the same as in the regulated second price auction, but discretion
enables the PE to cut the Outsider from the bidding and push the price up. Discretion raises
consumer welfare when government effectiveness is high, but reduces it when it is low.


                                                  26
Rules, Practice and Transparency

In the preceding model, the divergence between laws and practice occurred when the PE was
allowed to exclude a bidder, allegedly for low quality, but instead excluded high quality bidders
in exchange for bribes. When the law prevents any exclusion, the PE is bound to follow that law.
The PE could then have worse but not better practice than laws. In a different area of regulation,
such as transparency, practice can easily exceed legal mandates. The law may not require
transparency, but the PE may still choose it. Figure 8 shows the relationship between transparency
law and in practice in our data. Many countries, such as Egypt and Algeria, have transparency
practices weaker than laws. Other countries, such as the Netherlands, Lithuania and the Czech
Republic, have transparency practices stronger than what laws require. By allowing the PE to make
a transparency choice, we allow both positive and negative divergence between law and practice.

Figure 8: Transparency in Law and Practice




                                               27
       We now assume that  =  , so there is no legitimate case for exclusion, and that  <
 so that the Insider loses the auction if the Outsider bids. Moreover, we assume that the Outsider
cannot be excluded, but cannot bid when he does not know about the auction. We consider two
institutional regimes. Transparency regulation means that the procuring entity is required to notify
both bidders about the auction. Transparency discretion means that the procuring entity can freely
choose whether to notify the Outsider.

       We formalize transparency as the probability, denoted by , that the Outsider learns about
the auction. The value of  is set by the PE and can be either  < 1 or 1. Absent a transparency
law, the PE can set  to either  (which can be zero) or 1 at no cost. If transparency is regulated,
the PE can either set  = 1 or pay a cost  > 1 to set  =  . The cost "" captures the hassle
of deviating from legal norms and the risk of detection and penalty. This cost scales up with  so
that cheating is costlier under more accountable governments. The PE negotiates with the Insider
before choosing . The PE can make a binding commitment to a level of transparency, or more
accurately non-transparency. Both the Insider and the PE are risk neutral. Proposition 3 describes
the interplay between transparency law and practice.



Proposition 3: If transparency is not regulated, the PE sets  = 1 if  > 1 and  =  if  <
                                                                     -
1. If transparency is regulated, the PE sets  = 1 if  >                        and  =  if  <
                                                                     - +

  -
          .
 - +


       Proposition 3 illustrates how laws are unnecessary when government effectiveness is high.
If  > 1, the PE ensures full transparency even without a transparency regulation.                    If
                                          -
effectiveness is low enough that  <               , then transparency is low even with transparency
                                          - +

regulation.   In that case, the Insider bribes the PE with or without regulation. Regulation only
                     -
binds if 1 >  >              , for in that case, there is full transparency with regulation and limited
                     - +

transparency without regulation.    In that region, regulation reduces bribes.       The proposition


                                                 28
implies that practices are better than the law stipulates in accountable governments and worse than
legal mandates in unaccountable ones.

Empirical Predictions of the Model

We next turn to the empirical predictions of the model for the relationships between laws, practice,
and outcomes, including corruption, Process, and Product.



Prediction # 1: Procurement Laws deter corruption, especially in low capacity governments.

       The model of the regulation of exclusion predicts no bribes when exclusion is regulated
(forbidden), because the PE has no discretion to increase her profits. When the PE has discretion,
the Insider can bribe her to exclude the Outsider. The model thus predicts that procurement
regulation deters corruption. In contrast, the regulation of transparency does not entirely eliminate
bribes. Since we allow the PE to flout the law at a cost, bribery still occurs in very low public
                                                                                 -
capacity countries. Even in settings with modest public capacity (1 >  >                 ), regulation
                                                                                - +

eliminates bribes.

       With both forms of regulation, bribes essentially disappear if government capacity () is
sufficiently high. If corruption is costly, or if the PE is publicly minded enough, she does not take
bribes even if she has full discretion. The model then predicts that regulation should have a stronger
negative impact on corruption at low levels of government capacity and human capital. Regulation
of the public sector does not, however, increase corruption at any level of public capacity, which
contrasts with the theory of regulation of private sector activity.



Prediction # 2: Practices are better than laws in well governed countries and worse than laws in
poorly governed countries.

       When exclusion is not regulated, its practice is worse than the laws in low public capacity
settings. When government capacity () is sufficiently low, discretion to exclude bidders results
in the exclusion of high quality bidders, since the low quality bidder pays a bribe. When exclusion
is regulated, practices cannot be worse than laws because the laws are followed (by assumption).
                                                  29
If we allowed the PE to pay a cost and avoid the regulation, as we do with transparency, we would
also find that practices are worse than laws when exclusion is regulated.

       For regulation of transparency, high public capacity leads to high transparency even
without mandates. A high  encourages the PE to notify the Outsider even without the rules,
because competition serves the PE's objectives of lower cost and higher quality. Breaking the
transparency rule by the PE is more common when government capacity is low. The model thus
predicts that practice is better than laws when bureaucratic incentives are aligned with public
welfare and worse than laws when these incentives are weak.



Prediction # 3: Better governance improves Process and Product, regardless of laws.

       In the model, higher  and  lead to better Process and Product whenever the PE had any
room to act. When the PE cannot exclude, these variables are irrelevant, since outcomes are
everywhere the same. When the PE has discretionary power to exclude, good outcomes, such as
the exclusion of low quality bidders, occur when  and  are high and bad outcomes, such as the
arbitrary exclusion of outsiders, occur when  and  are low.

       In the model of transparency, because the law can be avoided at a cost, the importance of
public capacity is particularly clear. When the PE has control over transparency, high levels of 
and  lead to competitive auctions and lower prices, with or without a law. When  and  are low,
transparency is low, even with the law, so competition is lower and prices are higher.



Implication #4: Laws improve Product and Process in poorly-governed countries and adversely
affect them in well-governed countries.

       In Section III, we showed that stricter laws correlate with better practice, better practice
correlates with better Process and Product, but laws do not correlate positively with better Process
and Product. The exclusion model suggests a clear and testable reason for this finding. Regulation
is beneficial when  and  are low because discretion leads to corruption. Regulation is harmful



                                                30
when  and  are high because discretion enables the elimination of low-quality bidders. We see
this prediction as the most important result of the model.



V. Corruption, Laws, and Practice
In this section, we empirically test the first two predictions: (1) regulations reduce corruption, and
(2) practice falls short of rules in low public capacity countries and is better than rules in high
capacity ones. We use two measures of public sector capacity: human capital and government
effectiveness. The World Bank's Human Capital Index (Angrist et al, 2019) runs from 0.293 to
0.884 with a standard deviation of 0.15; its correlation with the logGDP is 0.88. The World Bank's
Government Effectiveness Index runs from -2.47 to 2.21 with a standard deviation of 0.98. Its
correlation with the logGDP is 0.86. Government effectiveness is close to the parameters of the
model, but may also reflect procurement outcomes we use as dependent variables. The link
between human capital and public capacity is less than perfect, but human capital is surely not
directly measuring the ability to handle procurement. Previous work (Glaeser, Ponzetto and
Shleifer 2007, Pande 2011, Barro 2013) argues that national human capital captures the ability to
discipline and staff governments.



Does Regulation Reduce Corruption?

In our model, the regulation of government constrains bureaucratic discretion and therefore the
ability to engage corrupt contractors. The model predicts that rules reduce bribes. However, some
research shows that regulation causes corruption, either because businesses pay bribes to capture
their regulators (Stigler 1971) or because government officials introduce regulations to extract
bribes (Djankov et al. 2003). In our study, in contrast, most of the regulations constrain
government, not the contractors, although some of them may in principle encourage corruption.

       The correlation between our corruption measure and the Laws index is -0.115, though it is
not statistically significant (Table 7, first column). In Table 9, we test whether this relationship
holds if we control for government capacity, and whether it is weaker in higher capacity countries.
The evidence demonstrates three findings. First, government capacity, measured either by human

                                                 31
capital or government effectiveness, has a large and statistically significant effect on corruption.
Second, controlling for government capacity, stricter procurement laws are strongly associated
with less corruption. Third, we test the prediction of our model that when governance is sufficiently
good, the impact of laws on corruption is attenuated. Laws always (weakly) reduce corruption.
The third regression estimates the original specification above the median educated sample
countries and the fourth for the below-median educated countries. For educated countries, the
coefficient in laws is -0.12, and statistically significant at the 5 percent level. For uneducated ones,
the estimated coefficient is -0.06, and statistically significant at the 10 percent level.


Table 9: Controlling for Government Capacity
                                  Corruption as a Function of Regulation and Government Capacity
                             OLS                     OLS              More Educated        Less Educated
                          -0.086***               -0.093***               -0.127**            -0.062*
 Law Index
                            (0.028)                 (0.028)                (0.050)             (0.033)
                          -1.429***               -1.016***              -1.518***           -1.540***
 Human Capital
                            (0.112)                 (0.224)                (0.366)             (0.263)
 Government                                        -0.075**
 Efficiency                                         (0.035)
 R2                           .52                     .54                    .23                 .32
 N                            154                     154                     77                  77




Laws and Practice in High and Low Human Capital Countries
The model predicts that practice is stricter than laws in well-governed countries and falls short in
poorly governed ones. To test this prediction we compare practice and laws overall and for the
four categories. We conduct three tests. Is practice stricter than laws in high human capital
countries? Is practice looser than laws in low human capital ones? Is the gap between practice and
laws higher in high than in low human capital countries? The first two tests apply if laws and
practice refer to exactly the same thing. The third test is more appropriate under a mismatch.


        Table 10 splits the sample at the median education level and compares the mean levels of
laws and practice across countries. The first row shows results for overall laws and practice. The
mean laws index in low human capital countries is 2.009 and the mean practice index is 1.666.
The difference is highly statistically significant, with a t-statistic of 4.573. The mean laws index
in high human capital countries is 1.941 and the mean practice index is 2.341. Again, the difference
                                                   32
is statistically significant, with a t-statistic of -4.273. The last column tests whether the difference
between laws and practice is significantly higher in countries with human capital levels above the
median. Unsurprisingly, the difference is higher, with t-statistic of -6.203. Results are very similar
if we sort on government effectiveness rather than human capital.


Table 10: Laws and Practice in Countries with different levels of Education
 Variable Means        Below Median Human Capital          Above Median Human Capital      Probability
                                                                                            (Practice-
                                               Prob.                            Prob.
                                                                                             Laws) is
                                               Laws                             Laws
                      Laws       Practice                 Laws      Practice                Higher in
                                              =Practice                        =Practice
                                                                                           Low H.C.
                                              (T -Stat)                        (T -Stat)
                                                                                            Countries
                      2.009       1.666         0.000      1.941     2.341      0.000         0.000
 Overall Index
                     (0.063)     (0.065)       (4.573)    (0.075)   (0.067)     -4.273        -6.203
                      0.493       0.414         0.001      0.510     0.562      0.019         0.000
 Transparency
                     (0.021)     (0.029)       (3.343)    (0.026)   (0.027)     -2.387        -4.073
                      0.592       0.506         0.004      0.535     0.636      0.000         0.000
 Competition
                     (0.022)     (0.027)       (2.950)    (0.025)   (0.028)     -3.942        -4.821
 Limits to            0.267       0.474         0.000      0.301     0.673      0.000         0.002
 Exclusion           (0.022)     (0.031)      (-5.856)    (0.021)   (0.033)     -8.995        -3.011
 Integrity of         0.658       0.271         0.000      0.595     0.470      0.003         0.000
 Contract            (0.031)     (0.018)      (11.537)    (0.029)   (0.025)     3.036         -4.913
 N                     78          78             78        77        77          77           155
         Note: Standard errors are in parentheses.


         The pattern in the data is clear. Practice is good in well governed and well-educated
countries and laws are less restrictive. Practice is weak in poorly governed and educated countries
and laws are more restrictive. These findings echo the result in the transparency model that, with
high government capacity, practice is strong and laws are unnecessary, whereas with low capacity,
practice is weak even if laws are on the books.


         The rest of Table 10 shows the results for the four distinct elements of laws and practice.
In worse educated countries, laws are stricter than practice for transparency, competition, and
integrity of contract (though not for limits of exclusion). In better educated countries, laws are
less binding than practice for transparency, competition, and exclusion, though not for the integrity
of contract. Some of this may be the consequence of practice not exactly mirroring laws. But in
our ultimate test of laws vs practice in educated vs uneducated countries, we find the same result
for every sub-index as we do for the overall index of laws.
                                                     33
       In summary, laws are not the same as practice, and mandating a procurement policy does
not mean that it will be put into practice. Laws do predict practice, but governmental capacity does
as well. In better educated and well governed countries, procuring entities follow good practice
even without legal requirements. In poorly educated and misgoverned countries, procuring entities
have worse practice, despite extensive laws meant to govern procurement.




VI. Laws and Outcomes in Rich and Poor Countries
In this final empirical section, we establish two key facts. First, we show that procurement-specific
rules are less important than the overall quality of government or national human capital for
procurement outcomes. Well educated countries with capable governments achieve good
procurement outcomes no matter what rules they have on the books. Second, we find support for
the central implication of the model that rules are helpful when governance quality is low and
harmful when it is high. If bureaucrats are accountable, rules that restrict their discretion do more
harm than good. When bureaucrats are not accountable, rules limit their misconduct.


       These findings resolve the conundrum identified in Section III that although laws predict
practice and practice predicts outcomes, laws do not predict outcomes. The answer is that laws
are positively correlated with outcomes in low human capital countries and negatively in high
human capital ones. Across the full sample, the heterogeneous impact of rules makes them seem
irrelevant. In fact, we see that laws do matter, but they help in some circumstances and harm in
others. This is a central prediction of our model, and we confirm it empirically here.


       As a preliminary step, Table 11 shows the correlations between human capital and
government effectiveness and our two procurement outcomes. The table parallels earlier findings
in Table 6, except here we control for public capacity. In these regressions, laws are never
statistically significant in predicting outcomes, whereas public capacity is consistently significant,
with explanatory power of 30-40%. These results frame our puzzle that laws in the full sample do
not seem to matter.



                                                 34
Table 11: Process, Product, and the Quality of Government
               Efficiency of   Efficiency of   Efficiency of   Quality of   Quality of   Quality of
                 Process         Process         Process        Product      Product      Product
                   0.031           -0.083          0.162         0.004        0.094        0.120
 Laws
                  (0.293)         (0.240)         (0.285)       (0.229)      (0.190)      (0.220)
 Human          8.425***                           1.204       9.275***                    2.892
 Capital          (1.175)                         (2.297)       (0.918)                   (1.774)
 Gov.                           1.399***        1.306***                    1.505***     1.155***
 Efficiency                      (0.161)          (0.362)                    (0.128)      (0.279)
 R2               0.255           0.298            0.314         0.406        0.433        0.466
 N                 155             186              155           155          186          155


        But what if we distinguish between rich and poor countries? The model predicts that
restricting the PE's discretion is efficiency-promoting in countries with poor government capacity
and harmful in countries with high capacity. When the Product index is regressed on laws in the
high human capital subsample, we estimate:


                                               -1.01      3.06
                                  =                     +
                                               (0.35)     (.72)


        The r-squared is 0.10. When we run the same regression in the low human capital
subsample, we estimate:

                                                0.95      2.92
                                 =                      -
                                               (0.35)     (.73)

The r-squared is 0.09. The relationships for high and low human capital countries are shown in
Figures 9 and 10, respectively. The regressions are mirror images of each other. Procurement
outcomes improve with the regulation of government in less educated countries and deteriorate in
more educated countries.




                                                    35
Figure 9: Law and Quality of Product in High Human Capital Countries




Figure 10: Law and Quality of Product in Low Human Capital Countries




                                            36
           We next turn to the continuous interaction between the regulation index and the measures
of government capacity in Table 12.

Table 12: Testing with Continuous Interactions
                                     Process                                   Product
                         0.237         0.107        0.085         0.276         0.470         0.428
 Laws
                        (0.294)       (0.362)      (0.373)       (0.216)       (0.297)       (0.310)
                       8.692***        2.880        1.462       9.627***      6.550***       4.940**
 Human Capital
                        (1.148)       (2.580)      (2.567)       (0.846)       (2.117)       (2.131)
 Gov.                                 1.121*       1.324**                    2.230***      2.458***
 Effectiveness                        (0.642)      (0.648)                     (0.527)       (0.538)
 Human                -5.626***     -6.717***                   -7.414***    -7.649***
 Capital*Law            (1.859)       (2.268)                     (1.369)      (1.861)
                                                  -0.837**                                 -0.921***
 Gov. Eff.*Laws
                                                   (0.329)                                   (0.273)
                                      -0.173        -0.247                    -0.599**     -0.686***
 Log(GDP)
                                     (0.297)       (0.297)                     (0.244)       (0.247)
 Polity2                             0.103*         0.085                      0.073*        0.0516
                                     (0.053)       (0.054)                     (0.044)       (0.045)
 Function of                          0.033         0.064                     -0.248**      -0.212**
 Government                          (0.120)       (0.120)                     (0.098)       (0.099)
                                      -0.288        -0.259                      -0.196        -0.159
 Efficiency (WEF)
                                     (0.263)       (0.264)                     (0.216)       (0.220)
 R2                     0.298         0.466         0.456         0.502         0.583         0.565
 N                       155           126           126           155           126           126


           Process is the dependent variable in the first three regressions of Table 12, and Product in
the last three regressions. Regressions (1), (2), (4) and (5) interact human capital with laws.
Regressions (3) and (6) interact government efficiency with laws. We demean both variables in
the interaction, so that the reported coefficients on the main variable can be interpreted as their
estimated effect at the mean level of the other variable. The analysis conveys several results. First,
laws by themselves on average have no influence on either Process or Product. Second, either
human capital or effectiveness generally has a positive effect on both Process and Product. Third,
and most important, the interaction terms are all negative and statistically significant, which is a
striking confirmation of our model's principal prediction. The effect of laws on Product and
Process is much greater in poor than in rich countries. Procurement laws have beneficial effects in
developing countries, but not in rich ones where government effectiveness sis high.


           Table 13 examines the impact of these interaction terms on the six components of Product
and Process (recall that the variables here are coded so that higher values mean worse outcomes).

                                                   37
All interaction coefficients are positive. In the top panel, five of the regressions show interactions
that are statistically significant and economically meaningful. The interaction is not significant for
the no competition outcome.


Table 13: Testing with Interaction Terms
                                                  No
                Collusion      Favoritism                     Time        Cost Overrun   Low Quality
                                             Competition
                 -0.062**        0.010          -0.023       -0.060*         -0.021         -0.006
   Laws
                  (0.029)       (0.031)        (0.030)       (0.036)        (0.025)        (0.028)
  Human         -0.630***      -0.576***      -0.938***     -1.345***      -0.510***      -0.750***
  Capital         (0.111)       (0.116)        (0.115)       (0.139)        (0.096)        (0.105)
Laws*Human      0.626***       0.600***          0.183      0.704***       0.646***       0.541***
  Capital         (0.182)       (0.190)        (0.189)       (0.225)        (0.155)        (0.172)
    R2             0.215         0.192           0.307        0.397           0.222          0.285
     N              154           154             154          155             155            154




VII. Conclusion
Most countries regulate their bureaucracies in addition to regulating their private sectors. We
investigate such regulation in the case of public procurement, using the hypothetical study of a
road resurfacing contract, in 187 countries. We distinguish between regulatory rules, and
regulatory practice, and measure them in terms of how much discretion they allow the procuring
entities in selecting and managing subcontractors. We then evaluate the relationship between the
two as well as their effect on procurement outcomes, such as corruption, the efficiency of
procurement process, and the quality of the procurement product.

       A preliminary look at the evidence shows tremendous dispersion on how heavily countries
regulate the procurement process in law, with poorer countries generally using more extensive
regulation. We find that procurement laws are highly, though not perfectly, correlated with
procurement practice. However, we also find some puzzling evidence. Although better
procurement practice is highly correlated with procurement outcomes, more extensive
procurement laws, although they are associated with less corruption, generally do not predict better
procurement outcomes. The question is why?

                                                 38
       We propose a new theoretical framework for addressing this question. The theory describes
a procurement auction in which the organizers may take bribes in exchange for favoring connected
bidders. The model allows us to discuss a variety of regulations of the procurement process, but
also delivers a basic ­ and not entirely surprising -- prediction, namely that procurement regulation
is more socially valuable when the incentives of the bureaucrats are further away from social
welfare. Properly motivated bureaucrats require fewer rules.

       We then bring the theoretical predictions to the cross-country data and find strong support.
Heavier regulation of procurement is associated with better outcomes in countries with lower
quality public sectors, and with worse outcomes in countries with higher quality ones. The
evidence explains the puzzle that, overall, there is no relationship between procurement laws and
outcomes ­ one needs to sort on government capacity in the analysis. The evidence is consistent
with recent findings from better identified but more specific settings which point to the benefits of
bureaucratic discretion (Coviello et al. 2018, Bandiera et al. 2020, Decarolis et al. 2020).

       There is a broader point as well. In many settings, economists and legal scholars see laws
and their enforcement as complements. Laws are more effective in countries with better judiciaries,
bureaucracies, etc. Here we find the opposite: laws and enforcement capabilities are substitutes.
Countries with weak bureaucracies need strict laws to regulate them; countries with strong
bureaucracies can lay off a little. This message has application to the design of institutions,
particularly the regulation of government.




                                                 39
References
Angrist, Noam, Simeon Djankov, Pinelopi Goldberg, and Harry Patrinos. 2019. "Measuring
Human Capital," Available at SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3339416.

Bandiera, Oriana, Andrea Prat, and Tommaso Valletti. 2009. "Active and Passive Waste in
Government Spending: Evidence from a Policy Experiment," The American Economic Review,
99(4): 1278­1308.

Bandiera, Oriana, Michael Carlos Best, Adnan Qadir Khan, and Andrea Prat. 2020. "The
Allocation of Authority in Organizations: A Field Experiment with Bureaucrats," London School
of Economics, London, mimeo.

Banerjee Abhijit, Rema Hanna, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2012. "Corruption," Handbook of
Organizational Economics, Elsevier.

Banfield, Edward. 1975. "Corruption as a Feature of Governmental Organization," The Journal of
Law and Economics, 18(3): 587-605.

Baranek, Bruno and Vitezslav Titl. 2020. "The Cost of Favoritism in Public Procurement,"
Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, mimeo.

Barro, Robert J. 1999. "Determinants of Democracy," Journal of Political Economy, 107(S6):
158-183.

Barro, Robert J. 2013. "Education and Economic Growth," Annals of Economics and Finance,
Society for AEF, 14(2): 301-328.

Barro, Robert J. and Rachel M. McCleary. 2005. "Which Countries Have State Religions?" The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(4): 1331-1370.

Bertrand, Marianne, Simeon Djankov, Rema Hanna, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2007. "Obtaining
a Driver's License in India: An Experimental Approach to Studying Corruption," The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 122(4): 1639-1676.

Best, Michael Carlos, Jonas Hjort, and David Szakonyi. 2019. "Individuals and Organizations as
Sources of State Effectiveness", NBER Working Paper No. 23350, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                             40
Bosio, Erica, Jean Arlet, Antoni Albert Nogues Comas, and Nicole Anouk Leger. 2018. "Road
Costs Knowledge System (ROCKS) ­ Update," The World Bank, Washington, DC.

Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
2004. "The Regulation of Labor," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4): 1339-1382.

Botero, Juan, Alejandro Ponce, and Andrei Shleifer. 2013. "Education, Complaints, and
Accountability," Journal of Law and Economics, 56(4): 959-996.

Burgess, Robin, Remi Jedwab, Edward Miguel, Ameet Morjaria, and Gerard Padró i Miquel. 2015.
"The Value of Democracy: Evidence from Road Building in Kenya," American Economic Review,
105(6): 1817-51.

Campos, Nicolas, Eduardo Engel, Ronald D. Fischer, and Alexander Galetovic. 2019.
"Renegotiations and Corruption in Infrastructure: The Odebrecht Case," Available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3447631.

Center for Systemic Peace. 2019. Polity IV Project, Political Regime Characteristics and
Transitions, 1800-2018, Vienna, VA, USA.

Collier, Paul and Martina Kirchberger. 2016. "The Cost of Road Infrastructure in Low- and
Middle-Income Countries," World Bank Economic Review, 30(3): 522-548.

Colonnelli, Emanuele and Mounu Prem. 2020. "Corruption and Firms," Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2931602 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2931602.

Conley, Timothy and Francesco Decarolis. 2016. "Detecting Bidders Groups in Collusive
Auctions," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 8(2): 1-38.

Coviello, Decio and Stefano Gagliarducci. 2014. "Publicity Requirements in Public Procurement:
Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design," Journal of Public Economics, 109: 76-100.

Coviello, Decio and Stefano Gagliarducci. 2017. "Tenure in Office and Public Procurement,"
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(3): 59-105.

Coviello, Decio, Andrea Guglielmo and Giancarlo Spagnolo. 2018. "The Effect of Discretion on
Procurement Performance," Management Science, 64(2):715-738.

                                              41
Decarolis, Francesco. 2014. "Awarding Price, Contract Performance, and Bids Screening:
Evidence from Procurement Auctions," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(1):
108-132.

Decarolis, Francesco and Giuliana Palumbo. 2015. "Renegotiation of Public Contracts: An
Empirical Analysis," Economics Letters, 132(C): 77-81.

Decarolis, Francesco, Leonardo M. Giuffrida, Elisabetta Iossa, Vincenzo Mollisi, and Giancarlo
Spagnolo. 2019. "Bureaucratic Competence and Procurement Outcomes," NBER Working Paper
No. 24201, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Decarolis, Francesco, Giancarlo Spagnolo, and Riccardo Pacini. 2020a. "Past Performance and
Procurement Outcomes," NBER Working Paper No. 22814, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Decarolis, Francesco, Ray Fisman, Paolo Pinotti, and Silvia Vannutelli. 2020b. "Corruption in
Procurement: New Facts from Italian Government Contracting", mimeo.

Di Tella, Rafael and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2003. "The Role of Wages and Auditing During a
Crackdown on Corruption in the City of Buenos Aires," Journal of Law and Economics, 46(1):
269­292.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. "The
Regulation of Entry," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1): 1-37.

Djankov, Simeon, Edward Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei
Shleifer. 2003a. "The New Comparative Economics," Journal of Comparative Economics, 31 (4):
595-619.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003b.
"Courts," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(2): 453-517.

Djankov, Simeon, Oliver Hart, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008a. "Debt Enforcement
around the World," Journal of Political Economy, 116(6): 1105-1149.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008b. "The
Law and Economics of Self-Dealing," Journal of Financial Economics, 88(3): 430-465.
                                              42
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio López-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2010.
"Disclosure by Politicians," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, American
Economic Association, 2(2): 179-209.

Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna, and Stephen P. Ryan. 2012. "Incentives Work: Getting Teachers to
Come to School," American Economic Review, 102(4): 1241-78.

Faccio, Mara. 2006. "Politically Connected Firms," American Economic Review, 96(1): 369-386.

Fisman, Raymond. 2001. "Estimating the Value of Political Connections." American Economic
Review, 91(4): 1095-1102.

Freedom House. 2020. Freedom in the World 2020, Washington DC.

Flyvbjerg, Bent, Mette K. Skamris Holm, and Søren L. Buhl. 2003. "How Common and How
Large are Cost Overruns in Transport Infrastructure Projects?" Transport Reviews, 23(1): 71­88.

Glaeser, Edward L., Giacomo AM Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer. 2007. "Why Does Democracy
Need Education?" Journal of Economic Growth, 12(2): 77-99.

Hart, Oliver and John Moore. 1988. "Incomplete Contracts and Renegotiation," Econometrica,
56(4): 755-785.

Hart, Oliver, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997. "The Proper Scope of Government:
Theory and an Application to Prisons," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4): 1127-1161.

Kelman, Steven. 1990. "Procurement and public management: The Fear of Discretion and the
Quality of Government Performance," AEI Press, Washington, DC.

Kelman, Steven. 2002. "Remaking Federal Procurement," Public Contract Law Journal, 31(4):
581-622.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 1999. "The Quality of
Government," The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15(1): 222-279.

Lichand, Guilherme and Gustavo Fernades. 2019. "The Dark Side of the Contract: Do Government
Audits Reduce Corruption in the Presence of Displacement by Vendors?" University of Zurich,
Switzerland, mimeo.

                                              43
Milligan, Kevin, Enrico Moretti, and Philip Oreopoulus. 2004. "Does Education Improve
Citizenship? Evidence from the United States and the United Kingdom," Journal of Public
Economics, 88: 1667-95.

Mironov, Maxim and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2016. "Corruption in Procurement and the Political
Cycle in Tunneling: Evidence from Financial Transactions Data," American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 8(2): 287-321.

Olken, Benjamin. 2007. "Monitoring corruption: Evidence from a field experiment in Indonesia,"
Journal of Political Economy, 115(2): 200-249.

Olken, Benjamin, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Jordan Kyle, and Sudarno Sumarto. 2018.
"Tangible Information and Citizen Empowerment: Identification Cards and Food Subsidy
Programs in Indonesia," Journal of Political Economy, 126(2): 451-491.

Pande, Rohini. 2011. "Can Informed Voters Enforce Better Governance? Experiments in Low-
Income Democracies," Annual Review of Economics, 3: 215-237.

Porter, Robert and John Zona. 1993. "Detection of Bid Rigging in Procurement Auctions," Journal
of Political Economy, 101(3): 518-38.

Rasul, Imran and Daniel Rogger. 2018. "Management of Bureaucrats and Public Service Delivery:
Evidence from the Nigerian Civil Service," The Economic Journal, 128(608): 413-446.

Sequeira, Sandra and Simeon Djankov. 2014. "Corruption and Firm Behavior: Evidence from
African Ports," Journal of International Economics, 94(2): 277-294.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny. 1993. "Corruption," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108:
599-617.

Spagnolo, Giancarlo. 2012. "Reputation, Competition and Entry in Procurement," International
Journal of Industrial Organization, 30(3): 291-296.

Stigler, George. 1971. "The Theory of Economic Regulation," Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science, 3: 3-18.




                                              44
Svensson, Jacob. 2003. "Who Must Pay Bribes and How Much? Evidence from A Cross Section
of Firms," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 207-230.

Szucs, Ferenc. 2017. "Discretion and corruption in public procurement," University of California
at Berkeley, job market paper.

World Bank. 2020. World Development Indicators, Washington, DC.

World Economic Forum. 2019. Global Competitiveness Report 2019: How to End a Lost Decade
of Productivity Growth, Geneva, Switzerland.




                                               45
Appendix A: Description of variables

         For all questions discussed below, the term "legal framework" refers to the body of
instruments (laws, acts, regulations, etc.) that regulate the entire procurement process (from needs-
assessment to post-tendering). This only includes legal instruments that are procurement-specific
and mandatory. 7

         Laws and Practices: Variable Construction and Examples

         On transparency, respondents are asked seven questions gauging whether the law mandates
the publication of each of the following seven documents: procurement plans; model procurement
documents and standard contract conditions; tender notices; tender documents and technical
specifications; notices of award and bidding results; contracts; and contract amendments. All seven
questions are Yes/No questions, asking respondents to indicate whether the law mandates the PE
to publish each of these documents. To build the transparency index, each "Yes" answer is given
a score of 1, and each "No" answer a score of 0. The transparency law index is the average of the
scores for each of the 7 questions.

         In Argentina, PE's are not mandated by law to publish annual procurement plans (a score
of 0), but all documents related to the procurement process stricto sensu ­ model documents, tender
notices, tender documents, and awards ­ must be published (a score of 1 for each of these 4
documents). Neither the contract itself nor its subsequent modifications must be published by law
(a score of 0 for each of these 2 sets of documents). Argentina scores 4 out of 7 points in the
transparency law index, for an average of 0.57.

         Respondents are also asked seven mirroring practice questions, measuring whether the
same documents are readily available to bidders in the majority of procurement processes. For
example, the mirroring practice question asks: "In practice, do tender notices need to be made
publicly available online by the procuring entity?" These seven questions are also Yes/No
questions, and respondents are asked to supplement their answers with links to the materials. The


7
  Guidelines that are self-imposed by the procuring entity and for "recommended" use, are not included. Standard
bidding documents and general contract terms are included whenever their use by the procuring entity is mandatory.
Customizable contract terms are not considered, as they can be modified at will by the procuring entity. Laws that are
not procurement-specific and only contain general obligations on fairness and transparency are not included.

                                                         46
team verifies such links directly before coding a "Yes" answer. The transparency practice index is
built by attributing a score of 1 to each "Yes" answer and 0 to each "No" answer. In Argentina,
public procurement plans are not available in practice (a score of 0). Model documents and tender
notices are publicly available (1 for each), while PE's do not publish tender documents and awards
despite a legal obligation to do so (0 for each). Contracts and contract amendments are not
published either (0 for each). Argentina scores 2 out of 7 points in the transparency practice, for
an average of 0.29.

       In more than a fourth of the sample ­ 52 countries ­ the procuring entity is not required by
law to publish the award, so that the results of the auction are only made available to the winning
bidder, and losing contractors are deprived of an opportunity to understand ­ and challenge ­ the
reasons behind their loss. In several countries, documents are not published in practice despite a
legal obligation to do so. The Argentine law mandates the publication of tender documents, but
the relevant PE only makes them available upon payment of a fee. Conversely, in some countries
the law does not mandate publication, but documents are nonetheless available. In the United
Kingdom, the law requires PE's to prepare annual procurement plans, without mandating their
publication. However, once they are prepared, and given the availability and spread of online tools,
PE's just choose to put them on their website.

       The competition law index asks 6 questions related to legal provisions favoring
competition throughout the entire procurement process (and there are six parallel practice
questions). The first question asks whether, according to the law, open tendering is the default
method of procurement for a routine road resurfacing contract. Open tendering is defined as the
process in which any interested firm may submit an economic offer in response to a call for
competition. A "Yes" carries a score of 1 and "No" carries 0. The mirror question in practice asks
respondents to indicate whether the majority of road resurfacing contracts are in fact procured
through open tendering. Respondents are presented with three different answer options: (i) open
tendering is the default by law and also the most common in practice; (ii) open tendering is not the
default by law, but remains the most common in practice; and (iii) other methods of procurement,
such as restricted tendering, direct award, reverse auctions, competitive dialogue, etc., are the most
common. Answer options (i) and (ii) are coded as "Yes", with a score of 1. Answer option (iii) is
coded as "No", with a score of 0.
                                                 47
        In many European countries ­ such as Austria and Italy ­ the law gives PE's the discretion
to choose between open tendering and restricted tendering (a score of 0 on whether open tendering
is the default by law), but open tendering is still most frequently used (a score of 1 on whether
open tendering is the most common practice). Similarly, in France the use of open tendering is
discretionary (a score of 0 on whether open tendering is the default by law), but the relevant PE
introduced a guideline ­ not mandatory, but strictly followed ­ imposing the use of open tendering
for all contracts above 1,000,000 (a score of 1 on whether open tendering is the most common in
practice).

        The second question asks whether, in an open tendering procedure, the PE can require
bidders to participate in a prequalification process, which can limit competition. A "Yes" answer
corresponds to a score of 0, a "No" answer corresponds to a score of 1. The mirroring practice
question asks respondents to indicate how often prequalification is used for a road resurfacing
contract. Experts are presented with 5 answer options. Prequalification happens: (i) very rarely
(less than 10% of cases); (ii) rarely (10-25% of cases); (iii) occasionally (25-50% of cases); (iv)
often (50-90% of cases); and (v) very often (more than 90% of cases). If prequalification is used
in less than 25% of cases (very rarely or rarely), the score of 1; it is 0 otherwise. Worldwide, in
103 out of 187 countries prequalification takes place in more than 25% of cases.

        The third question asks whether the legal framework prohibits dividing contracts to
circumvent thresholds for open tendering. The obligation for PE's to use open tendering is usually
tied to a monetary threshold, but they may circumvent the threshold by splitting the contract and
then using a non-open procedure that limits competition. A score of 1 is given if dividing contracts
is forbidden by law, a score of 0 if it is not. The practice question asks how often contracts are
divided to circumvent procurement rules. If this occurs in less than 25% of cases, the score is 1,
and 0 otherwise. This phenomenon is extremely widespread, with 73 countries scoring a "0" in
practice. Local experts in Mali and Sudan explained that procuring entities frequently split works
into several contracts to award them to contractors of their choice with little or no publicity.

        The fourth question asks whether the law mandates a minimum time limit between the
advertisement of the tender notice and the submission deadline for an open tendering procedure (a
score of 1). In the absence of such a rule, a procuring entity can limit competition by setting
demanding technical specifications and imposing a tight timeline. In Bulgaria, the Agency for
                                                 48
Road Maintenance posted a 100 million procurement notice on December 29, 2016, to solicit
bids for the construction of an electronic toll system, with the closing day for bids of January 4.
Not surprisingly, only one firm met the deadline. The practice question asks how often the PE does
not advertise procurement opportunities long enough so as to restrict competition. If rarely or very
rarely, the score is 1. If occasionally, often or very often, the score is 0.

        The fifth question in the competition law index asks whether the legal framework requires
the PE to proceed to bid opening immediately after the deadline for bid submission has been
reached. A score of 1 is attributed to a "Yes" answer, 0 to "No". The mirror practice question asks
whether bids are immediately opened in practice; 1 if "Yes", 0 if "No".

        The sixth question asks whether there is a standstill period between public notice of award
and contract signing that suspends the procurement process to allow unsuccessful bidders to
challenge the award decision. A score of 1 is attributed to a "Yes" answer, 0 to "No". The mirroring
practice question asks whether the filing of a challenge against the award does in fact suspend the
process (a score of 1).

        In Lao PDR, half the elements measured by the competition law index are regulated. In
particular, open tendering is the default method of procurement (a score of 1), the legal framework
mandates a minimum time limit between the advertisement of the tender notice and the submission
deadline (a score of 1), and the division of contracts is forbidden (a score of 1). Lao PDR thus
scores 3 out of 6 and obtains a score of 0.5 on the competition law index. Practice, however, lags
behind. Even though open tendering is the default by law, PE's prefer to use prequalification to
pre-screen candidates (a score of 0 in both). In more than 90% of procurement processes, the
procuring entity does not advertise procurement opportunities long enough (a score of 0) and bid
opening is not carried out immediately (a score of 0). The division of contracts in practice is
uncommon, and challenges usually suspend the award process (a score of 1 in each). With 2 out
of 6 points, Lao PDR's score on the competition practice index is 0.33.

        The limits to exclusion questions, both by law and in practice, look at 5 issues. The first
question asks whether the legal framework establishes the minimum content of the tender notice
and tender documents. These are often regulated separately, but both must be regulated for the
answer to be coded as "Yes". If no regulation exists, or only one of two aspects is regulated, the

                                                   49
answer is coded as "No". Because narrowly defined tender specifications and tender documents
make it easier to exclude bidders, a "No" answer carries a score of 1, and a "Yes" carries a score
of 0. In Bangladesh and the Russian Federation technical specifications are often drafted so
narrowly that only one company satisfies them. These can include a specific type of asphalt with
no obvious quality advantage that only one company in the country produces, for example. Or it
can include a requirement to have performed the exact same contract for the PE in the last 7 years,
thus creating and intrinsic and recurrent bias toward a single contractor. The practice question asks
how often the PE defines technical specifications to benefit a specific bidder. If in less than 25%
of cases, a score of 1, otherwise 0.

       The second question asks whether the law requires the PE to make clarifications publicly
available to everyone (including to companies that did not participate in the bidding process) to
minimize one-on-one interactions with bidders. Respondents are presented with 4 answer options:
the PE (i) addresses all clarifications in a public meeting; (ii) must answer and communicate the
answer to all other bidders; (iii) must answer, but is not always required to communicate the answer
to all other bidders; and (iv) only answers the relevant bidder. A score of 1 is given if the procuring
entity must address all clarifications in a public meeting, making it more difficult to exclude
bidders and minimizing one-on-one interactions, a score of 0 otherwise. The mirroring practice
question asks how often the PE holds informal meetings with individual bidders. If in less than
25% of cases, a score of 1, otherwise 0.

       The third question asks which award criterion is used for a routine road maintenance
contract by law. Three answer options are available: (i) price; (ii) price and other elements, i.e.
best value for money; or (iii) the choice is left at the discretion of the PE. Using price as the only
award criterion makes it harder for the PE to exclude bidders, a score of 1. All other options make
it easier, a score of 0. The mirroring practice question asks how often the PE changes the award
criterion after the bids are opened. If in less than 25% of cases, a score of 1, otherwise 0.

       The fourth question examines whether the legal framework establishes what constitutes an
abnormally low bid and the criteria to handle such a bid. Having such a criterion makes it more
difficult for the PE to exclude bidders (a score of 1). The practice question asks how often private
sector companies submit recklessly low bids to win the tender. A score of 1 is recorded if Rarely
or Very Rarely, and 0 in all other cases.
                                                  50
        The fifth question asks whether the legal framework defines what constitutes a non-
substantial error. Regulating non-substantial errors makes it more difficult for the PE to exclude ­
a score of 1. The practice question asks whether the bidder would be given the opportunity to
rectify such errors before disqualification. If so, it is harder for the PE to exclude ­ a score of 1. If
not, it is easier, a score of 0.

        Last, the integrity of contract indexes by law and in practice look at 6 types of restrictions
on the PE's discretion during the life of the contract. The first is whether, by law, the PE is required
to have already allocated budget to a specific project before tendering. Respondents are presented
with three answer options: (i) yes, there is a specific budget allocation; (ii) yes, a certificate is
required; and (iii) no. If the law requires a specific budget allocation and/or a budget certificate,
the answer is coded as "Yes", a score of 1. If no such requirement exists in the law, the answer is
"No", and the score is 0. The practice question asks the percentage of cases in which the procuring
entity awards a contract without having already set aside all the necessary funds. If this happens
in less than 25% of cases (i.e. rarely or very rarely), a score of 1 is assigned, 0 otherwise. Data
from Tunis revealed that without a specific budget allocation or a certificate securing funds for
each tendered project, procuring entities find themselves with invoices they cannot pay. In fact, it
is not unusual for the relevant PE to have to return part of its budget before the end of the fiscal
year, leaving it exposed to payments it cannot make. Delays in payment create considerable
slowdowns, as contractors stop working until they are paid.

        The second element relates to subcontracting. Respondents are asked to indicate which of
the following three dimensions of subcontracting is regulated by law: (i) "features", i.e. the
administrative process to subcontract, the limits of subcontracting, the authorizations required,
etc.; (ii) "disclosure", i.e. when and how companies should inform the PE of their intent to
subcontract; and (iii) "liability", i.e. the responsibility of the contractor and subcontractor in case
of poor performance. The answer is coded as "Yes" ­ a score of 1 ­ only when all three aspects
are regulated. All other options are coded as "No" ­ a score of 0. The practice question asks
respondents to identify whether contractors frequently employs subcontractors that were neither
properly selected nor disclosed during the tendering process (a score of 0 if this happens in more
than 25% of contracts).


                                                   51
       The next two elements relate to contract execution. Respondents are asked to indicate how
renegotiations and additional works are regulated. Renegotiations are defined as substantial
changes to the original contract terms that lead to new contract clauses. Respondents are asked to
indicate whether some key aspects of renegotiation ­ including process, limits and disclosure
requirements ­ are regulated (a score of 1). The mirroring practice question gauges how often the
renegotiation process is abused to increase the price or the scope of the project without another
competitive process. If Rarely or Very Rarely, a score of 1, otherwise 0.

       Additional works are all complementary works not included in the initial contract or tender
documents but are related to the initial works and thus awarded to the same contractor. These
works usually become needed during the execution of the original contract and are awarded to the
original contractor through non-competitive methods of procurement. The law question asks
whether additional works can be procured through direct award (a score of 1) or whether complete
discretion is left to the PE on the process to award such works (a score of 0). The mirroring practice
question tests how often additional works are in fact awarded through non-competitive measures.
If Rarely or Very Rarely, a score of 1 is assigned; otherwise 0. In many countries, renegotiations
and additional works are completely unregulated, but characterize more than 50% of contracts.

       The fifth and sixth elements relate to payment and ask whether the legal framework
establishes a time frame within which the procuring entity must process the payment once an
invoice is received (a score of 1 if "Yes", 0 if "No") and whether the company is entitled to claim
interest on late payments if the PE does not pay within the legally-established timeframe (a score
of 1 if "Yes", 0 if "No"). The practice questions ask how often payment is processed in the legally-
mandated timeline and how often interests on late payments are actually paid. If payments are
made on time in more than 50% of cases ("often" or "very often"), a score of 1 is recorded. If not,
0. The same coding applies if interest on late payments is actually paid to companies in more than
half of the procurement processes.

       In Singapore, the law does not require the PE to have already allocated budget before
tendering (a score of 0), but it usually does so in practice (a score of 1). Subcontracting,
renegotiations, and additional works are completely unregulated (a score of 0 on each of these
three questions in the integrity of contract law index). The subcontracting and renegotiation
processes in practice are not abused by the procuring entity (a score of 1 in each) and direct award
                                                 52
of additional works is unusual (a score of 1). The law does not contain a deadline for payment of
invoices (a score of 0) but does mandate the payment of interest on late payments (a score of 1).
In practice, payments are timely in more than 90% of cases (a score of 1), but interest is rarely paid
(a score of 0). Singapore scores 1 out of 6 on the integrity of contract law index, or 0.17. In practice,
it scores 5 out of 6, or 0.83.

        The Law and Practice indices are the sums of their four subindices.

        Outcomes

        The outcomes we measure are corruption, Process, and Product.

        Respondents on the corruption question are presented with 5 answer options, to indicate
whether bribing happens: (i) very rarely (less than 10% of cases); (ii) rarely (10-25% of cases);
(iii) occasionally (25-50% of cases); (iv) often (50-90% of cases); and (v) very often (more than
90% of cases). In Colombia, bidders resort to bribes in 50-90% of road procurement cases; in
Myanmar bribes are reported in more than 90% of such cases. The variable is scored by taking the
average of the answer category, for example Colombia scores 0.70 and Myanmar scores 0.95. High
scores mean bad outcomes.

        Several inputs go into the construction of the Product index. Questions on time benchmark
the efficiency of the procurement process from the moment the procuring entity decides to
advertise the procurement opportunity, until the contract is successfully executed and the last
payment is made. Time is measured for two phases of the procurement life-cycle: the bidding
phase, which covers all interactions between the advertisement of the procurement opportunity
and the commencement of the works measured in the case study, and the contract management
phase, which measures all interactions with government agencies that delay the execution of the
contract. The measure captures the median duration in calendar days that our respondents indicate
is necessary in practice to complete a procedure with minimum follow-up with government
agencies and includes all typical delays that a construction company would experience when
dealing with the procuring entity. Time equals log(Number of days).

        The bidding process can take as few as 149 days in Taiwan or as many as 801 days in
Guinea-Bissau, where just obtaining permits and a notice to commence the works takes 420 days.

                                                   53
During the execution of the contract, inspections and payment are the largest sources of delay.
Obtaining payment takes more than one year in Haiti and Iran, while companies are left waiting
more than nine months for an inspection in Mongolia and Mozambique.

       The question on overruns measures how often the project is delivered within the original
budget. Respondents are presented with the same answer options as for other frequency questions,
with a high score if works are delivered within the original budget. In 13 countries in the sample
­ including Malawi and Peru ­ the original budget estimate is met in less than 10 percent of
procurement cases. In 52 countries ­ including Serbia and Tunisia ­ it is met in less than 25% of
road procurement contracts. Fiji, Lichtenstein and Singapore are the only three countries in the
sample meeting the original budget in more than 90% of contracts. The variable is scored by taking
the average of the answer category, then subtracting from one to be consistent with the other two
variables in the Product index. This implies, for example, that Malawi gets a score of 0.95 (1-0.05),
Serbia gets a score of 0.825 (1-(0.25+0.10)/2), while Singapore gets a score of 0.05 (1-0.95).

       The question on the low quality of public works asks how often the contract is executed
with less quality or with different technical specifications than those submitted during the tender
process. In Cameroon and Malawi, more than 90% of road works projects are delivered with lower
than expected quality. In 15 countries ­ including Australia and Japan ­ road works projects are
delivered with the lower quality standards then agreed-upon in the original contract in less than
10% of cases. The variable is scored by taking the average of the answer category, for example
Cameroon gets a score 0.95, while Australia scores 0.05.

       The index of Product is the z-score of these three variables. Singapore scores highest, at
6.45, followed by Korea (5.22) and Australia (4.82). At the opposite end, Venezuela scores lowest,
at -6.12, followed by Haiti (-5.05) and Timor Leste (-4.98).

       Several questions go into the measure of the Efficiency of Process as well. For each of
these questions, respondents are presented with 5 answer options: (i) very rarely (less than 10% of
cases); (ii) rarely (10-25% of cases); (iii) occasionally (25-50% of cases); (iv) often (50-90% of
cases); and (v) very often (more than 90% of cases). Efficiency of Process is scored by taking the
average of the answer category. High scores signify bad outcomes.



                                                 54
       The favoritism variable measures how often procuring entities circumvent public
procurement rules by interpreting selection criteria in a way that favors a specific bidder. In 70
countries ­ including Canada and Denmark ­ this happens in less than 25% of cases. In Ecuador
and Mexico, favoritism characterizes more than 90% of procurement projects.

       The question on collusion asks whether procuring entities and private sector companies
prevent market entry to other competitors. Collusion is prominent in eastern Europe. In several
countries in the region ­ including Azerbaijan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan ­ collusion plagues more
than 50% of all road procurement contracts.

       The absence of competition in procurement is assessed by how often non-competitive
procurement methods are used instead of open tendering. In a quarter of countries in the sample ­
44 out of 187 ­ non-competitive procurement methods instead of open tendering are used in more
than 50% of contracts, with peaks of more than 90% of contracts in Lao PDR. In Israel and New
Zealand, only 10% of contracts use methods other than open tendering.

       Process is the z-score of the three variables. Denmark, Germany, Hong Kong, Japan,
Switzerland and another 16 countries score highest, at 3.68, followed by France, Morocco and the
Netherlands (3.15). At the opposite end, Lao PDR and Niger score lowest, at -7.50, followed by
Myanmar and the West Bank and Gaza (-5.46).

       Two other sources are used as outcomes. The World Economic Forum's executive opinion
survey asks a question pertaining to the quality of road infrastructure. Executives are asked: "In
your country, how is the quality (extensiveness and condition) of road infrastructure [1 =
extremely poor--among the worst in the world; 7 = extremely good--among the best in the
world]?". We also measure the average quality of roads using Google data on the average driving
speed from the first to the second largest business city, and from the second to the third one.

Control Variables

Five control variables feature in the analysis. The World Bank's Human Capital Index measures
the amount of human capital that a child born today can expect to attain by age 18, given the risks
of poor health and poor education that prevail in the country where she lives (Angrist et al 2019).
Government effectiveness from the World Bank's World Development Indicators (World Bank

                                                 55
2020), and is based on unobserved components model utilizing 33 data sources that are rescaled
and combined to create an aggregate indicator. The measure captures perceptions of the quality of
public services, the quality of the civil service and the degree of its independence from political
pressures, the quality of policy formulation and implementation, and the credibility of the
government's commitment to such policies. Freedom House's Functioning Government contains
three components: Do the freely elected head of government and national legislative
representatives determine the policies of the government; Are safeguards against official
corruption strong and effective; and Does the government operate with openness and transparency
(Freedom House 2020). The World Economic Forum's Efficiency of Legal Framework. The
measure is constructed in response to the survey question: "In your country, how easy is it for
private businesses to challenge government actions and/or regulations through the legal system?"
The final measure is the Center for Systemic Peace (2019)'s Polity2, which captures political
regime authority on a 21-point scale ranging from -10 (hereditary monarchy) to +10 (consolidated
democracy).




                                                56
Appendix B: Proofs of Proposition and Lemma
Proof of Proposition 1: In a simple second price auction with known costs and no exclusion, both
bidders bid their costs. If 0 <  then the Outsider also receives the contract under the second
price auction. In that case, consumer surplus is  -  , and the PE's welfare is  ( -  ) as
there is no scope for bribes. If 0 >  , then the Insider wins the auction, consumer surplus is
 -  , and the PE's welfare is ( -  ).

In the excludable auction case, we begin with the default action of the PE if no bribe is paid.

If 0 <  , then the exclusion of the Outsider is the default if and only if  -  >  -  .

If 0 <  , and < -( -  ), then the Insider pays no bribes because he knows that the
Outsider will be excluded if a bargain is not reached. Exclusion is socially optimal and occurs
without any bribes.

If 0 <  and -<  -  , then a corrupt bargain to exclude the Outsider selects the bribe
to maximize (( -  ) +  - ( - 1 )) ( -  -  )1- , subject to the constraint
        -                                                             1
that          B  ( -  +  -  ), which requires that  - 1 ( -  ) > . In
       
                        
that case, the bribe is  + (1 -  ) ( -  ) + (1 - ) and consumer surplus is  -
                           1
 <  -  .              If  - 1 ( -  ) < , then both entities remain in the auction and
consumer surplus is unchanged with discretion.

If 0 >  , then the procuring entity will exclude the insider if and only if >  -  .

If 0 >  , then there are two corrupt possibilities: (1) the Insider and Outsider both remain in the
auction even though the socially optimal outcome is to exclude the Insider, and (2) the Insider
remains but the Outsider is excluded.

If 0 >  and <  -  , then the Insider wins the auction with or without bribery.
Consequently, a corrupt bargain to exclude the Outsider selects the bribe that maximizes
(( -  ) +  - ( -  )) ( -  -  )1- , subject to the constraints that
 -                                                                          
           B  ( -  ), or 1   . In this case, the bribe equals  + (1 -  ) ( -
   
 ) = .

If 0 >  and >  -  , then the Insider is excluded from the auction if there are no bribes.
Bribery can either leave both bidders in the auction, or exclude the Outsider.

If the Outsider is excluded, then the bargain maximizes ( ( -  ) +  -  ( -
                                                                -
 )) ( -  -  )1- , subject to the constraint that                  
                                                                           B  . The bribe level




                                                 57
                                          
satisfies     = (1 - )( -  ) +  ( -  ), so that joint welfare is   (1 -
                        1
 )1-  ( -  ) +  ( -  ).

If the Outsider is included then the bargain maximizes (( -  ) +  -  ( -
                                                                    -
 )) ( -  -  )1- , subject to the constraint that                              B  ( -  +  -
                                                                      
                             -
 ), which requires          
                                 +  - 0   -  .                    The bribe      satisfies    = (1 -
                                 
 )( -  +  -  ) +  ( -  ), so that joint welfare is   (1 -  )1-  ( -  +
                1
 -  ) +  ( -  ). Joint welfare is higher in the corrupt bargain if the Outsider is
excluded if and only if 1 > .

Putting these conditions together, if 1 > , then a corrupt bargain to exclude the Outsider and
                                          -
keep the Insider occurs if and only if         . In that case, social losses relative to the simple
                                         
                                               -
second price auction equal  -  . If                    < , then the outsider is kept and the Insider
                                                
is, excluded and there are social gains from discretion.
                                                                                               -
If 1 <  , then a corrupt bargain to keep the insider occurs if and only if  - 0 +                   
                                                                                                
, but in this case it bargain just replicates the simple second price auction, so there are no social
                                               -
welfare losses. If 1 <  and  - 0 +                    < , the insider is excluded and there are social
                                               
gains of  -  + 0 -  relative to the simple second price auction. If 1 <  then  -
       -         -                                                -           -
0 +     
            >       
                         and if 1 >  then  - 0 +        
                                                                         <    
                                                                                    , so discretion is
                                                    -  -                                   -
beneficial if and only if >   -  +                   ,  .                If 1 >  and              ,
                                                                                             
                                                                              -
then discretion reduces consumer welfare. If 1 <  and  -  +                   
                                                                                     , then discretion
does not impact consumer welfare.
Proof of Proposition 2: If the Insider has made a cost cutting investment, he is a low cost/low
quality provider.    In a regulated second price auction without exclusion, the Insider always
reduces quality to win the bid. Consumer welfare is equal  -  -  .

As 0 >  and >  -  , then the Insider is excluded from the auction if there are no bribes.
Bribes can either leave both bidders in the auction, or exclude the Outsider.

Following the logic of the Proof of Proposition 1, if 1 >  , then a corrupt bargain to exclude the
                                  -                                              
Outsider occurs if and only if            .     If 1 <  and  - 0 +  > , then there is a
                                  
corrupt bargain with the Insider, but as we assume that >  -  + , there is never a corrupt
bargain when 1 <  and so the Insider earns zero profits if he has cut quality.

                                                 58
      - +                                                                                - +
If      
                  <  < 1, then the Insider is included and so earns zero profits. If         
                                                                                                    >
, then the Outsider is excluded, the insider wins the auction, pays a bribe of          (1 - ) +

     ( -  + ) and so earns total profits of (1 - )( -  +  - ).


If the insider does not cut costs, his quality is the same as the outsider's and 0 <  , so the default
is not to exclude anyone and for the Insider to earn zero profits. If  > 1, the Outsider is not
excluded and the Insider loses the auction. If  < 1, the Outsider is excluded and the Insider
wins and earns profits after bribes of (1 -  )(1 - )( -  - ).

If  > 1, the insider earns zero profits whether or not he cuts costs. By assumption he does not
make the investment, and so is not excluded from the auction. The auction therefore yields
consumer welfare of  -  -  >  -  -  .
      - +
If      
                  <  < 1, Insider earns zero profits if he cuts costs, but positive profits if he does
not. In this range, he does not invest and consumer welfare is  -  >  -  -  .
       - +
If       
                  < , he earns profits after bribes of (1 -  )[( -  - ) - ( -  -
)] if he does not cut costs, and (1 -  )[( -  + ) - ] if he does.
                                                                  +              - +
Discretion then leads to quality cuts if and only if  < -                   <            < 0. In that
                                                                  +       +          
case, consumer welfare is  -  -  , which offers the worst case scenario of maximum price
and minimum quality.

Proof of Proposition 3: If there is no bribe, the PE sets  = 1, since added competition reduces
costs and raise social welfare. In that case, the Insider receives zero profits. If the Outsider does
not receive the signal then the Insider's profits equal  -  .
If there is no law, a corrupt bargain to reduce transparency selects the bribe to maximize
((1 -  )(1 -  ) +  ) ((1 -  )( - 1 ) -  )1- , subject to the constraint that
(1-)( - )                                                             1
                    B  (1 -  ))( -  ), or ( -  )  - 1  0. Hence if  > 1,
        
the PE sets set  = 1.              If  < 1, the PE sets  =  , and the bribe is  =
   
 + (1 -  ) (1 -  )( - 1 ).

If there is a law, a corrupt bargain to reduce transparency selects the bribe to maximize
((1 -  )(1 -  ) +  - ) ((1 -  )( - 1 ) -  )1- , subject to the constraint
       (1-)( - )                                                                 1
that                    B  (1 -  ))( -  ) + , or ( -  )  - 1  . Hence
               
             -                                        -
if  >                 , the PE sets  = 1. If  <               , then the PE sets  =  , and the bribe
             - +                                      - +
            
is  =  + (1 -  ) (1 -  )( - 1 ) + (1 -  ).


                                                   59
