                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    CONFIDENCE MANAGEMENT IN TOURNAMENTS

                                         Shanglyu Deng
                                         Hanming Fang
                                           Qiang Fu
                                           Zenan Wu

                                       Working Paper 27186
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27186


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




Wu thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.71803003) and the seed fund
of the School of Economics, Peking University, for financial support. Any errors are our own.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Shanglyu Deng, Hanming Fang, Qiang Fu, and Zenan Wu. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Confidence Management in Tournaments
Shanglyu Deng, Hanming Fang, Qiang Fu, and Zenan Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 27186
May 2020
JEL No. D03,D2,D82

                                          ABSTRACT

An incumbent employee competes against a new hire for bonus or promotion. The incumbent's
ability is commonly known, while that of the new hire is private information. The incumbent is
subject to a perceptional bias: His prior about the new hire's type differs from the true underlying
distribution. He can be either ex ante overconfident or underconfident. We first explore whether a
firm that aims to maximize aggregate effort would benefit or suffer from the bias. It is shown
that debiasing may not be productive in incentivizing efforts. We then study the optimal
information disclosure policy. The firm is allowed to ex ante commit to whether an informative
signal--which allows the incumbent to infer the new hire's type--will be disclosed publicly. We
fully characterize the conditions under which transparency or opacity will prevail. We further
take a Bayesian persuasion approach to optimally design the firm's evaluation and feedback
structure. We also consider an alternative context in which the manager is concerned about the
expected winner's effort. We demonstrate that the insights obtained from the baseline setting
remain intact. Our results shed light on the extensive discussion of confidence management in
firms and the debate about organizational transparency.

Shanglyu Deng                                    Qiang Fu
Department of Economics                          Department of Strategy and Policy
University of Maryland                           NUS Business School
3114 Tydings Hall                                15 Kent Ridge Drive
7343 Preinkert Dr.                               Singapore
College Park, MD 20742                           bizfq@nus.edu.sg
sdeng1@umd.edu
                                                 Zenan Wu
Hanming Fang                                     School of Economics
Department of Economics                          Peking University
Ronald O. Perelman Center                        Beijing, China
for Political Science and Economics              zenan@pku.edu.cn
133 South 36th Street
Suite 150
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu
   "Attempt easy tasks as if they were difficult, and difficult as if they were easy; in the one
case that confidence may not fall asleep, in the other that it may not be dismayed."

                                                                                  --Baltasar Graci´
                                                                                                  an


   "Perhaps a successful life, like a successful company, needs both optimism and at least
occasional pessimism, and for the same reason a corporation does."

                                                                                   --Martin Seligman


1       Introduction
    The internal labor markets inside firms are widely viewed to resemble a tournament
(Lazear and Rosen, 1981; Rosen, 1986): Workers strive for bonus or to climb hierarchical
ladder toward higher rungs (Brown and Minor, 2014); they are rewarded or punished based on
their performance relative to competitors or benchmarks instead of absolute output metrics
(Chen and Lim, 2013). A plethora of anecdotal and empirical observations have documented
the prevalence of tournament incentives and relative performance evaluation (RPE) schemes
(see, e.g., Eriksson, 1999; Henderson and Fredrickson, 2001; Belzil and Bognanno, 2008;
Connelly, Tihanyi, Crook, and Gangloff, 2014; and Lazear, 2018). Consider, for instance,
the popular practice of vitality curve --or stack ranking--that are pioneered by Jack Welch
and have proliferated in the modern corporate landscape.1 As argued by DeVaro (2006),
promotion tournaments are an integral component of firms' HR practice to advance their
strategic interests.
    The conventional wisdom tells that the incentive of the agents involved in tournament
situations crucially depends on their relative competitiveness and their perception of each
other's competency (Brown, 2011). However, one's knowledge about his opponent is often
limited, and their perception can be systematically biased. Consider the usual scenario in
which a new hire joins an organization and competes--under an RPE scheme--against in-
cumbent employees for bonus or promotion. The competency of the incumbents can be
inferred from their established track record, while that of the new hire often remains to be
ascertained, which gives rise to the typical problem of information asymmetry (see, e.g., Hur-
ley and Shogren, 1998; W¨  arneryd, 2003; Zhang and Zhou, 2016; and Denter, Morgan, and
Sisak, 2020). Furthermore, incumbent employees may have misperceptions about the new
    1
    A vitality curve is a performance management practice that ranks or rates individuals against their
coworkers. It is also called stack ranking, forced ranking, and rank and yank. The concept of a "vitality
curve" has been used to justify the "rank-and-yank" system of management at GE, whereby 10% of workers
are fired at each evaluation.


                                                   1
hire. A large economics and psychology literature has identified the prevalence of percep-
tional biases, by which people "misplace" themselves in comparison with others or population
mean, being either overconfident or underconfident (see, e.g., Larwood and Whittaker, 1977;
Cooper, Woo, and Dunkelberg, 1988; Malmendier and Tate, 2005, 2015; Moore and Cain,
2007; Moore and Healy, 2008; and Muthukrishna, Henrich, Toyokawa, Hamamura, Kameda,
and Heine, 2018). Such phenomena are pervasive in workplaces. Consider the following
examples.

   i. A startup recruits a high-profile executive poached from an industry leader; incumbent
      employees may presumably overestimate the external hire.

  ii. Optimism typically arises in a rapidly growing firm; incumbent workers would arguably
      underestimate newbies, as they attribute the firm's success to their own superior com-
      petency.

  iii. A corporate culture that champions workplace Darwinism--e.g., that at Enron--
       typically boosts workers' ego and breeds overconfidence, which also lead them to look
       down on newcomers.2

    In this paper, we aim to explore two main questions. Suppose that the firm cares about
aggregate effort supply in the workplace. First, does a firm benefit or suffer from its em-
ployee's perceptional bias? Second, suppose that the firm is able to conduct an evaluation to
acquire an informative signal about the new hire's true ability, is the firm willing to disclose
it to employees, which manipulates their beliefs and, in turn, influences the performance of
the competition?
    To answer these questions, we adopt a standard lottery contest setting--as in Denter,
Morgan, and Sisak (2020) and Zhang and Zhou (2016)--to model a promotion tournament
in a firm. Two employees--an incumbent worker and a new hire--are involved in the compe-
tition. They differ in their valuations of the "prize"--i.e., promotion to a higher rung along
the corporate ladder--which can conveniently be interpreted as a measure of one's ability
or strength: A larger valuation incentivizes more efforts. It is noteworthy that the model
can alternatively but equivalently be set up in a way that employees have common valua-
tion of the prize--i.e., bonus package with monetary value--but bear different effort costs.
The ability of the incumbent is common knowledge, while that of the new hire is privately
known to himself. The new hire's ability can take either a high or a low value. We allow the
incumbent employee to possess a different prior about the new hire than the true underlying
distribution. The uncommon priors thus depict the incumbent employee's misperception of
his relative competitiveness in the tournament. A manager--e.g., HR director--can secure
  2
      See Netessine and Yakubovich (2012).

                                               2
an informative signal about the new hire's true ability through an evaluation exercise. The
manager decides on the firm's information disclosure policy: She ex ante commits to ei-
ther disclosing the signal or concealing it, with the latter to be equivalent to foregoing the
evaluation exercise.
    The questions posed in this paper are not only theoretically interesting, but also prac-
tically relevant. First, successful confidence management is broadly viewed in practice as a
key to boosting productivity. The economics literature has espoused the motivation effect
of (over)confidence, as a positive self-image could incentivize efforts and catalyze success
(see, e.g., B´
             enabou and Tirole, 2002; Compte and Postlewaite, 2004; Gervais and Goldstein
(2007); Chen and Schildberg-H¨   orisch, 2019). However, the usual motivation effect arises in
settings of a stand-alone decision making or a principal-agent relationship. We neverthe-
less demonstrate subtler impact of overconfidence on effort supply in a tournament setting.
We show that both overconfidence and underconfidence can benefit or harm effort provision
depending on the parameters. Imagine that the incumbent is ex ante a favorite. Overcon-
fidence would stifle the competition, as the complacency entices him to further slack off; in
contrast, underconfidence by the incumbent can prevent shirking. Conversely, imagine that
the incumbent is ex ante an underdog, overconfidence would help avoid discouragement,
and thus debiasing would weaken the competition. The ramifications result from (i) the
relative-performance based reward structure in tournaments, and (ii) players' nonmonotone
best response correspondence in the strategic interactions in such competitive events (Lazear
and Rosen, 1981; and Dixit, 1987). To the best of our knowledge, such effects have yet to
be formally delineated in the literature.
    Second, firms' internal information management--i.e., the information accessible to their
employees--has spawned extensive discussion in both academic studies and practice. A large
portion of leading firms in Europe and the United States have established internal knowledge
system or built competency models that contain and reveal to workers the performance of
their peers (Nafziger and Schumacher, 2013). Eli Lilly & Co. allows its employees to access
their rankings in the succession planning system. In National University of Singapore (NUS)
Business School, faculty members are allowed to access colleagues' student feedback reports.3
The informative signal, if disclosed, allows the uninformed incumbent to make inference
about the type of his opponent: It not only ameliorates information asymmetry, but also
varies his perception of relative competitiveness, which may either mitigate or strengthen
his perceptional bias. This update, by the same logic laid out above, would indeterminately
affect his incentive in the competition and trigger ambiguous strategic response from the
new hire.
  3
    NUS conducts annual performance review for faculty members. Each department sets aside a bonus
pool to reward teaching excellence, and only top ranked performers receive the monetary reward.



                                                3
    The results of our analysis can be summarized as follows. We first fully characterize the
necessary and sufficient conditions under which the persistence of the incumbent's misper-
ception benefits/harms the firm in terms of aggregate effort. We then proceed to explore
the optimal information disclosure policy. When the quality--i.e., the precision--of the sig-
nal obtained through the evaluation is fixed, two effects loom large when the incumbent
observes the signal with misperception in place. The informative signal serves two roles.
First, it catalyzes an information effect due to information asymmetry. The updating al-
leviates information asymmetry ex post, but causes dispersed tournament outcomes across
different states ex ante. Second, it gives rise to a morale effect because of the perceptional
bias. The additional information leads the biased incumbent to revise his perception of the
relative competitiveness. The direction and magnitude of his response to the signal depends
on the nature of his initial perceptional bias and the realization of the signal. The morale
effect reconciles with the information effect in the presence of overconfidence, but a tension
emerges with underconfidence in place. Either disclosing the signal or concealing it can be
optimal, and we identify the conditions and interpret the underlying logic. The comparison
between biased and unbiased beliefs and that between transparency and opacity sensitively
depend on employees' ex ante relative competitiveness, the underlying distribution of the new
hire's ability, as well as the incumbent employee's perceptional bias. Our theoretical results
yield novel and useful managerial implications for firms' confidence and internal information
management, which we elaborate on in Sections 2.4 and 3.2.
    We further explore two variations of the model. First, we take a Bayesian persuasion
approach to endogenize the information structure. In the baseline setting, we assume that
the quality of the signal is fixed and that the firm can either disclose or conceal it. In the
extension, we endow the firm to design flexibly its evaluation. We show that the optimum
requires either fully revealing or completely non-informative evaluations. This result cor-
roborates our findings in the baseline setting. Second, we allow the firm to maximize the
expected winner's effort instead of the aggregate effort. Again, we demonstrate that the
main findings in the baseline setting remain qualitatively intact.

Related Literature Our paper contributes to the literature on information transmission
in contests/tournaments. One stream of this literature assumes that a designer possesses
superior information about contenders and explores her optimal disclosure policy, e.g., Fu,
Jiao, and Lu (2014), Zhang and Zhou (2016), Serena (2018), Lu, Ma, and Wang (2018),
and Boosey, Brookins, and Ryvkin (2020). The other stream of work studies contenders'
strategic action to reveal private information. Denter, Morgan, and Sisak (2020) and Fu,
G¨urtler, and M¨unster (2013) let the informed party take a costly action to signal his private
type prior to the competition. Kovenock, Morath, and M¨    unster (2015) and Wu and Zheng


                                              4
(2017) study contenders' voluntary information disclosure. All these studies assume common
priors and rational beliefs. Our paper belongs to the former class of studies, as it allows the
firm to conduct evaluation and decide whether to disclose an informative signal. However,
the extant literature does not allow for perceptionally biased players; as a result, the morale
effect--which plays a subtle and important role in determining the optimum and looms large
because of the perceptional bias in our setting--is absent in the existing literature. Our study
thus complements this literature.
    Our paper is naturally linked to the literature on the motivational effect of over(under)-
confidence, such as B´ enabou and Tirole (2002), Compte and Postlewaite (2004), Fang and
Moscarini (2005), and Chen and Schildberg-H¨    orisch (2019). However, these studies focus on
the stand-alone decision making of a single agent or in a principal-agent setting. Fang (2001)
instead explores the role of perceptional bias in a team-production setting. In contrast, we
explore the role played by the perceptional bias in a tournament in which reward is based
on relative performance. Gervais and Goldstein (2007) show that overconfidence reduces
free-riding and benefits teamwork, as an overconfident agent works hard. Kyle and Wang
(1997) demonstrate in a Cournot duopoly setting the commitment value of overconfidence.
They interpret overconfidence as one's excessively optimistic perception about his signal's
precision; in contrast, we focus on players' over(under)-placement (Moore and Healy, 2008),
by which one over(under)-estimates his relative competitiveness.
    Crutzen, Swank, and Visser (2013) demonstrate that manager may refrain from differ-
entiation among employees, as differentiation may lead them to downgrade their self-ratings
and dampen incentives. Nafziger and Schumacher (2013) show that revealing peer's per-
formance can be counterproductive as a worker can infer the impact of his effort on the
probability of success. However, these settings do not involve competition or perceptional
biases.
    In one of our extensions, we take a Bayesian persuasion approach pioneered by Kamenica
and Gentzkow (2011) to endogenize the information structure of the internal evaluation.
Zhang and Zhou (2016) study the optimal information design in a similar setting but with
common prior. Alonso and Camara (2016) explore Bayesian persuasion while allowing the
sender and (single) receiver to possess heterogeneous beliefs. We borrow their approach and
apply it to a tournament setting.
    The rest of our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we set up an asymmetric-
information tournament model with uncommon priors, characterize the equilibrium, and
elaborate on the impact of perceptional bias. In Section 3, we explore the optimal information
disclosure policy in the tournament and interpret the results. In Section 4, we explore two
variations to the baseline setting: (i) optimally designed evaluation and (ii) a setting in
which the firm cares about the expected winner's effort. In Section 5, we conclude.


                                               5
2     Asymmetric-Information Tournament with Uncom-
      mon Priors
    We model the competition between two employees inside an organization as a tournament.
In this part, we first spell out the fundamentals of the tournament model and solve for the
equilibrium, which lays a foundation for the analysis of optimal information policy.


2.1     Model
    We consider a firm with a manger and two risk-neutral employees, index by i  {A, B }.
The two employees compete for a prize--i.e., promotion--by exerting irreversible efforts si-
multaneously. We assume a lottery contest success function (CSF) to model the competition
in the inside-firm labor market: For an effort profile (xA , xB )  (0, 0), an employee i wins
with a probability4
                                           
                                            xi /(xA + xB ) if xA + xB > 0,
                         pi (xA , xB ) =
                                                  1/2         if xA + xB = 0.
    An employee i values the win for vi > 0, with vA to be commonly known and vB to be a
                                                                                       L    H
piece of private information. Specifically, vB is a random variable on the set  = vB     , vB
           L     H                 H
with 0 < vB  < vB   and Pr(vB = vB   ) = µ  (0, 1). For ease of exposition, we interpret one's
value for the win as his ability: A more motivated worker is better incentivized to engage in
effort. We impose the following assumption throughout the paper:

              L
Assumption 1 vB  vA /4.

   Assumption 1 is intuitive. It ensures that the competition would not be excessively
lopsided even if employee B is of the low type, which rules out the case of corner solution in
which a low-ability employee B is completely discouraged to exert effort in equilibrium.
   One's effort xi entails a unity marginal effort cost. An employee i chooses his effort to
maximize his expected payoff

                        i (xi , xj ) = pi (xA , xB )vi - xi , i, j  {A, B }, i = j.

    We assume that the manager possesses the correct prior µ while employee A believes
    4
      A closed-form equilibrium solution to the model is not available if we assume a CSF in the form of
(xi ) /[(xA ) + (xB ) ], with   (0, 1]. Simulation shows that our results remain qualitatively unchanged if
0 <  < 1. The analysis is available from the authors upon request.




                                                    6
           H
Pr(vB = vB   )=µ~  [0, 1].5 It is common knowledge that the manager and employee A may
hold different priors about vB ; that is, they "agree to disagree." When µ
                                                                         ~ < µ, employee
A underestimates his opponent, and we say that employee A exhibits overconfidence; when
µ
~ > µ, he overestimates his opponent, which alludes to underconfidence.

Remark 1 It is useful to note that the model is isomorphic to an alternative setting in
which employees commonly value the prize from winning the tournament--i.e., vi = v for
i  {A, B }--but bear different (linear) effort costs (e.g., Moldovanu, Sela, and Shi, 2007;
Taylor and Yildirim, 2011; Brown and Minor, 2014). One's payoff function is given by

                       ~i (xi , xj ) = pi (xA , xB )v - ci xi , i, j  {A, B }, i = j,
                       

and maximizing ~i (xi , xj ) is equivalent to maximizing

                                   ~i (xi , xj )                v
                                                 = pi (xA , xB ) - xi ,
                                        ci                      ci

which restores the original game considered in our paper.


2.2     Equilibrium in Tournament
   Zhang and Zhou (2016) fully characterize the equilibrium of a lottery contest game with
one-sided incomplete information, and the analysis extends to our setting. In the equilibrium,
employee A exerts effort                                 2
                                          1-µ
                                             ~     µ~
                                               +
                                            vL      vBH
                                xA =  1 B 1-µ              ,
                                                         
                                                ~      µ
                                                       ~ 
                                        vA
                                           + vL + vH
                                                         B     B


and employee B has a type-dependent effort strategy indeterminately, which is given as
follows:
                                                             H    L
                        xB (vB ) = vB xA - xA , for vB  vB     , vB .
                                               
For notational convenience, we define K (~µ) := xA . It is straightforward to write down the
ex ante expected total effort of the tournament, which we denote by T E (µ, µ ~), as

                                                                       L                 H
       T E (µ, µ
               ~) = Eµ xB (vB ) + xA = Eµ             vB xA = (1 - µ) vB +µ             vB K (~
                                                                                              µ).    (1)

  We use the notation Eµ [·] to denote the expectation under belief µ. It is noteworthy that
employees' equilibrium efforts, xA and xB (vB ), involve only employee A's perceived belief µ
                                                                                            ~.
   5
   Note that employee B 's belief about vB does not matter in our model because (i) he has private infor-
mation about vB ; and (ii) he only cares about employee A's effort.

                                                     7
However, both µ and µ ~ enter the expression of the an ex ante expected total effort T E (µ, µ
                                                                                             ~),
as it is aggregated over the true distribution described by µ.
    We now explore the property of K (~ µ). Taking derivative of K (~
                                                                    µ) with respect to µ
                                                                                       ~ yields

                                            H        L                     L H
                                           vB -     vB           vA -     vB vB
                          K (~
                             µ) =                             H (1-µ    Lµ    2       .
                                           L H     1         vB     ~)+vB ~
                                       vA vB vB   vA
                                                         +         L vH
                                                                  vB  B


                                                                     L H
                         µ) depends on that of vA -
Note that the sign of K (~                                          vB vB . Further, we can obtain that

                                                             2
                                            H        L                      L H
                                  2        vB -     vB            vA -     vB vB
                        K (~
                           µ) =                                   H (1-µ    Lµ    3       .
                                            L H 2       1        vB     ~)+vB ~
                                      vA   vB vB       vA
                                                             +         L vH
                                                                      vB  B


                                                                    L H
                      µ) depends on that of vA -
Again, the sign of K (~                                            vB vB . It is straightforward to obtain
the following.

Lemma 1 The function K (·) is strictly increasing with its argument and convex if vA >
   L H                                                    L H
  vB vB , and is strictly decreasing and concave if vA < vB vB .


2.3    Desirability of Persistent Misperception
   Employees' efforts accrue to the benefit of the manager in our context. The equilibrium
result allows us to explore one natural question: Does the firm benefit from employee A's
misperception, i.e., µ = µ
                         ~? Specifically, does the persistence of the uncommon priors boost
the productivity of organization in terms of its expected total effort T E (µ, µ
                                                                               ~)? Recall by (1)
that the tournament generates an expected total effort

                                               L                         H
                                 ~) = (1 - µ) vB
                         T E (µ, µ               +µ                     vB K (~
                                                                              µ).

With common prior, the expected total effort boils down to

                                                        L                H
                         T E (µ, µ) = (1 - µ)          vB +µ            vB K (µ),

as in Zhang and Zhou (2016). Therefore, the comparison hinges on the monotonicity of K (·).
We obtain the following.

Proposition 1 (Value of Persistent Misperception) Suppose that the firm aims to
maximize the expected total effort in the tournament. Then the following statements hold:


                                                  8
                       H L
   i. When vA < vB       vB , the firm strictly benefits from employee A's misperception--i.e.,
      T E (µ, µ
              ~) > T E (µ, µ)--if and only if employee A exhibits overconfidence--i.e., µ
                                                                                        ~ < µ;
                       H L
  ii. When vA > vB       vB , the firm strictly benefits from employee A's misperception--i.e.,
      T E (µ, µ
              ~) > T E (µ, µ)--if and only if employee A exhibits underconfidence--i.e., µ
                                                                                         ~ > µ;
                       H L
 iii. When vA = vB       vB , employee A's belief does not affect the expected total effort, i.e.,
      T E (µ, µ
              ~) = T E (µ, µ).

    Proposition 1 states that the firm may either benefit or suffer from the incumbent em-
ployee's perceptional bias; neither overconfidence nor underconfidence necessarily harms the
firm. To interpret its logic, recall that the new hire's type-dependent equilibrium effort is
given by
                                                              H    L
                         xB (vB ) = vB xA - xA , for vB  vB     , vB ,

which leads to the expected total effort

                                                                                  L          H
      T E (µ, µ
              ~) = Eµ xB (vB ) + xA =       xA × Eµ           µ) (1 - µ)
                                                      vB = K (~                  vB +µ      vB .

To explore the impact of the incumbent employee's belief on the total effort T E (µ, µ       ~), it
suffices to focus on how xA varies with µ
                                        ~, i.e., the property of K (~
                                                                    µ). The conventional wisdom
in the contest/tournament literature is that a more level playing field fuels competition. In
                       H L
the case of vA < vB     vB , employee A can be viewed as an ex ante underdog. Proposition
1(i) shows that in this case, his overconfidence turns out to boost his morale, which narrows
the gap in terms of ability and fuels the competition. Conversely, Proposition 1(ii) states
                                                                  H L
that, if employee A is the favorite in the sense that vA > vB       vB , the the firm suffers from
his overconfidence: Employee A underestimates his opponent, which softens the competition
                                                                            H L
and entices himself to slack off. In the knife-edge case of vA = vB           vB , these balancing
forces cancel out in the ex ante even race.
     The contest/tournament literature has conventionally espoused the productive role played
by various design instruments that manipulate the balance of competition--e.g., favoritisms
(Epstein, Mealem, and Nitzan, 2011; Franke, Kanzow, Leininger, and Schwartz, 2013, 2014;
Fu and Wu, 2020, among others), headstarts (Kirkegaard, 2012; Konrad, 2002; Siegel, 2009;
Drugov and Ryvkin, 2017, among others), and bidding caps (Che and Gale, 1998; Gavious,
Moldovanu, and Sela, 2002; Olszewski and Siegel, 2019, among others).6 Our analysis implies
that the same can alternatively be achieved by a perceptional bias, and debiasing may turn
out to weaken the competition and mute employees' incentives.
  6
    See Mealem and Nitzan (2016), Chowdhury, Esteve-Gonz´    alez, and Mukherjee (2019), and Fu and Wu
(2019a) for comprehensive surveys on discrimination in contests.


                                                  9
2.4         Managerial Implications of Proposition 1
    Our analysis demonstrates the subtle roles played by employees' perceptional biases. It is
broadly championed that confidence catalyzes success, and managers should build confidence
in his staff. The economics and psychology literature has also identified the motivational
effect that advocates the positive incentive effect of overconfidence. We, however, show that
employees' incentives and productivities depend indeterminately on their (mis)perception
about relative competitiveness when they engaged in internal competitions, which are per-
vasive in modern workplace (Netessine and Yakubovich, 2012).
    Proposition 1 demonstrates that employees' (mis)perception can be either productive
or counterproductive, depending on the actual relative competitiveness between the incum-
bent and the new worker. The firm may sometimes benefit from persistent underconfidence.
Consider, for instance, a startup that rose from successful grassroots innovations. Its early
employees could underestimate their own abilities relative to better educated junior recruits,
despite the extensive experience and knowhow they possess. Proposition 1 suggests that the
firm may not have to "debias" even if it is able to: For instance, if the firm is confident
                                                                      H L
in the value of its early employees' human capital--i.e., vA > vB      vB --which might have
been critical in helping the firm navigate the startup stages, then underconfidence would
turn out to incentivize employees and fuel more competition. In contrast, consider an am-
bitious academic institution in the process of aggressive expansion by recruiting from more
prestigious peers. Its faculty members may be on average disadvantaged in their research
                                 H L
capacity ex ante, i.e., vA < vB    vB , but also underconfident about their skills relative to
the new hires. Proposition 1 then suggests that it is helpful to restore the confidence of the
incumbent faculty.


3         Internal Evaluation and Information Disclosure
    In this section, we expand the model to explore the optimal information disclosure policy
that modifies the information environment. The firm sets an information disclosure policy
prior to the competition. For the moment, we assume that the firm equally values employees'
contribution and the policy is chosen to maximize the expected total effort.7
    The firm conducts an internal evaluation on employee B and obtains a noisy signal
s  {H, L} regarding his ability. Specifically, we assume that the signal is drawn as follows:

                                          H                  L
                           Pr s = H vB = vB = Pr s = L vB = vB = q,                                       (2)
    7
        We consider an extension in which the manager cares about the expected winner's effort in Section 4.2.




                                                       10
             1
where q  2     , 1 indicates the quality of the signal.8 When q = 1, the signal perfectly reveals
employee B 's ability. In the extreme case that q = 1/2, the firm's signal is completely
uninformative. The manager commits prior to the competition her disclosure policy, i.e.,
whether the result of her private evaluation about employee A's ability--i.e., the realized
signal s--is to be disclosed publicly or concealed from employee A before the competition
takes place.
    The signal would allow the manager and employee A to update their beliefs based on
their own prior. For the manager, she would infer that employee B is of high type with a
posterior probability µs , as given by
                                               H
                                  µ Pr s|vB = vB
                µs =                H                      L
                                                             , for s = H, L.                         (3)
                       µ Pr s|vB = vB + (1 - µ) Pr s|vB = vB

Similarly, employee A's posterior belief, denoted by µ
                                                     ~s , is given by
                                              H
                                µ~ Pr s|vB = vB
                µ
                ~s =               H                      L
                                                            , for s = H, L.                          (4)
                     ~ Pr s|vB = vB
                     µ               + (1 - µ
                                            ~) Pr s|vB = vB

It is straightforward to verify that both µs and µ
                                                 ~s strictly increase with the priors, µ and µ
                                                                                             ~,
respectively, for q < 1. When the signal is perfectly informative--i.e., q = 1--both parties'
posterior belief would jump to one upon receiving s = H and drop to zero upon receiving
s = L, independent of their priors.


3.1     Optimal Information Disclosure Policy
    The manager sets the information disclosure policy to maximize employees' expected ag-
gregate effort. We denote by T E C (µ, µ
                                       ~) the expected total effort when the signal s is with-
held, where the superscript C indicates "concealment." The expected total effort T E C (µ, µ~)
is the same as (1) and given by

                           T E C (µ, µ             L
                                     ~) = (1 - µ) vB +µ           H
                                                                 vB K (~
                                                                       µ).                           (5)

When the signal s  {H, L} is disclosed, the expected total effort is given by

                                                     L             H
                                   ~s ) = (1 - µs ) vB
                         T E (µs , µ                   + µs       vB K (~
                                                                        µs ).

   8
    Note that q is exogenous in this section. We will generalize the model and endogenize the information
structure using a Bayesian persuasion approach (e.g., Kamenica and Gentzkow, 2011, Alonso and Camara,
2016) in Section 4.1.




                                                   11
Further, the actual probabilities that s = H and s = L occur amount to µq + (1 - µ)(1 - q )
and µ(1 - q ) + (1 - µ)q , respectively. This allows us to calculate the expected equilibrium
total effort when the manager commits to disclosing the signal, T E D (µ, µ ~), where we use
superscript D to indicate "disclosure":

       T E D (µ, µ
                 ~) =                                       L
                          µq + (1 - µ)(1 - q ) × (1 - µH ) vB + µH               H
                                                                                vB K (~
                                                                                      µH )

                                                             L                    H
                         + µ(1 - q ) + (1 - µ)q × (1 - µL ) vB + µL              vB K (~
                                                                                       µL ),   (6)

where µs and µ~s , with s  {H, L}, are given by (3) and (4), respectively.
    We then investigate the manager's incentive to disclose the result of her noisy evaluation
to employee A, holding fixed the quality of the signal, q . For expositional convenience, we
define  as
                                                    3
                                                L 2       H
                              H L
                                              (vB ) vA + vB             µ (1 - µ
                                                                               ~)
                    :=       vB vB   - vA ×           3             -             .            (7)
                                                H
                                              (vB )   2         L
                                                          vA + vB       ~ (1 - µ)
                                                                        µ

Proposition 2 (Concealment vs. Disclosure) Suppose q  ( 1        2
                                                                   , 1] and that the manager
aims to maximize the expected total effort in the tournament. Then the following statements
hold:

   i. When  > 0, it is optimal to commit to disclosing her private signal, i.e., T E D (µ, µ
                                                                                           ~) >
         C
      T E (µ, µ
              ~);

  ii. When  < 0, concealing the signal is optimal to the manager, i.e., T E D (µ, µ
                                                                                  ~) <
         C
      T E (µ, µ
              ~);

 iii. When  = 0, the firm is indifferent between disclosing the signal and concealing it,
      i.e., T E D (µ, µ
                      ~) = T E C (µ, µ
                                     ~).

    Proposition 2 states that the optimal information disclosure policy hinges on the sign
of . To interpret this proposition, it is key to identify the condition that determines the
sign of . Note that that the second term in (7) is always negative when employ A exhibits
                             ~  µ. To see that, note that [µ(1 - µ
(weak) overconfidence, i.e., µ                                         µ(1 - µ)]  1 in this
                                                                  ~)]/[~
case, which in turn implies that
               3
            L 2        H
          (vB ) (vA + vB )       µ(1 - µ
                                       ~)  v L (vA + vB
                                                      H
                                                        )            L
                                                                vA (vB    H
                                                                       - vB )
               3             -             B H        L
                                                          - 1 =  H        L
                                                                              < 0.
            H
          (vB  2       L
              ) (vA + vB )       ~(1 - µ)
                                 µ         vB (vA + vB )        vB (vA + vB )

This observation allows us to infer that with overconfidence (~
                                                              µ < µ) or rational belief (~
                                                                                         µ = µ),
                            H L
disclosure is optimal if vB vB - vA < 0, or equivalently, employee A is an ex ante favorite;

                                               12
       1.75                                                            1.75




       1.25                                                            1.25


                                                                                                              Disclosure
                                             Concealment


                                                                                               Concealment          Concealment
       0.75                                                            0.75



                             Disclosure                                                               Disclosure



       0.25                                                            0.25
          0.25        0.75                1.25             1.75           0.25          0.75                 1.25                 1.75




                                         µ  µ)
     (a) Rationality and Overconfidence (~                                       (b) Underconfidence (~
                                                                                                      µ > µ)

                 Figure 1: Optimal Effort-Maximizing Information Disclosure Policy

                                                  H L
conversely, concealment is optimal if vB             vB - vA > 0, or equivalently, employee A is an ex
ante underdog.
                                                                                                         H
    The optimum is illustrated in Figure 1(a). In the figure, the horizontal axis traces vB                ,
                                           L
while the vertical axis measures vB          . Therefore, the area under the diagonal collects all
                                              L       H
the relevant parameterizations with vB          < vB    . Assuming (vA , µ, µ
                                                                            ~) = (1, 0.5, 0.4), the dashed
                                                                                              H L
curve splits the area into two regions: The upper portion depicts the case of vB               vB - vA > 0
such that  < 0, in which concealment policy is preferred; while the lower portion represents
    H L
  vB   vB - vA < 0 such that  > 0, in which case full disclosure prevails.
                                                                                          H L
    Complexity arises in the scenario of underconfidence. The sign of vB                    vB - vA alone
cannot predict the sign of , as the second term in the expression of (7) is indetermi-
nate when µ   ~ > µ. The optimal disclosure policy is depicted by Figure 1(b). The division
                H L                           H L
between vB         vB - vA < 0 and vB           vB - vA > 0 is insufficient to predict the optimal
                                                                     3                      3
                                              H L                  L 2          H       H 2          L
disclosure policy. The terms of vB              vB - vA and [(vB    ) (vA + vB    )]/[(vB ) (vA + vB   )] -
[µ(1 - µ ~)/µ~(1 - µ)] jointly determine the sign of , with a total of four scenarios. Fixing
(vA , µ, µ
         ~) = (1, 0.5, 0.6), the solid solid curve in the figure traces all parameterizations that
            L 3          H       H 3            L
satisfy [(vB  ) 2 (vA + vB )]/[(vB ) 2 (vA + vB   )] = [µ(1 - µ   ~(1 - µ)]. The area above the solid
                                                               ~)/µ
                                      3                      3
                                  L 2            H        H 2       L
curve depicts the case of [(vB ) (vA + vB )]/[(vB ) (vA + vB          )] - [µ(1 - µ ~)/µ~(1 - µ)] > 0, in
which case the optimum with overconfidence or rational belief is overturned. In the area
below the solid curve, the term continues to be negative, which retains the prediction under
overconfidence or rational belief.
    Proposition 2 and Equation (7) enable comparative statics with respect to the degree of




                                                                  13
      1.75                                                 1.75




      1.25                                                 1.25




      0.75                                                 0.75




      0.25                                                 0.25
         0.25        0.75         1.25         1.75           0.25        0.75         1.25         1.75




        (a) Underconfidence: (µ, µ
                                 ~) = (0.5, 0.6)             (b) Underconfidence: (µ, µ
                                                                                      ~) = (0.5, 0.7)

       Figure 2: Impact of Underconfidence on Optimal Information Disclosure Policy

employee underconfidence. Fix vA and µ  ~ > µ. Let us define
                                                                                
                                L 3         H
                 
                     H    L   (vB ) 2 vA + vB     µ (1 - µ
                                                         ~)         H     L  vA 
         (~µ) := (vB   , vB )       3          -            > 0 , vB  > vB       ,
                                H 2
                              (vB ) vA + vB L     ~ (1 - µ)
                                                  µ                           4

                            H    L
as the set of parameters (vB  , vB ) under which the optimal information disclosure policy
with underconfidence differ from that with overconfidence or rational belief. The following
proposition can be obtained:

                                                                  ~ > µ
Proposition 3 (Impact of Increasing Underconfidence) Suppose that µ   ~ > µ.
               
Then (~µ)  (~ µ ) and the inclusion is strict.

                                          L    H
    By Equation (7), for given (vA , vB     , vB ), the sign of  would be determined by the size
of µ
   ~ relative to µ in the case of underconfidence. For a µ         ~ mildly above µ, i.e., moderate
underconfidence, the optimum is more likely to coincide with that under overconfidence or
                                      3                     3
                                   L 2           H       H 2        L
rational belief, as the sign of [(vB ) (vA + vB    )]/[(vB ) (vA + vB )] - [µ(1 - µ  ~(1 - µ)] remains
                                                                                  ~)/µ
negative. With severe underconfidence in place, i.e., a large µ       ~ relative to µ, the sign would
turn positive, and the optimum under overconfidence or rational belief would be overturned.
    Figure 2 illustrates how a change in the degree of underconfidence affects the optimal
information disclosure policy, which confirms the observation from Proposition 3. Figure 2(a)
depicts the same scenario as in Figure 1(b), which shows the optimum under underconfidence
with (µ, µ~) = (0.5, 0.6). Recall that the area above the solid curve depicts the case of
      3
   L 2         H       H 3          L
[(vB ) (vA + vB  )]/[(vB ) 2 (vA + vB )] - [µ(1 - µ  ~)/µ~(1 - µ)] > 0, which causes the optimum
to divert from that with overconfidence and rational belief. In Figure 2(b), we demonstrate

                                                      14
the comparative statics when µ    ~ increases from from 0.6 to 0.7. The curve that defines
      3                  3
   L 2        H       H 2         L
[(vB ) (vA + vB )]/[(vB ) (vA + vB  )] - [µ(1 - µ
                                                ~)/µ~(1 - µ)] = 0 is shifted downward, with the
lower dashed curve representing the case of µ   ~ = 0.7. Because [µ(1 - µ       µ(1 - µ)] strictly
                                                                           ~)]/[~
                                  3                  3
                               L 2         H      H 2       L
decreases with µ~, the term [(vB ) (vA +vB )]/[(vB ) (vA +vB )]-[µ(1-µ     ~(1-µ)] is more likely
                                                                        ~)/µ
to be positive following such an increase in µ  ~, which enlarges the set of parameterizations
under which the optimal information disclosure policy differs from that when the incumbent
is overconfident or has rational belief.


3.2     Managerial Implications of Propositions 2 and 3
   Our results in Section 3.1 provide a playbook for firms' internal information management.
The optimal information disclosure policy sensitively depends on the specific environment,
which can be summarized as follows:

                                                                Moderate        Significant
                                          Overconfidence
                                                              Underconfidence Underconfidence
                                 H L
 Weak Incumbent (vA <           vB vB )    Concealment         Concealment      Disclosure
                                  H L
 Strong Incumbent (vA >         vB vB )     Disclosure          Disclosure     Concealment

    The table demonstrates that the optimal disclosure policy depends solely on employees'
                                                                               H L
ex ante relative competitiveness--i.e., the comparison between vA and vB        vB --when the
incumbent employee is overconfident or has rational beliefs. However, additional cautions
are required when the incumbent is underconfident: Mild underconfidence preserves the
optimum under the previous case, while significant underconfidence overturns that.
    Let us first consider the scenario of overconfidence. Imagine a rapidly-growing firm whose
employees excessively attribute the firm's success to their own talent and contribution, and
thus exhibit overconfidence. If the firm is confident in the quality of its search effort, i.e.,
          H L
vA < vB      vB , then Proposition 2 would recommend that the firm refrain from granting to
its employees the access to information about their peers, as the table shows. Conversely,
imagine a seasoned teaching star in a business school: The wealth of classroom experience
and industry knowledge accumulated over the years not only ensures reliable delivery in
teaching, but also breeds complacency. Proposition 2, as well as the table, clearly indicates
that allowing the faculty members to access peers' teaching feedback report may increase
the school's aggregate teaching quality.9
    Next, let us consider a case of underconfidence. Consider the example of a startup that
poaches a veteran executive from an industry leader to upgrade its managerial talent. The
early employees may grossly overestimate the external hire who possesses a stellar career
  9
    The practice of NUS business school exemplifies a transparent internal feedback and competitive per-
formance evaluation system. See Introduction and Footnote 3 for details.

                                                  15
record, which alludes to severe underconfidence; by Propositions 2 and 3, the firm should
embrace a transparent internal information management. The recommendation appears to
be counterintuitive at the first glance. In this scenario, an early employee suffers from both
deficiency in competency and a severe lack of confidence. When additional observation from
the evaluation allows him to infer more about relative competitiveness, his morale can either
be elevated or degraded, depending on the realization of the signal. The possible boost in
his confidence, however, ex ante outweighs the possible "bust." The logic will be further
unveiled when we delve in depth the underlying logic for our results in the next subsection.


3.3    Intuition for Propositions 2 and 3
    We now interpret the logic that underlies Propositions 2 and 3. We mainly focus on the
economic forces that drive Proposition 2; the intuition for Proposition 3 naturally ensues.
Recall by Proposition 2, the optimal information disclosure policy under rational belief co-
incides with that under overconfidence, but may not for the case of underconfidence. We
begin with the benchmark case of common prior and consider the role played by information
disclosure without the complications caused by employee's misperception. We then elabo-
rate on the role played by misperception. We label the effect from the former source an
information effect, while that from the latter a morale effect. The combination of the two
forces determines the optimum depicted in Proposition 2. Equation (7)--which explains
how the optimum with underconfidence may depart from that with overconfidence or ratio-
nal belief--is underpinned by the morale effect. A rationale about the morale effect would
then shed light on Equation (7), which we elaborate on at the end of this section.

Common Prior: Information Effect Upon observing the signal s  {H, L}, employee
A updates his belief about employee B 's type; the additional information leads his belief
to be revised either upward or downward, depending on the realization of the signal. The
Bayesian updating causes the equilibrium in the tournament to diverge across states.
    The dispersion across states triggered by the signal occurs regardless of the perceptional
bias. We thus focus on the case of common prior--i.e., µ = µ ~--to illustrate its nuance. Our
rationale is largely aligned with that in Zhang and Zhou (2016). Define

                     C
                  T ER (µ) := T E C (µ, µ) = (1 - µ) vB
                                                      L
                                                        +µ       H
                                                                vB K (µ),

the expected total effort for the case of concealment, where the subscript R indicates the
rational benchmark. When the signal is revealed, employee A's belief will be revised to
                                                                                       C
either µH or µL , and the expected total effort of the tournament ends up as either T ER (µH )


                                             16
       C
or T ER  (µL ); the corresponding ex ante expected total effort with common prior--which is
                          D
similarly defined as T ER       ~) := T E D (µ, µ)--must aggregate over the states.
                            (µ, µ
   Simple algebra would verify that
                   C
              d T ER         H        L                        L        H
                     =      vB -     vB K (µ) + (1 - µ)       vB +µ    vB K (µ),
                dµ

and
             d2 T E R
                    C
                              H       L                         L         H
                      =2     vB -    vB K (µ) + (1 - µ)        vB +µ     vB K (µ).
               dµ2
                                                              L H
Recall from Lemma 1 that (i) K (µ) is increasing if vA > vB    vB , and decreases if vA <
   L H                                         L H                           L H
  vB vB ; and (ii) K (µ) is convex if vA > vB    vB and concave if vA < vB    vB . Hence,
   C
T ER (µ) perfectly reserves the concavity/convexity of K (µ).
   Carrying out the algebra, we can obtain the ex ante expected total effort

            D                               C                                 C
         T ER (µ) = µq + (1 - µ)(1 - q ) T ER (µH ) + µ(1 - q ) + (1 - µ)q T ER (µL ).

The informative signal causes the posterior to disperse and deviate from the prior µ, with
µH > µ > µL . Because µq + (1 - µ)(1 - q ) µH + µ(1 - q ) + (1 - µ)q µL  µ by the
                                                D                                        C
martingale property of beliefs, the function T ER (µ) is simply a weighted average of T ER (µ)
over two different states. As a result, the comparison depends on the concavity/convexity of
                 C
the function T ER  (µ). We can immediately infer the following by Jensen's inequality.

            D             C                       C
Remark 2 T ER (µ) > (<)T ER (µ) if and only if T ER (µ) is strictly convex (concave).

   That is, full disclosure (concealment) outperforms concealment (full disclosure) if and
only if employee A is an ex ante favorite (underdog), which explains Proposition 2 for the
case of µ = µ
            ~.

Uncommon Priors: Morale Effect We now explore the case of uncommon priors, i.e.,
µ=µ  ~. We need to compare T E C (µ, µ    ~) as in (5) to T E D (µ, µ
                                                                    ~) as in (6). For the sake of
expositional convenience, we focus on the case of µ = 1/2, which implies that the ex ante
probabilities of receiving s = H and s = L do not depend on q , and are both equal to 1/2.
As a result, T E C (µ, µ
                       ~) and T E D (µ, µ
                                        ~) can be, respectively, simplified as

           1        1
  T EC       ,µ
              ~   =       L
                         vB + vB H
                                    K (~
                                       µ), and
           2        2
           1        1                                 1
  T ED       ,µ
              ~   =             L
                      (1 - q ) vB + q vB H
                                            K (~
                                               µH ) +   q          L
                                                                  vB + (1 - q )    H
                                                                                  vB K (~
                                                                                        µL ).
           2        2                                 2



                                               17
The comparison boils down to

                              1            1
                         T ED    ~ - T EC
                                ,µ           ,µ
                                              ~
                              2            2
                                                                                    
                                       L       H
                         1  (1 - q ) vB + q vB × K (~
                                                    µH ) - K (~
                                                              µ)
                                                                                    
                    =                                                                  .
                         2 - q          L
                                       vB + (1 - q )      H
                                                         vB × K (~
                                                                 µ) - K (~
                                                                         µL ) 

     Upon observing the signal s, employee A updates his belief µ          ~, which affects his effort
incentive in the tournament. His perception can be shifted either upward or downward.
In other words, employee A's morale can be either boosted--i.e., µ            ~ dropping to µ   ~L --or
be busted--i.e., µ ~ rising to µ ~H . The comparison highlighted above hinges on the change
of K (~ µH ) - K (~µ) vis-` a-vis K (~µ) - K (~µL ) . The magnitude of his belief adjustment in
response to a given signal depends on the nature of his initial misperception, i.e., whether
employee A exhibits overconfidence or underconfidence.
     Suppose that employee A is overconfident, so he underestimates his opponent, i.e., µ        ~ < µ.
His posterior tends to respond to a high signal more sensitively--i.e., with a significant jump
above from the initially underestimated µ    ~ to µ~H --compared to the response to a low signal,
i.e., a relatively mild decrease from µ  ~ to µ~L . This follows from the properties of Bayesian
updating: new signal impacts the posterior more if it is more unexpected under the prior.10
Thus in the case of overconfidence, the incumbent's perception about the competitor would
be substantially revised upward when a high signal refutes his initial underestimate of the
competitor, while the revision would be more incremental when a low signal simply reinforces
the existing bias. The opposite holds for the case of underconfidence with µ           ~ > µ, but the
intuition is analogous. The upward revision of the posterior in response to a high signal tends
to be muted compared to that in the presence of a low signal. A low signal would sharply
overturn the initial overestimates, causing a significant drop from µ     ~ to µ
                                                                               ~L ; in contrast, a high
signal only confirms the initial overestimate, so the rise from µ    ~ to µ~H tends to be moderate.
                                                                                 L H
     For expositional efficiency, let us focus on the case of vA >             vB vB , as the case of
           L H
vA < vB     vB is simply its mirror image. Recall that in this case K (·) is strictly increasing in
its argument by Lemma 1, and K (~     µH ) - K (~
                                                µ) and K (~ µ) - K (~
                                                                    µL ) are both positive. Further,
     D 1            C 1
T E 2, µ   ~ - T E 2, µ   ~ is positive when µ  ~ = µ = 1/2 by the information effect.
     With overconfidence, the argument laid out above implies that K (~         µH ) - K (~µ) tends to
outweigh K (~  µ) - K (~
                       µL ): A high signal overturns his initial misperception, while a low signal
                                                      1
marginally confirms his bias. This implies T E D ( 2     ~) - T E C ( 1
                                                        ,µ            2
                                                                        ,µ
                                                                         ~) tends to be positive, and
thus information disclosure outperforms concealment. Clearly, when employee A is an ex
  10
     This property of Bayesian updating is also exploited in Fang and Moscarini (2005) in a principal-agent
setting, where they refer to this effect the morale hazard.



                                                    18
ante favorite, the effect caused by asymmetric response in his morale triggered by a high or
a low signal coincides with the information effect laid out above. Therefore, the comparison
between disclosure and concealment under overconfidence remains the same as that under
rationality, as Figure 1(a) shows.
    Consider, alternatively, the case of underconfidence. Although both K (~          µH ) - K (~µ) and
K (~µ) - K (~                     µH ) - K (~
            µL ) are positive, K (~         µ) tends to be outsized by K (~     µ) - K (~  µL ): In this
case, a low signal tends to overturn the initial underconfidence, whereas a high signal only
                                                            1
mildly endorses the misperception. As a result, T E D ( 2      ~) - T E C ( 1
                                                              ,µ            2
                                                                              ,µ
                                                                               ~) is less likely to be
positive, and thus concealment is more likely to prevail. The morale effect runs into conflicts
with the aforementioned information effect and could outweigh the latter and overturn the
optimum, as Figure 1(b) depicts.
    Intuitively, the more biased the belief, the stronger this morale effect. This rationale thus
sheds light on the observation of Proposition 3: The result implies that a larger µ           ~ relative
to µ--which alludes to more significant underconfidence--may overturn the optimum under
overconfidence or rational belief. Recall, again, that the optimum depends on the sign of  as
                                                        L 3         H         H 3          L
defined in (7). As mentioned previously, the term [(vB   ) 2 (vA + vB )]/[(vB   ) 2 (vA + vB )] - [µ(1 -
µ
~)/µ~(1 - µ)] is always negative with overconfidence, which is in line with the case of rational
                                                                                             H L
belief. The optimum under rational belief depends entirely on the sign of vB                   vB - vA ,
                                                          3
                                                       L 2          H        H 3           L
which captures the information effect. The term [(vB ) (vA + vB )]/[(vB ) 2 (vA + vB )] - [µ(1 -
µ
~)/µ~(1 - µ)] encapsulates the morale effect, and it plays a nontrivial role when a larger µ           ~
relative to µ is present, in which case the significant underconfidence amplifies the morale
effect and more than offsets the information effect, as shown in Proposition 3.


4     Extensions and Discussion
    In this section, we consider two variations to the baseline model. We first apply a Bayesian
persuasion approach to endogenize the information structure of the internal evaluation. We
then explore a setting in which the manager is concerned about the expected winner's effort
instead of total effort. Finally, we elaborate on the managerial implications our results may
contribute.


4.1     Optimal Design of Internal Evaluation
    Thus far, we have assumed that the quality of the internal evaluation--i.e., q --is exoge-
nous. In practice, a firm has the discretion to set the scope and format of the evaluation in
workplace or choose the evaluator, which presumably affects the quality of the exercise. For
instance, a more experienced supervisor can assess his employee's ability more accurately.


                                                  19
    We now allow the firm to flexibly design and precommit to the information structure of
the evaluation exercise before the tournament begins, which is referred to as the Bayesian
persuasion approach in the literature, pioneered by Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011). An
information structure consists of a signal space S and a pair of likelihood distributions
       H         L
   (·|vB ),  (·|vB ) over S . We allow the manager to freely set the information structure of
the evaluation; she is thus endowed with full control over the amount of information to be
revealed through the evaluation and the form of signal to be disclosed to employees. Obvi-
ously, the evaluation exercise depicted in Section 3 involves a simple information structure
with a binary signal space S = {H, L} and a conditional likelihood distribution for each
                             H      L
underlying state--i.e., vB      or vB --parametrized by a variable q [see Equation (2)].
    In a seminal paper, Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011) show that searching for the optimal
disclosure policy is equivalent to solving the concave closure of a value function defined on
the set of all posteriors--i.e., µs with our notation--assuming that all agents share a common
prior (i.e., µ
             ~ = µ) over the underlying states. Recently, Alonso and Camara (2016) generalize
the tools in Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011) and allow for heterogeneous priors. According
to Alonso and Camara (2016), it is without loss of generality to consider a binary signal
space in our setting, i.e., S = {H, L}; the search for the optimal effort-maximizing signal
                   H         L
structure  (·|vB     ),  (·|vB ) can be reduced to the following optimization problem:

                                         ~H ) + (1 - )T E (µL , µ
                           max T E (µH , µ                      ~L )                        (8)
                         {,µL ,µH }


subject to
                                        µH + (1 - )µL = µ,                                  (9)
                                            tµs
                            µ
                            ~s =                       , for s  {H, L},                    (10)
                                      tµs + r(1 - µs )
                                          0  , µH , µL  1,                                 (11)

where r and t are defined as r := (1 - µ ~)/(1 - µ) and t := µ~/µ respectively and capture the
likelihood ratios of prior beliefs. As defined above, the variable µs in the objective function
(8) is the manager's posterior about employee B 's ability inferred upon observing signal
s  {H, L}; µ  ~s in expression (10), accordingly, refers to employee A's posterior.
    Given the disagreed priors (µ, µ ~) and manager's belief (µL , µH ), employee A's posterior
belief can be derived from (10). When the manager and the employees share a common prior
(i.e., µ
       ~ = µ), we have r = t = 1 and they share the same Bayesian update (i.e., µs = µ    ~s for
s  {H, L}). Condition (9) requires Eµ (µs ) = µ, which is identical to the one in Kamenica
and Gentzkow (2011) and is commonly referred to as the Bayes-plausibility (BP) constraint.
Condition (11) simply requires that the posterior belief µH and µL and the probability  be
bounded between zero and one. It is useful to point out a perfectly informative evaluation

                                                  20
corresponds to (µH , µL ) = (1, 0) with  = µ, and a completely uninformative evaluation
(i.e., no information disclosure) corresponds to (µH , µL ) = (µ, µ) with   [0, 1].
    Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011) and Alonso and Camara (2016) show that the indirect
value function from the above maximization problem boils down to the value of the concave
closure of T E µs , µ
                    ~s (µs ) at the firm's prior µ. Simple algebra yields the following:

                                          L             H                tµs
                    ~s (µs ) = (1 - µs ) vB
           T E µs , µ                       + µs       vB ×K                          .
                                                                   tµs + r(1 - µs )

Proposition 4 (Optimal Design of Evaluation with Heterogeneous Priors) Sup-
pose that the manager aims to maximize the expected total effort in the tournament and can
flexibly design the internal evaluation. Then the following statements hold:

   i. When  > 0, full disclosure with a perfectly revealing evaluation--i.e., (µH , µL ) =
      (1, 0)--is optimal;

  ii. When  < 0, a completely uninformative evaluation--i.e., (µH , µL ) = (µ, µ)--is opti-
      mal;

 iii. When  = 0, the expected total effort is the same across all evaluation designs.

    Proposition 4 states that the optimal evaluation is either perfectly revealing or com-
pletely uninformative. The firm has a polarized preference regarding its evaluation, either
maximizing the transparency in the tournament or simply minimize it: The firm can forgo
the evaluation when preferring no disclosure. The condition for perfect revelation or no eval-
uation coincides with that for fully disclosing or concealing a noisy signal of quality q  ( 1
                                                                                             2
                                                                                               , 1]
in Proposition 2.


4.2    Maximizing the Expected Winner's Effort
    Next, we consider an alternative context in which the manager is concerned about the
expected winner's effort instead of the total effort (e.g., Moldovanu and Sela, 2006; Serena,
2017; and Barbieri and Serena, 2019). This objective is sensible in many scenarios. For
instance, when a firm solicits a technical solution internally, only the quality of the chosen
entry accrues to its benefit. A CEO succession race motivates candidates to develop their
managerial skills when carrying out assigned tasks: Large public firms--e.g., GE and HP--
often have difficulty retaining losing candidates, which would lead them to focus only on the
acquisition of human capital from the winner (Fu and Wu, 2019b).




                                                21
   Denote the expected winner's effort fixing (µ, µ
                                                  ~) by W E (µ, µ
                                                                ~). Similar to Equation (1),
W E (µ, µ
        ~) can be derived as

                           (xA )2 + [xB (vB )]2                            xA · xB (vB )
        W E (µ, µ
                ~) = Eµ                           = Eµ xA + xB (vB ) - 2                 .
                             xA + xB (vB )                                 xA + xB (vB )

Because total effort T E (µ, µ
                             ~) is simply given by Eµ xA + xB (vB ) , the expression can alter-
natively be written as

                                                         xA · xB (vB )
                        W E (µ, µ            ~) - 2Eµ
                                ~) = T E (µ, µ                         .
                                                         xA + xB (vB )

Thus, maximizing W E (µ, µ ~) is equivalent to maximizing the total effort minus the term
      xA ·xB (vB )
2Eµ xA +xB (vB ) . The additional non-linear term adds complications. However, we show
below that the prediction under total effort maximization remains qualitatively robust to a
large extent.
    We first evaluate the desirability of persistent misperception, as in Section 2.3. The
following can be obtained.

Proposition 5 (Value of Persistent Misperception) Suppose that the firm is con-
cerned about the expected winner's effort in the tournament. Then the following statements
hold:

                     H L
   i. When vA < vB     vB , the firm strictly benefits from employee A's misperception--i.e.,
      W E (µ, µ
              ~) > W E (µ, µ)--if and only if employee A exhibits overconfidence--i.e., µ
                                                                                        ~ < µ;
                     H L
  ii. When vA > vB     vB , the firm strictly benefits from employee A's misperception--i.e.,
      W E (µ, µ
              ~) > W E (µ, µ)--if and only if employee A exhibits underconfidence--i.e., µ
                                                                                         ~>
      µ;
                     H L
 iii. When vA = vB     vB , employee A's prior does not affect the expected total effort, i.e.,
      W E (µ, µ
              ~) = W E (µ, µ).

    Proposition 5 states that the prediction of Proposition 1 is perfectly preserved in this
alternative setting. Further, we explore the question that leads to Proposition 2: Suppose
that an informative signal of quality q  ( 1     2
                                                   , 1] is available; would the manager disclose it
to the employees? We resort to numerical exercises and hereby report the observations.
Specifically, we compare the expected winner's effort between disclosure and concealment.
To proceed, we set (vA , µ, q ) = (1, 0.5, 0.8).
    Figure 3 illustrates our numerical results for different cases. Three observations deserve
to be highlighted. First, a comparison between Figure 3(a) and Figure 1(a) show that the

                                                  22
     1.75                                                    1.75




     1.25                                                    1.25




     0.75                                                    0.75




     0.25                                                    0.25
        0.25        0.75         1.25            1.75           0.25           0.75        1.25         1.75




               (a) Rationality (~
                                µ = 0.5)                               (b) Underconfidence (~
                                                                                            µ = 0.51)

     1.75                                                    1.75




     1.25                                                    1.25




     0.75                                                    0.75




     0.25                                                    0.25
        0.25        0.75         1.25            1.75           0.25           0.75        1.25         1.75




         (c) Slight Overconfidence (~
                                    µ = 0.498)               (d) Significant Overconfidence (~
                                                                                             µ = 0.49)

       Figure 3: Optimal Information Disclosure Policy: Maximizing Winner's Effort

manager is more likely to hide information under the rational benchmark when maximizing
the expected winner's effort vis-` a-vis total effort. Second, as employee A becomes more
overconfident, the manager tends to disclose information more often, which can be seen by
comparing Figure 3(c) to Figure 3(d), i.e., µ~ dropping from 0.498 to 0.49: In the latter case,
the resultant pattern for the optimum coincides with that in the case of maximizing total
effort as is depicted in Figure 1(a). Third, when employee A exhibits underconfidence, the
pattern for the optimum is similar to that in the case of total effort, which can be seen
by comparing Figure 3(b) to Figure 1(b). In summary, the result of Section 3 qualitatively
remain in place, despite the fact that the objective function of expected winner's effort causes
nonlinearity.


                                                        23
5    Concluding Remarks
    In this paper, we investigate the impact of perceptional bias--i.e., overconfidence or
underconfidence--in a promotion tournament and the optimal information disclosure in a
firm. Rich implications can be inferred from our results.
    First, we demonstrate that a persistent misperception may either benefit or harm the
firm's performance. As a result, debiasing its employees can be potentially counterproductive
to a firm. Second, we fully characterize the conditions under which disclosing an informative
signal of an employee's ability, or concealing it, can prevail.
    The intricate role played by the perceptional bias sheds light on the extensive discussion
of confidence or morale management and workplace culture building, which casts doubt
into any universal recipe given the complexity. The analysis also speaks to the debate
about organizational transparency. The information fed to employees varies their belief and
perception, which in turn affect their incentives subtly and indeterminately.
    In this paper, we primarily focus on the maximization of aggregate effort. A firm can
be subject to other concerns and could calibrate its information management practice to
achieve other goals. It would be interesting to explore the impact of perceptional bias and
the optimal information management policy that addresses other objective functions--e.g.,
selection efficiency (Ryvkin and Ortmann, 2008; Brown and Minor, 2014)--which should be
attempted in future research.


References
Alonso, Ricardo and Odilon Camara, "Bayesian persuasion with heterogeneous priors," Jour-
  nal of Economic Theory, 2016, 165, 672­706.

Barbieri, Stefano and Marco Serena, "Winners' efforts in team contests," Working Paper,
  2019.

Belzil, Christian and Michael Bognanno, "Promotions, demotions, halo effects, and the earn-
  ings dynamics of American executives," Journal of Labor Economics, 2008, 26 (2), 287­
  310.

B´
 enabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, "Self-confidence and personal motivation," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (3), 871­915.

Boosey, Luke, Philip Brookins, and Dmitry Ryvkin, "Information disclosure in contests with
  endogenous entry: An experiment," Management Science, 2020, forthcoming.



                                             24
Brown, Jennifer, "Quitters never win: The (adverse) incentive effects of competing with
  superstars," Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (5), 982­1013.

  and Dylan B. Minor, "Selecting the best? Spillover and shadows in elimination tourna-
  ments," Management Science, 2014, 60 (12), 3087­3102.

Che, Yeon-Koo and Ian L. Gale, "Caps on political lobbying," American Economic Review,
 1998, 88 (3), 643­651.

Chen, Hua and Noah Lim, "Should managers use team-based contests?," Management Sci-
 ence, 2013, 59 (12), 2823­2836.

Chen, Si and Hannah Schildberg-H¨ orisch, "Looking at the bright side: The motivational
 value of confidence," European Economic Review, 2019, 120, 103302.

Chowdhury, Subhasish M., Patricia Esteve-Gonz´    alez, and Anwesha Mukherjee, "Heterogene-
 ity, leveling the playing field, and affirmative action in contests," Working Paper, 2019.

Compte, Olivier and Andrew Postlewaite, "Confidence-enhanced performance," American
  Economic Review, 2004, 94 (5), 1536­1557.

Connelly, Brian L., Laszlo Tihanyi, T. Russell Crook, and K. Ashley Gangloff, "Tournament
  theory: Thirty years of contests and competitions," Journal of Management, 2014, 40 (1),
  16­47.

Cooper, Arnold C., Carolyn Y. Woo, and William C. Dunkelberg, "Entrepreneurs' perceived
  chances for success," Journal of Business Venturing, 1988, 3 (2), 97­108.

Crutzen, Beno^it S.Y., Otto H. Swank, and Bauke Visser, "Confidence management: On
  interpersonal comparisons in teams," Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 2013,
  22 (4), 744­767.

Denter, Philipp, John Morgan, and Dana Sisak, "Showing off or laying low? The economics
  of psych-outs," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2020, forthcoming.

DeVaro, Jed, "Strategic promotion tournaments and worker performance," Strategic Man-
  agement Journal, 2006, 27 (8), 721­740.

Dixit, Avinash, "Strategic behavior in contests," American Economic Review, 1987, 77 (5),
  891­898.

Drugov, Mikhail and Dmitry Ryvkin, "Biased contests for symmetric players," Games and
  Economic Behavior, 2017, 103, 116­144.

                                            25
Epstein, Gil S., Yosef Mealem, and Shmuel Nitzan, "Political culture and discrimination in
  contests," Journal of Public Economics, 2011, 95 (1), 88­93.

Eriksson, Tor, "Executive compensation and tournament theory: Empirical tests on Danish
  data," Journal of Labor Economics, 1999, 17 (2), 262­280.

Fang, Hanming, "Confidence management and interpersonal strategic interactions," Mimeo,
  2001.

   and Giuseppe Moscarini, "Morale hazard," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2005, 52 (4),
  749­777.

Franke, J¨
         org, Christian Kanzow, Wolfgang Leininger, and Alexandra Schwartz, "Effort maxi-
  mization in asymmetric contest games with heterogeneous contestants," Economic Theory,
  2013, 52 (2), 589­630.

  , , , and , "Lottery versus all-pay auction contests: A revenue dominance theorem,"
  Games and Economic Behavior, 2014, 83, 116­126.

Fu, Qiang and Zenan Wu, "Contests: Theory and topics," Oxford Research Encyclopedia of
  Economics and Finance, 2019a.

   and    , "Disclosure and favoritism in hierarchical competitions," Working Paper, 2019b.

   and , "On the optimal design of biased contests," Theoretical Economics, 2020, forth-
  coming.

  , Oliver G¨
            urtler, and Johannes M¨
                                  unster, "Communication and commitment in contests,"
  Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2013, 95, 1­19.

  , Qian Jiao, and Jingfeng Lu, "Disclosure policy in a multi-prize all-pay auction with
  stochastic abilities," Economics Letters, 2014, 125 (3), 376­380.

Gavious, Arieh, Benny Moldovanu, and Aner Sela, "Bid costs and endogenous bid caps,"
 RAND Journal of Economics, 2002, 33 (4), 709­722.

Gervais, Simon and Itay Goldstein, "The positive effects of biased self-perceptions in firms,"
 Review of Finance, 2007, 11 (3), 453­496.

Henderson, Andrew D. and James W. Fredrickson, "Top management team coordination
  needs and the CEO pay gap: A competitive test of economic and behavioral views,"
  Academy of Management Journal, 2001, 44 (1), 96­117.



                                             26
Hurley, Terrance M. and Jason F. Shogren, "Effort levels in a Cournot Nash contest with
 asymmetric information," Journal of Public Economics, 1998, 69 (2), 195­210.

Kamenica, Emir and Matthew Gentzkow, "Bayesian persuasion," American Economic Re-
 view, 2011, 101 (6), 2590­2615.

Kirkegaard, Ren´
               e, "Favoritism in asymmetric contests: Head starts and handicaps," Games
  and Economic Behavior, 2012, 76 (1), 226­248.

Konrad, Kai A., "Investment in the absence of property rights; the role of incumbency
 advantages," European Economic Review, 2002, 46 (8), 1521­1537.

Kovenock, Dan, Florian Morath, and Johannes M¨
                                             unster, "Information sharing in contests,"
 Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 2015, 24 (3), 570­596.

Kyle, Albert S. and F. Albert Wang, "Speculation duopoly with agreement to disagree: Can
 overconfidence survive the market test?," Journal of Finance, 1997, 52 (5), 2073­2090.

Larwood, Laurie and William Whittaker, "Managerial myopia: Self-serving biases in orga-
  nizational planning," Journal of Applied Psychology, 1977, 62 (2), 194­198.

Lazear, Edward P., "Compensation and incentives in the workplace," Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 2018, 32 (3), 195­214.

   and Sherwin Rosen, "Rank-order tournaments as optimum labor contracts," Journal of
  Political Economy, 1981, 89 (5), 841­864.

Lu, Jingfeng, Hongkun Ma, and Zhe Wang, "Ranking disclosure policies in all-pay auctions,"
  Economic Inquiry, 2018, 56 (3), 1464­1485.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Geoffrey Tate, "CEO overconfidence and corporate investment,"
 Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (6), 2661­2700.

  and , "Behavioral CEOs: The role of managerial overconfidence," Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 2015, 29 (4), 37­60.

Mealem, Yosef and Shmuel Nitzan, "Discrimination in contests: A survey," Review of Eco-
 nomic Design, 2016, 20 (2), 145­172.

Moldovanu, Benny and Aner Sela, "Contest architecture," Journal of Economic Theory,
 2006, 126 (1), 70­96.

  , , and Xianwen Shi, "Contests for status," Journal of Political Economy, 2007, 115 (2),
  338­363.

                                           27
Moore, Don A. and Daylian M. Cain, "Overconfidence and underconfidence: When and why
 people underestimate (and overestimate) the competition," Organizational Behavior and
 Human Decision Processes, 2007, 103 (2), 197­213.

   and Paul J. Healy, "The trouble with overconfidence," Psychological Review, 2008, 115
  (2), 502­517.

Muthukrishna, Michael, Joseph Henrich, Wataru Toyokawa, Takeshi Hamamura, Tatsuya
 Kameda, and Steven J. Heine, "Overconfidence is universal? Elicitation of Genuine Over-
 confidence (EGO) procedure reveals systematic differences across domain, task knowledge,
 and incentives in four populations," PLOS ONE, 2018, 13 (8), 1­30.

Nafziger, Julia and Heiner Schumacher, "Information management and incentives," Journal
  of Economics & Management Strategy, 2013, 22 (1), 140­163.

Netessine, Serguei and Valery Yakubovich, "The Darwinian workplace," Harvard Business
  Review, 2012, 90 (5), 25.

Olszewski, Wojciech and Ron Siegel, "Bid caps in large contests," Games and Economic
  Behavior, 2019, 115, 101­112.

Rosen, Sherwin, "Prizes and incentives in elimination tournaments," American Economic
  Review, 1986, 76 (4), 701­715.

Ryvkin, Dmitry and Andreas Ortmann, "The predictive power of three prominent tourna-
  ment formats," Management Science, 2008, 54 (3), 492­504.

Serena, Marco, "Quality contests," European Journal of Political Economy, 2017, 46, 15­25.

  , "Harnessing beliefs to optimally disclose contestants' types," Working Paper, 2018.

Siegel, Ron, "All-pay contests," Econometrica, 2009, 77 (1), 71­92.

Taylor, Curtis R. and Huseyin Yildirim, "Subjective performance and the value of blind
  evaluation," Review of Economic Studies, 2011, 78 (2), 762­794.

W¨
 arneryd, Karl, "Information in conflicts," Journal of Economic Theory, 2003, 110 (1),
 121­136.

Wu, Zenan and Jie Zheng, "Information sharing in private value lottery contest," Economics
 Letters, 2017, 157, 36­40.

Zhang, Jun and Junjie Zhou, "Information disclosure in contests: A Bayesian persuasion
  approach," Economic Journal, 2016, 126 (597), 2197­2217.

                                            28
Appendix: Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1

Proof. Recall that
                                                                L        H
                                     ~) = (1 - µ)
                             T E (µ, µ                         vB +µ    vB K (~
                                                                              µ).

The result immediately follows from the monotonicity of K (·), which is characterized by
Lemma 1.

Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. For notational ease, we include q as an argument of T E D (µ, µ
                                                                     ~),

        T E D (µ, µ
                  ~; q ) = µq + (1 - µ)(1 - q ) × (1 - µH )                 L
                                                                           vB + µH     H
                                                                                      vB K (~
                                                                                            µH )

                                                                L                           H
                            + µ(1 - q ) + (1 - µ)q × (1 - µL ) vB + µL                     vB K (~
                                                                                                 µL ).

                                                           1                              1
Note that concealment is equivalent to disclosure with q = 2 : T E C (µ, µ
                                                                         ~) = T E D µ, µ
                                                                                       ~; 2 .
   Define G(q ) as

                                                                        L              H
        G(q ) : = µq + (1 - µ)(1 - q ) × (1 - µH (q ))                 vB + µH (q )   vB K (~
                                                                                            µH (q )).

                          µq                          µ
                                                      ~q
Recall that µH = µq+(1-    µ)(1-q )
                                    and µ
                                        ~H = µ  ~q +(1-µ~)(1-q )
                                                                 . In defining G(·), we treat µH and µ
                                                                                                     ~H
as functions of q .
    It is easy to verify that T E D (µ, µ~; q ) = G(q ) + G(1 - q ). Then,

       T E D (µ, µ
                 ~; q )                             2 T E D (µ, µ
                                                                ~; q )
                        = G (q ) - G (1 - q ), and           2
                                                                       = G (q ) + G (1 - q ).
            q                                             q

Simple algebra yields that

                                    2                           H                      L
G (q ) = K (~
            µH )~            µH )[~
                µH (q ) + K (~    µH  × µq                     vB + (1 - µ)(1 - q )   vB

                                      H                     L
         + 2K (~
               µH )~
                   µH (q ) µ         vB - (1 - µ)          vB

                 H      1        1
              2 vB      L
                       vB
                            +   vA
                                     ~(1 - µ)
                                     µ                                           L
                                                                                vB        H
                                                                                   (vA + vB ) µ(1 - µ~)
       = - (1-µ
              ~)(1-q )+~
                       µq       (1-µ
                                   ~)(1-q )
                                                       ×µ            µH ) ×
                                                        ~H (q ) × K (~           H        L
                                                                                             -          .
                            +        L        +   µ
                                                  ~q
                                                   H
                                                                                vB (vA + vB ) µ~(1 - µ)
                  vA                vB            vB       >0
                             >0


                                                          29
                                             (1-µ
                                                ~)~
                                                  µ
It can be verified that µ
                        ~H (q ) =                       2   > 0. Moreover, it follows from Lemma 1 that
                                        [(1-µ        µq ]
                                            ~)(1-q )+~
                                              H L
K (~
   µH )     0 is equivalent to vA -          vB vB      0. Therefore, G (q )     0 is equivalent to

                                                       L        H
                                     H L              vB (vA + vB ) µ(1 - µ~)
                     :=             vB vB - vA ×       H        L
                                                                   -                  0.
                                                      vB (vA + vB ) µ~(1 - µ)

Similarly, we can show that G (1 - q ) 0 is equivalent to                     0. Therefore, we can obtain
that
                              2 T E D (µ, µ
                                          ~; q )
                                                 0   0.
                                    q 2
                              1
                  T E D (µ,µ
                           ~; 2 )
Next, note that        q
                                  = G (1
                                       2
                                         ) - G (1  2
                                                     ) = 0. Consequently, when  > 0, T E D (µ, µ   ~; q )
                                                  D                  D       1          C
is strictly increasing in q and hence T E (µ, µ          ~; q ) > T E µ, µ~; 2 = T E (µ, µ   ~) for all
1                                  D                                                       D
2
  < q  1. When  < 0, T E (µ, µ          ~; q ) is strictly decreasing in q and hence T E (µ, µ  ~; q ) <
    D        1        C                   1                                D
T E µ, µ  ~; 2 = T E (µ, µ    ~) for all 2 < q  1. When  = 0, T E (µ, µ         ~; q ) is constant in q
and thus the firm is indifferent between disclosure and concealment.


Proof of Proposition 3

Proof. In the case of underconfidence, for every given µ  (0, 1), the term [µ(1-µ       µ(1-µ)]
                                                                                   ~)]/[~
                        ~, with [µ(1 - µ
strictly decreases with µ                   µ(1 - µ)] µ
                                       ~)]/[~         ~=µ
                                                          = 1 and [µ(1 - µ    µ(1 - µ)] µ
                                                                         ~)]/[~         ~=1
                                                                                            = 0.
                                3                       3
                       L 2        H       H 2        L                                 L    H
Note that the term (vB   ) (vA + vB ) / (vB ) (vA + vB ) < 1. Therefore, fixing (vA , vB , vB ),
                               
                             ~  (µ, 1) such that
there exists a unique cutoff µ
                            3
                      L 2       H
                    (vB ) vA + vB               µ (1 - µ
                                                       ~)
                                            -                  0, if and only if µ
                                                                                 ~   ~ .
                                                                                     µ                (12)
                      H 3               L       ~ (1 - µ)
                                                µ
                    (vB )2      vA +   vB

Proposition 3 follows instantly from (12) and Proposition 2.


Proof of Proposition 4

Proof. Recall that
                                                            tµs
                                         µ
                                         ~s (µs ) =                    .
                                                      tµs + r(1 - µs )
It follows immediately that

                                    rt                                 -2(t - r)rt
               µ
               ~s (µs ) =                     2
                                                > 0, and µ
                                                         ~s (µs ) =                     .
                            [tµs + r(1 - µs )]                      [tµs + r(1 - µs )]3



                                                        30
Denote T E (µs , µ
                 ~s (µs )) by T E s (µs ). The second order derivative of T E s (µs ) with respect to
µs is

                                                  2                                     L                   H
   T E s (µs ) = K      µ
                        ~s (µs )       µ
                                       ~s (µs )       +K µ        ~s (µs ) × (1 - µs ) vB
                                                         ~s (µs ) µ                       + µs             vB

                                                         H          L
                + 2K µ
                     ~s (µs ) µ
                              ~s (µs )                  vB -       vB

                              H           1        1
                    µs (µs ) vB
                   2~                     L
                                         vB
                                              +   vA
                                                         t                        L
                                                                                 vB        H
                                                                                    (vA + vB ) µ(1 - µ~)
              = - tµs +r(1-µs )        r(1-µs )
                                                                ~s (µs ) ×
                                                             ×K µ                 H        L
                                                                                              -          .
                                   +       L      +    tµs
                                                        H
                                                                                 vB (vA + vB ) µ~(1 - µ)
                        vA                vB           vB

                                   >0
                                                                                                                (13)

                                                                                                  H L
It follows from Lemma 1 that K µ
                               ~s (µs )                         0 is equivalent to vA            vB vB . Therefore,
T E s (µs )   0 is equivalent to

                                                              L        H
                                   H L                       vB (vA + vB ) µ(1 - µ~)
                     =            vB vB - vA ×                H        L
                                                                          -                 0.
                                                             vB (vA + vB ) µ~(1 - µ)

When  > 0, T Es (µs ) is strictly convex in µs , indicating the optimality of perfectly revealing
signals. When  < 0, T Es (µs ) is strictly concave in µs , indicating the optimality of com-
pletely uninformative signals. When  = 0, T Es (µs ) is linear in µs , and thus all information
disclosure policies lead to the same expected total effort.


Proof of Proposition 5

Proof. First we simplify W E (µ, µ
                                 ~).

                                                                            xA · xB (vB )
                                 ~) = Eµ xA + xB (vB ) - 2
                         W E (µ, µ
                                                                            xA + xB (vB )
                                                                            
                                                                  xA         v B xA - xA
                                          = Eµ         v B xA - 2           
                                                                               vB xA

                                          = Eµ F vB , K (~
                                                         µ)             ,

                       2K 3       
where F (vB , K ) :=   
                        vB
                              +      vB K - 2K 2 . Note that

                       F (vB , K )   6K 2         
                                   =  + vB - 4K  2 6 - 4 K > 0.
                         K            vB


                                                              31
                   ~) is increasing in K . From Lemma 1, K (·) is strictly decreasing in µ
Therefore, W E (µ, µ                                                                      ~ if
   H L
  vB vB > vA and K (~ µ) is strictly increasing in µ
                                                   ~ otherwise. This completes the proof.




                                             32
