                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           TRUST AND INSURANCE CONTRACTS

                                        Nicola Gennaioli
                                         Rafael La Porta
                                   Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
                                         Andrei Shleifer

                                       Working Paper 27189
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27189


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nicola Gennaioli, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trust and Insurance Contracts
Nicola Gennaioli, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 27189
May 2020
JEL No. D23,G22,L14,Z13

                                          ABSTRACT

We assemble and analyze a new data set of homeowner insurance claims from 28 independently
operated country subsidiaries of a multinational insurance company. A fundamental feature of
the data is that such claims are often disputed, and lead to rejections or lower payments. We
propose a new model of insurance, in which consumers can make invalid claims and firms can
deny valid claims. In this environment, trust and honesty are critical factors that shape insurance
contracts and the payment of claims, especially when the disputed amounts are too small for
courts. We characterize equilibrium insurance contracts, and show how they depend on the
quality of the legal system and the level of trust. We then investigate the incidence of claims,
disputes and rejections of claims, and payment of claims in our data, as well as the cost and
pricing of insurance. The evidence is consistent with the centrality of trust for insurance markets,
as predicted by the model.

Nicola Gennaioli                                 Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Department of Finance                            SKEMA Business School
Università Bocconi                               60 Rue Dostoievski
Via Roentgen 1                                   Sophia Antipolis, 06902
20136 Milan, Italy                               France
nicola.gennaioli@unibocconi.it                   and NBER
                                                 florencio.lopezdesilanes@skema.edu
Rafael La Porta
Brown University                                 Andrei Shleifer
70 Waterman Street                               Department of Economics
Room 101                                         Harvard University
Providence, RI 02912                             Littauer Center M-9
and NBER                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
 rafael.laporta@brown.edu                        and NBER
                                                 ashleifer@harvard.edu
1.Introduction

        We examine the effects of culture and the legal environment on insurance by by analyzing

homeowner insurance contracts in 28 countries. In cooperation with a multinational insurance

company, we collected data on homeowners insurance in the countries where the company owns

subsidiaries. Homewoner insurance is a simple transaction, in which a home and its content are

insured against fire, other damage (most prominently water damage), and theft. Most countries

have it. Because this market is relatively unregulated, we can analyze some basic contracting

problems affecting risk sharing arrangements.

        We discover that disputes are a fundamental feature of homeowner insurance in most

countries. The client can falsely claim theft, or represent that damages that are entirely his fault --

and hence are not covered-- are instead an accident, or provide a fraudulent assessment of harm.

The insurance company, in turn, can make unreasonable requests for documentation of losses (e.g.,

require original receipts for payment for stolen goods), or argue that claims are not covered (e.g.,

because a leak is the builder's fault). In these highly contentious environments, transaction costs

take up about 40% of insurance revenues, on average

        Critically, because many claims are small, few disputes go to court, suggesting that the legal

system may not be first order important for these transactions. Arrow (1974) famously argued that

even simple economic transactions rely on trust. Societies with a norm of honest behavior should

find contracting easier. Is this true? What is the role of trust and that the law in a simple transaction

like homeowners insurance? And, if trust matters, precisely how how does it affect contracting?

        We address these questions by measuring three sets of homeowner insurance outcomes.

The first set focuses directly on disputes in the claims process. It includes data on how many claims

are made, the share of rejected or disputed claims, and the share of claimed value of damages that

is paid. The second set of outcomes measures the company's cost structure: the ratio of general

expenses and the ratio of paid losses to total premiums in the homeownership segment. The third

set looks at two proxies of economic efficiency: the insurance premiums as a share of value covered


                                                   2
and the homeowners insurance profit margin. Variation in the above outcomes allows us to explore

how the same insurance contract works across countries.

        A first look at the data reveals two striking facts. First, the share of rejected claims

worldwide is on average about 20%, but rises to close to 35% in low trust countries such as Croatia,

Slovakia and Turkey. Second, eventual compensation averages only 61% of initial claims worldwide,

but falls below 40% in lower trust countries such as Slovenia and Poland. Put differently, collection

of insurance claims is a highly contentious process. To the extent that it varies across countries, it

appears to improve with generalized trust in line with Arrow's hypothesis.

        To move forward, we study the role of trust in contracting in a new model with a standard

risk-sharing structure. The innovation is that both the insurance company and the insuree can

engage in opportunistic behavior, and companies must bear administrative costs to deal with

contentious claims. The incentive of parties to behave opportunistically may depend on the law, but

it also crucially depends on shared norms of trust/honesty. In particular, in countries where many

people are trustworthy, it is psychologically costlier for individuals and firms to act opportunistically.

        We characterize attributes of the settlement process, the cost structure, the pricing of

claims, and profits, all as a function of trust. There are three broad predictions of the model. First, by

reducing opportunism on both sides, higher trust reduces disputes over claims, as reflected in the

number of claims opened, the share of rejected claims, the share of claimed value that is not paid,

and the overall claim payments by the insurance company. The model also predicts that trust should

especially improve enforcement of claims in which losses are harder to verify objectively.

        Second, higher trust reduces the costs of insurance companies. It reduces transaction costs,

measured by general expenses as a share of total premiums, as companies spend fewer resources to

administer claims and to find new and reliable clients. It also reduces the amount of paid losses as a

share of total premiums by reducing the number of false claims that companies must pay.

        Third, higher trust yields to greater economic efficiency via two effects. First, it reduces the

premia relative to the amount covered, thereby creating a welfare improvement for customers


                                                    3
(given that in higher trust countries claims are more likely to be repaid). Second, it increases the

insurer's profit, thereby improving the welfare of firms. Intuitively, when honesty is high: i)

transaction costs are low, which reduce costs for consumers, and ii) indemnities are paid, which

increases consumers' demand for insurance contracts and hence the profit of the firm.

        We test the predictions of the model using both business unit and claim level data for the 28

countries in our sample. The data confirm that higher trust is associated with fewer disputes over

claims. In addition, claim level data allows us to distinguish different types of claims. We show that,

in line with the prediction of our model, trust reduces disputes over theft claims, which are arguably

harder to verify. Second, and again in line with the predictions of the model, we show that higher

trust is associated with lower costs for firms, in terms of both general expenses and indemnities

paid. Third, higher trust is correlated with lower prices and higher profits, consistent with our

model's predictions regarding economic efficiency. We find that per capita income and the

efficiency of the legal system also matter for some contracting outcomes, but not as reliably as trust.

        Our results convey two messages. First, social norms of honesty play an important role in

facilitating contracting when external verification is impossible or too expensive. Second, trust does

not only affect the extent to which people engage in trade, but also the entire structure of

transactions. It reduces disptues, changes the cost structure, and consequently shapes equilibrium

premia and profits. Low trust distorts each single step of the contracting process, creating

transaction costs and reducing gains from trade.

        Our paper falls in the intersection of three research areas. The first is the study of insurance

contracts when fraud is a possibility (Crocker and Morgan 1998, Crocker and Tennyson 2002,

Dionne, Giuliano, and Picard 2009, Asmat and Tennyson 2014, and Burgeon and Picard 2014). This

literature recognizes the centrality of deception and verifiability in shaping insurance contracts, but

does not take a comparative perspective, nor stress that firms can also act opportunistically. The

second area compares financial contracts across different countries as a function of laws and

institutions (e.g., La Porta et al 1998, 2008). The third, and perhaps most relevant, literature focuses


                                                   4
on the role of cultural factors in general, and trust in particular, in shaping financial transactions and

economic outcomes (e.g., LaPorta et al 1997, Guiso, Sapienza, Zingales 2006, 2008, 2013, Aghion et

al 2010). These various streams of analysis come together for understanding homeowners insurance.

Relative to previous work on trust, we show how in insurance low trust hinders economic efficiency

by distorting the entire structure of enforcement, costs, and prices.




2. Insurance Data and Basic Facts.

        We examine how a homeowner's insurance contract varies across 28 countries during 2010-

2013. The source of the data is a large multinational insurance company which operates in all of

these countries. Critically, this company delegates to country offices decisions regarding product

pricing and claims policies, including the handling of disputes. Our setting thus allows us to examine

how an insurance company adapts its pricing and claims policies to local conditions for the same

home insurance product and, perhaps uniquely, for the same parent company.

        Our sample includes all 28 countries where the company has a large home insurance

business. The top management allowed us to gather data, and provided logistical and management

support. All countries generally supplied all the requested data. The sample includes countries on all

continents and with a range of income levels, but most countries are located in Western and Eastern

Europe (see Appendix A for a full sample). The United States is not in our sample.

        We study a relatively simple and common transaction: homeowners' insurance. This type of

insurance is a substantial fraction of the gross premiums of the insurance industry in most countries

(property insurance is about 25% of the non-life segment and non-life is half of total premiums). It is

also a relatively standard contract and cross-country differences in regulation play a minor role. 1




1
  Car insurance is also a large part of the non-life insurance business. However, the regulation of car insurance
is fairly complex and varies greatly across countries.


                                                       5
        In most countries, the standard homeowners' insurance contract covers protection of the

home and belongings against weather, fire, theft, and liability. 2 We gather data both on the

contracts themselves and (accounting data) on the homeowners' insurance business segment. We

obtained all the documents that the insured receives from the company (forms, summary of policy,

full contracts, details of policy, details on how to make claims, claim forms, etc.). We also obtained

all the regulations pertaining to these contracts, including laws and national rules. In addition, we

asked each country office to send us the complete file of the first 20 homeowner's insurance

contracts signed in 2013. 3

        In addition, we collected data on the homeowners' insurance unit of our company in each of

the 28 countries. We have data for the period 2010-2012 on: (1) the nature and the number of

claims that were initiated, rejected, disputed, paid, and settled; (2) time to first response and time to

settle; (3) customer acquisition costs and general expenses; and (4) pricing, premiums and taxes.

        We also gathered contract level data on actual home insurance claims in each country. We

asked each country office for a copy of the complete file of the first 20 homeowner's insurance

claims settled in 2013. We were concerned, and made sure, that these claims were effecticely

randomly selected (i.e., not picked by the company). For each claim, we obtained: (1) the insurance

contract of the claimant; (2) all supporting documentation regarding the claim; (3) the evaluation

made by the assessors appointed by the claimant and the insurance company; (4) the analysis of the

claim made internally by the company; (5) all written communications about the claim; (6) the

calendar of events of the claim.; and (7) the resolution of the claim and its justification.

        Appendix A lists the various categories of data that we requested and tracks the response by

each country office. All 28 countries generally supplied all the required information. The request for

20 files of closed claims is the only area with incomplete compliance. We ended up collecting 550



2
  In Japan the standard contract also insures earthquake damage. In other countries, earthquake insurance is
priced separately in the contract and we excluded it when computing the price of insurance.
3
  If chronological information was unavailable, we requested the first 20 contracts in alphabetical order.


                                                     6
out of 560 files of closed home insurance claims (India supplied 18 claims and Thailand 12).

Appendix B shows the form that we used to request the business-segment information.

        We begin by presenting summary statistics on the homeowners' insurance business segment

and then present data on filed claims. We then look at the basic statistics in our data to understand

the main features of the claims process. Finally, we suggest that trust may play an important role in

explaining the patterns in the data.



2.1. Homeowners insurance business unit data

        Table 1 illustrates the frictions faced by the insurance company in the homeowners'

insurance business segment. For each country and each variable, we report the time-series average

over up to 3 years of data. 4 The table also reports world means over the 28 countries in our sample

at the bottom of each column. Appendix C defines all the variables in detail.

        The first three columns of Table 1 provide some basic information on the settlement of

claims, which is key to understand contracting and its frictions. To begin, according to column (1),

worldwide 17% of the outstanding homeowners insurance policies make a claim in an average year.

It is rather remarkable that as many as a third of the insurance policies have opened claims in Italy,

Portugal, and Slovenia. The frequency of claims is astounding, and explains in part how the expense

ratio for this type of insurance is so high. Column (2) shows that this insurance company ultimately

rejects in full 20% of the claims, including over a third in Croatia, Slovenia and Turkey. The reasons

for rejection vary from limited coverage to lack of evidence (for instance, with theft claims, absence

of proof of purchase). Finally, column (3) shows the length of the process of verifying claims and

reaching a settlement. The average time until claim resolution is 121 days. The entire process takes

less than 2 months in China, Romania, and Spain and over 6 months in France, Greece, Mexico,

Portugal and Turkey ­ on average.



4
 Four countries submitted data for less than three years (i.e., China, Ecuador, Japan, and Thailand). For all
other countries, we have three years of data for each variable. We compute means using all non-missing data.

                                                     7
        The costs of providing homeowners' insurance relative to total gross premiums include two

major components: the expense ratio (which includes acquisition costs) and the loss ratio. Column

(4) shows the expense ratio defined as the sum of acquisition costs and general costs, which are

associated with the cost of writing and servicing contracts, divided by total gross written premiums

in the year. The average expense ratio for the countries in our sample is 41%. The expense ratio is

always higher than 25% and it is close to 50% in Argentina, Bulgaria, Colombia, Croatia, Portugal,

Slovakia and Turkey. The high level of transaction costs in selling and administering insurance

contracts is a critical feature of this industry worldwide.

        Paying claims for the losses suffered by policyholders is a second major cost of doing

business. Column (5) of Table 1 reports the loss ratio computed as the value of claims settled over

total gross premiums in the year. The average loss ratio in our sample is 49%, but there is

substantial variation across countries. The loss ratio is surprisingly low in some countries; it is under

25% in China, Hong Kong, The Netherlands, Switzerland, and Thailand. In contrast, the loss ratio

exceeds 50% in Italy, Spain, Slovenia and Turkey but never reaches 60%.

        Column (6) reports the profit margin. We measure profitability using statutory tax rates from

KPMG for 2010-2012 and define profits as the difference between total gross written premiums and

costs. We calculate costs as the Combined Loss ratio, which is the sum of the Expense ratio and the

Loss ratio, both measured as a proportion of total gross written premiums. These two ratios include

the indirect and direct claim settling expenses respectively. On average, profit margins are 7 percent.

Profit margins range from close to -15 percent in Portugal and Slovenia, to over 30 percent in China,

The Netherlands, Thailand, Colombia, France, Greece, Mexico, Poland, Portugal, and Slovenia.

        The central message of columns (4) ­ (6) is that the expense ratio in selling and

administering home insurance is extraordinarily high. A homeowner, on average, receives back half

of what she pays in paid claims; the rest is lost in transaction costs. These facts raise the obvious

question of why individuals buy so much home insurance, why deductibles are not higher, and why it

costs so much to implement this contract. A major part of this paper answers the third question.


                                                    8
        The last column of Table 1 reports the average (gross) annual premium per policy that the

insurer receives in each country. Worldwide, homeowners pay annual average gross premiums of

$273. Premiums vary with income levels, ranging from over $1,000 in Austria or Switzerland to less

than $100 in China, India, Serbia, and Slovakia.

        The bottom line of Table 1 is that homeowner insurance entails massive transaction costs,

and is far from the textbook model of frictionless risk sharing. Standard contracting problems in

insurance such as adverse selection by riskier claimants and moral hazard in taking precautions

would be unable to account for the data. These problems reduce the tradeability of risk, but are not

themselves a source of disputes and transaction costs. Why does this market work this way?



2.2. Claims Data

        We next focus on the individual claims data. To illustrate some of the variables we examine,

we compare two actual water damage claims in our sample: one in Switzerland and one in Italy. 5

Water damages is the most common type of claim in our sample (close to 30 percent of all claims). 6

        The Swiss claimant filed a claim for water damages caused by a broken pipe. The claim

included a $3,070 repair budget submitted by the plumber whom the claimant hired to visit the

house. The company quickly sent a damage assessor to the house, who filed her report with the

insurance company 28 days after the claimant reported the damage. In its report, the assessor

corroborated the damage, its coverage under the contract, and agreed with the budget for repairs.

No deductible applied to this claim. Next, the company contacted the client accepting the claim in

full. The client accepted the proposed settlement. Sixty-four days after the filing of the claim, the

insurance company mailed the check for the claim to the policyholder and closed the case. In this




5
  To illustrate our claims data, we choose two developed economies whose insurance systems work reasonably
well compared to other countries. Still, there are remarkable differences between them.
6
  Weather damage and theft are second and third, respectively (they account for close to 25 percent of cases).
Property damage is the fourth category of claims with close to 15 percent of the cases. Other claims are much
less frequent in our sample (fire damage and third-party liability respectively capture 5 and 3 percent of cases).


                                                        9
case, the final settlement as a proportion of the initial claim was 100%. The same is true for the final

settlement as a proportion of the total assessed value net of deductibles.

        A similar Italian claim triggered an acrimonious process. The policyholder sent a claim to the

insurance company for $1,285 in damages caused by the accidental breaking of a valve of the

heating system. The $1,285 budget included expenses associated with both the broken valve and

water damage to the wall between the living room and the corridor. The company quickly sent a

damage assessor and she filed her report only 18 days after the claimant initiated the process. The

glitch is that the report assessed damages at only $546, excluding a deductible of $128.

        Thirty-six days after the claimant reported the damage, the insurance company contacted

the claimant sending her a report detailing the problems with her claim and proposing a settlement

amount of $416 (=$546-$128). Twenty-five days later, the policyholder replied complaining about

the proposed settlement and threatening to cancel the insurance policy. The company and the

client then engaged in conversations that lasted several months.

        Eventually, the policyholder accepted the initial assessment of the expert and the proposed

settlement. Two hundred and forty-five days after the start of the process, the insurance company

mailed the check for the reimbursement of the claim to the policyholder and closed the case. The

final settlement amounted to 100% of the assessed value net of the deductible, but only 32.5% of

the damage initially claimed by the policyholder.

        Table 2 summarizes some of the statistics collected from our sample of 550 claims closed in

2013. For each country, the table reports the average value claimed by the insured, the fraction of

claims that are small (below 1% of a country's one month of average wages), the ratio of the net

assessed value of damages to the initial claim, the ratio of settlement amount to the net assessed

value, and the ratio of the settlement amount to the initial claim. All amounts are computed net of

deductibles, which are therefore not the reason the settlements are lower than the claims or

assessed values. Table 2 also reports the country means for the number of days for claim resolution,




                                                    10
the percentage of claims that are disputed, the percentage of claims the company fully rejects, and

the gross yearly premium relative to the value insured. Appendix C defines all the variables.

           The first column shows the median (US$) value of damages initially claimed by the insured

party. This value ranges from $160 in Serbia to $6,638 in Germany, and $1,003 across countries.

These data show that most claims are relatively small. In fact, in column (2) we report the fraction

of claims in our sample that are below the level of one month of a country's average wage. This

share averages 64%, and is close to 60% in most countries. This means, in part, that courts very

rarely get involved in facilitating the resolution of disputes ­ the cost would be prohibitively high.

           The insurance company often settles claims for less than the value initially requested by the

policyholder. This happens for two main reasons. First, as the example of an Italian claim illustrates,

the policyholder may receive less than the value claimed when the assessor chosen by the company

disagrees with the value of damages in the claim. Column (3) reports the value assessed by the

expert appointed by the insurance company as a fraction of the value claimed by the policyholder.

On average, the assessed value net of deductibles equals 87% of the value claimed by the

policyholder. 7 This 13% wedge is one reason settlements are lower than claims.

           Second, the policyholder may receive less than the value claimed because the settlement is

lower than the net assessed value. To quantify this gap, the fourth column reports the final

settlement value as a proportion of the net assessed value. This number ranges from 26% in

Slovenia to 92% in the Netherlands. On average, the final settlement is 70% of the assessed

damages. If we multiply the entries in columns (3) and (4), we see that policyholders on average

receive 61% of the value of their claims. In fact, as column (6) shows, worldwide 23% of the claims

are rejected outright, with that number exceeding 1/3 in Colombia, Croatia, Greece, Hungary,

Poland, Portugal, and Slovenia. The full rejection of claims is the main reason why only 61% of the

original value is paid out on average.




7
    Deductibles are typically very small (i.e. the sample mean (median) is 2.13% (0.073%) of the initial claim.

                                                          11
           Column (7) combines total and partial rejections and shows that 47% of claims receive a

settlement lower than the assessed value net of deductibles. In summary, roughly half (53%=100%-

47%) of the claimants receive the full value of their initial claim while one quarter of the claimants

(i.e. 23%) receive nothing and another quarter (24%=47%-23%) receive 70% of their initial claim.

           There are several reasons why the final settlement is lower than the net assessed value. The

most common reasons are either that the policy did not cover the damages or that the client was

negligent. This turned out to be the case for roughly one quarter of the claims in our sample. The

second most common reason leading to a settlement lower than the assessed damage value is lack

of evidence, missing documentation to prove the claim, or claims made too late. This group of

reasons accounts for close to 11% of all the claims in the sample. Other reasons for partial recovery

include capped coverage (7% of cases) and underinsurance (4% of cases).

           Despite their simplicity, homeowners' insurance claims take a long time to settle. As shown

in column (8) of Table 2, the process takes 138 days on average, ranging from 38 days in China to

306 days in Austria. The average is close to the 121 days for the analogous variable reported in

Table 1 using aggregate business segment data. Claims take a long time to settle partly because the

insurance company and the policyholder disagree on the value of the damages. As column (9) shows,

the average percentage of disputed claims in our sample is 33%, ranging from 5% in Switzerland to

65% in Poland and Turkey. Only a tiny minority (0.12%) of these claims are actually legal disputes.

Instead, most of the disputes are negotiations between the insurance company and the client.

           The final column of Table 2 addresses the pricing of homeowners insurance. We gather data

on pricing from our sample of roughly 40 insurance policy contracts per country (20 contracts from

the sample of contracts signed in 2013 and 20 contracts from the claims sample). 8 We then

compute the ratio of the premium charged by the insurer to the value of the coverage under the




8
    All results on pricing are qualitiatively similar if we only use data from the sample of filed claims.


                                                            12
policy (total amount insured). 9 Unlike the analogous measure in Table 1, this measure does not

solely reflect what policyholders actually pay, but also the amount insured. The average gross yearly

premium as a percentage of the total value insured in our sample is 0.13%, i.e. the average annual

cost of homeowners insurance is 0.13% of the value covered. As with other measures in this table,

there is substantial variation across countries. The smallest insurance costs per dollar of value

covered are in China, Germany, Panama and Slovakia. In contrast, yearly premiums are much higher

in countries like Argentina, Austria, Bulgaria, Colombia, Greece, Italy and Mexico.



2.3. Correlations

        Table 3 presents correlations between the segment level accounting variables on Tables 1

and claims data in Table 2. The table groups variables based on whether their source is aggregate

statistics or the claims data. Three results emerge from these correlations. First, although the data

from 20 claim cases is noisier than that aggregated at the segment level, the variables from the

claims data are reassuringly highly correlated with their counterparts in accounting data (e.g. the

correlation is 59% for Claims-to-policies vs. Claimant Disputed Decision, 50% for Rejected-claims-to-

claims vs. Claim Fully Rejected, and 83% for Ln Settlement Days vs. Ln Days Final Proposal days).

         Second, payment of claims is much more contentious in some countries than others.

Countries with more claims generally have more disputes, more rejections, lower payments relative

to claims and even relative to estimates, and longer time to settle claims. This raises the question of

whether systematic factors shape such conflict. Consistent with this heterogeneity, homeowners

insurance is more costly in countries with more conflict between the insurance company and the

claimant. The correlation between Premium-to-sum-insured and Claims-to-policies is 60% and it is

53% with the Loss Ratio. Relatedly, costs rise with disputes. The correlation between Claims Fully




9
   For homeowners' insurance contracts, the total sum insured refers to the maxium amount that the
insurance company will pay to rebuild a home in the event that it is totally destroyed or badly damaged.


                                                  13
Rejected and both the Expense Ratio and the Loss Ratio is 53% and 72%, respectively. This country

heterogeneity is the key feature of homeowners insurance that we seek to explain.

        What determines these enormous differences between countries in the payment of

homeowner insurance claims. Why do some countries have a smooth process, with nearly all claims

accepted, and payments in line with claims, while others have high rejection rates and payments

substantially lower than the claims?

        One possibility is that legal enforcement may shape these differences. This however may not

be so realistic in a market where most claims are small and thus unlikely to be resolved "in the

shadow of the law".       A second hypothesis, articulated by Arrow (1974), is that for simple

transactions, such as homeowner insurance contracts, trust and honesty norms are essential. From

the Swiss and Italian data, comparing the differences in the proportion of rejected claims and the

final settlement as a proportion of the value claimed, trust seems like a possibility. Even more strking

are the differences between other high trust countries, such as China and the Netherlands, and low

trust ones, such as Colombia, Portugal or Turkey. In fact, the raw correlations between trust and

rejected claims and final settlement over initial claim are -0.64 and 0.60, respectively.

        If in countries with low levels of trust there is more opportunism by consumers and firms,

settlement of claims will be more contentious. But what are the implications of this possibility?

How does trust affect contracting? How does it distort settlement of claims? How does it affect

prices and profits? And what is the role played by the law? To address these questions, we next

present a model in which cultural and legal factors influence insurance contracts and markets. The

model yields predictions that we then bring to the data.




3. A Model of Homeowners Insurance

        A risk averse consumer with increasing and concave utility  ( ) contracts with a risk neutral

firm to insure against an accident that occurs with probability  < 0.5 and entails a loss .

According to the contract, the consumer pays a premium  to the firm and receives  in case of

                                                   14
accident. The consumer and the firm observe the accident, but they may try to cheat. The consumer

can claim that there is an insured accident when there isn't one, and the insurer can deny the claim

even after an insured accident. External verification is imperfect: the truth is found with probability

 . Verification could result from private negotiation and evidence production by the parties, or in

rare cases from litigation in court. Higher  means that it is easier, privately or in court, to prove

one's rightful claim. When  = 1/2, the case is so uncertain or the law ineffective that external

verification is a coin toss. In this case, if the consumer demands compensation and the firm denies it,

and there is no way to figure out who is right. Absent other incentives, contracting breaks down.

        We depart from conventional analyses by assuming that cheating is morally costly, to an

extent that depends on the social prevalence of honest behavior. Suppose that in a society a

fraction (1 -  ) of consumers misreport to have suffered an accident and a fraction 1 -   of

insurers unjustly refuses to compensate for losses. By cheating, these agents seek a material benefit

equal to the indemnity  received or avoided. We assume that the moral/psychological cost of

cheating to be:

                                       1
                                          (1 - ) +    .                                             (1)
                                       

The moral costs are proportional to the illicit gain . This is mostly a simplifying assumption, but it

also captures the intuition that larger stakes increase moral shame for dishonesty.  in Equation (1)

is a stochastic shifter of moral costs. It is distributed in [0, +) according to cdf  ().

        In Equation (1), people find it more costly to cheat when others around them are honest,

namely when  and  are high. Firms' honesty matters in the case of an accident, with probability

, consumers' honesty matters when the accident does not occur. The dependence of the cost of

cheating on average honesty can be due to social norms of honesty that people find it costly to

violate, or to principles of fairness whereby people find it unfair to cheat honest people (but perhaps

not dishonest ones). Although we cannot tease out the precise mechanism, we can measure the end

outcome: whether in a society others are viewed as honest/trustworthy.



                                                   15
        The prevalence of dishonesty exerts an externality on all insurers. If honesty is  ,  , the

insurance company must bear a sunk per-contract cost (1 - )(1 -  ) + 1 -   . It captures

the costs of hiring assessors that catch dishonest clients, of managing disappointed customers, etc.

        The timing of the interaction between consumers and firms is as follows.

 = 0: the firm posts a contract (, ) to maximize its profit subject to a "competition constraint".

 = 1: the consumer chooses whether to buy (, ).

 = 2: the accident may occur. The consumer decides whether to file a claim. If the consumer files,

the firm decides whether to pay. In this stage, both the consumer and the insurer can cheat.

 = 3: if parties' are in conflict, the outcome is determined with the verification probability .

        Two clarifications are in order. First, the moral cost shifter  is realized at  = 2. This implies

that there is no ex-ante screening or signaling of moral costs. Allowing for this possibility may be a

useful extension, particularly if insurers spend resources to screen clients with high moral costs, but

we leave it for future work. Second, the competition constraint faced by firms says that the profit

per insurance contract cannot be greater than , where higher competition means lower . When

 = 0 this constraint reduces to the usual zero profit condition. We later establish the precise

implications of this constraint for the link between the premium  and .



3.1 Equilibrium Trust

        We solve the model starting from  = 3. Conflict occurs if the consumer files a claim and the

firm challenges it. If the firm challenges a valid claim,  is enforced when harm is correctly verified,

which occurs with probability  . If the firm challenges an invalid claim,  is enforced with probability

that harm is incorrectly verified, (1 -  ). The outcome of conflict is stochastic.

        Consider the implications of conflict for the decision of whether to cheat at  = 2. If the

accident has not occurred, the consumer chooses whether to cheat and make a claim. If the accident

has occurred, the firm chooses whether to cheat and deny it. The condition for a consumer to

truthfully demand the indemnity as well as for a firm to accept to pay rightful claims is given by:

                                                   16
                               1                     (1 - ) + 
                   (1 - ) -       (1 - ) +      0              .                                   (2)
                                                          1 - 

        A consumer or a firm trades off the material benefit from cheating, obtained with probability

(1 -  ), against its moral costs. Agents are honest when the moral cost of cheating is high ( is low)

relative to the moral relief entailed by honest behavior  and  in society. Better verification of the

truth, higher  , cuts the benefit of cheating, making condition (2) more stringent.

        Equation (2) stipulates the same condition for honest behavior by firms and consumers.

Because the distribution function  () is common to consumers and firms, the equilibrium is

symmetric:  =  = . The equilibrium is pinned down by the condition:

                                                      
                                             =           .                                         (3)
                                                    1 - 

Proposition 1 There is one dishonest equilibrium  = 0. If () is decreasing and low moral costs are

sufficiently common that (0) > 1, there is also one stable interior equilibrium with  > 0. In this

equilibrium, honesty monotonically increases with verifiability and   1 as   1.

        When dishonesty is the norm,  = 0, individuals find it easy to cheat, so the norm becomes

self-enforcing. Consumers always falsely report damages and firms reject legitimate claims, so trust

in bilateral arrangements is low. Under some conditions there is another stable social equilibrium in

which some honesty is normal,  > 0. Here consumers often truthfully report damages and firms

pay legitimate claims, so consumers and firms trust each other more. Trust in turn reduces the

willingness to cheat, becoming self sustaining. In this equilibrium cheating is more prevalent for less

verifiable claims (such as theft), when  is lower, since the benefit of getting away with cheating is

the highest.

        The self-enforcing nature of cooperation through norms of honest and fair behavior has

been highlighted in previous work. Here we take the honesty norms as given and ask two questions.

First, how do they affect the implementation of a given insurance contract (, )? Second, how do

they affect contracting in the first place, including insurance prices and firms' profits?




                                                   17
3.2 Trust and the Payment of Claims

        We start by asking how higher trust, captured in the model by higher , affects the

implementation of, and in particular disputes over, a given contract. In our data, the measureable

outcomes are 1) the incidence of opened claims in the business unit data, 2) the prevalence of

rejected claims and the length of settlement, which are available both in the business unit and the

claim level data, and 3) the ratio of the final settlement to the initial claim, which is only available in

the claims data. Our model makes the following predictions:

Prediction 1. Open claims as a share of all contracts, / , rejected claims as a share of total claims,

 /, and the average settlement amount over the initial claim  are given by:

                                     / =  + (1 - )(1 - ),                                              (4)

                                                   1 - 
                                     / =                   ,                                           (5)
                                               + - )(1 - )
                                                (1

                                              + (1 - 2)(1 - )
                                      =                       .                                        (6)
                                              + (1 - )(1 - )

Higher trust  reduces / and /, and increases .

        When trust is low, many consumers file illegitimate claims so there are many opened claims,

so that / is well above the accident probability . Higher trust means less cheating, and hence

lower / . Likewise, when trust is low, not only insurance companies are highly suspicious of filed

claims, but they also cheat and refuse to pay even legitimate ones. As a result, rejected claims as a

share of total claims  / is high. Higher trust reduces deception by both consumers and firms,

reducing  /. This same outcome,  /, also captures in our model the probability that a

claimant disputes a decision by the insurance company (which is available in the claims level data),

because consumers' and firms' objections are reciprocal.

        Finally, when trust is low insurance companies refuse ­ legitimately or not ­ to pay many

claims. As a result, the average settlement amount SET is a smaller fraction of the initial claim.

Higher trust reduces cheating, increasing insurance companies' willingness to pay, so  increases

with trust. One way in which, when trust is is low, firms can refuse to pay is by adopting a formalistic


                                                    18
attitude with claims. Thus, the same mechanism implies that when trust is low the ratio between the

settlement and the value assessed by the firm ­ another enforcement outcome we measure ­ is low.

Of course, higher trust improves enforcement also along this metric.

        Predictions regarding length of settlement, which we measure as "days to settlement" (in

the accounting data) and as "days to final proposal" (in the claims data) are not independent

outcomes of the model, but they naturally follow from the previous ones. When conflict is extensive,

so that the number of open and rejected claims is high, settling claims takes more time. As a

consequence, higher trust should also facilitate speedier settlement.



3.3 Claim Level Data: Enforcement of Theft vs. Non Theft Claims

        In the claim level data, we measure claim outcomes, but we also have information about the

type of claim filed. This is useful because different types of claims are likely characterized by

different degrees of verifiability , which should affect claims and payments according to the model.

Consider the difference between theft and non theft claims. The former are clearly less verifiable

than the latter given that there is no obvious proof of theft. What does our model have to say about

measured differences in the resolution of theft and non theft claims and the role of trust?

        To address this question, we need to enrich the model by allowing some heterogeneity.

Suppose that some contracts have higher verifiability  than others. In each of these transactions,

then, the extent of honest behavior is determined as a function of the level of aggregate trust 

across all contracts. From Equation (2) we find that the frequency of honest behavior by firms and

consumers in transaction  when aggregate trust is equal to  is determined by the condition:

                                                        
                                        (, ) =             ,
                                                      1 - 

where aggregate trust  is exogenous to any given category of claims, being determined across all

                              
claims according to  =             ( ) , where () is the density of type- claims.
                             1-




                                                 19
        In this case, dishonesty and litigation in a given claim depends on its verifiability  but also

on aggregate trust , which is of course exogenous to the individual claim  . Obviously, higher

aggregate trust  increases honesty in all claims. It is also immediate to see that more verifiable

                                           (,)
claims entail more honesty, formally               > 0. More interesting, suppose that the moral cost
                                             


shifter  is exponentially distributed with mean 1/, where higher  captures higher moral cost of

cheating. As we show in the Appendix, if  is higher than a threshold  , then higher aggregate trust 

                                                               (,)
increases honesty more for less verifiable claims, namely             < 0. That is, trust is a substitute for
                                                                


limited verifiability: it is especially important for unverifiable claims.

        As we show in the Appendix, then, given that theft claims are the least verifiable, our model

yields the following prediction concerning our measured outcomes at the claim level.

Prediction 2 There are more theft claims in countries in which trust is lower. In a given country, theft

                                                                    ( / )
claims exhibit relative to non theft ones: 1) more rejections                < 0 and 2) lower settlements
                                                                       

                                                                              (/)            
     > 0. These differences shrink as aggregate trust increases, namely               > 0,      <0.
                                                                                             


        In hard-to-verify accidents such as theft, cheating is more likely to be successful. As a result,

the expected benefit of cheating goes up, which increases disputes between consumers and firms:

the share of rejected claims goes up and settlements go down. However, as we discussed above,

trust is a substitute for verifiability. This means that as aggregate trust increases, consumers and

firms behave more honestly, which disproportionally reduces disputes in theft claims relative to non

theft ones. The resolution of these claims should become similar in countries where trust is higher.



3.4 Trust and the Cost Structure

        Consider now how trust affects the second set of measured outcomes, which capture the

cost structure of firms: 1) the ratio of expenses to total premiums, and 2) the ratio of claim

payments to total premiums.          These variables, available in the business unit data, capture

transaction costs in insurance and the share of resources actually devoted to compensating


                                                     20
consumers. Since in these data we cannot draw distinctions based on verifiability, we go back to

considering a single transaction with verifiability . Naturally, the cost structure depends on the

premium  and the indemnity  written in the contract. To simplify, we perform comparative statics

on trust under two assumptions. First, we hold  fixed. Second, and in line with the presence of

multiple competitors in the industry we assume that firm is not a monopoly, so the "competition

constraint" is binding. That is, the price of a contract stipulating indemnity  is given by:

                           =  + [ + (1 - 2)(1 - )(1 - )] + (1 - ).                                (7)

        Here the premium covers costs and the market profit rate . One source of costs is the

payment of . This event occurs with probability  + (1 - 2)(1 - )(1 - ), which is above the

accident rate , particularly when trust  is low. Because accidents are rare ( < 0.5), there are

many more occasions for consumers to untruthfully pretend that the accident occurred than for

firms to pretend that it did not. Hence, even though consumers and firms cheat with the same

intensity, cheating by consumers is ex-ante more likely. This implies that higher trust  reduces the

compensation that insurance companies must pay for given stipulated indemnity .

        The second, and key, cost if the transaction expense  of dealing with conflict. Assessors and

staff must be hired, disgruntled customers must be attended to or replaced, and so on.

Prediction 3 Under  =  and a binding competition constraint, the expense ratio  and the loss

ratio  are given by:

                                               (1 - )
                          =                                          ,                            (8)
                                 + [ + (1 - 2)(1 - )(1 - )] + (1 - )

                                       [ + (1 - 2)(1 - )(1 - )]
                            =                                         .                           (9)
                                  + [ + (1 - 2)(1 - )(1 - )] + (1 - )

Higher trust  reduces the  . It also reduces the  provided  is high enough.

        When trust  is low, insurance companies spend a large amount of resources to protect

themselves against illicit claims and to avoid paying even legitimate ones. As a result, a large share

of resources raised through premiums is spent in these activities. Higher trust makes paying more




                                                   21
attractive, reducing  . Likewise, when trust is low many illicit claims are files and some must be

paid, absorbing a larger share of premia. As a result, higher trust reduces  as well. 10



3.5 The Optimal Contract, Prices, and Costs

        We next show how the optimal contract (, ) varies a function of , which yields predictions

about two other outcomes that we measure: the premium premium over the insured value /, and

firm profits, namely the product of margin (price minus cost) and sales. These variables are

indicative of welfare. Intuitively, higher / ceteris paribus make insurance more expensive for

consumers, and lower profits make it less valuable for firms, leading to lower gains from trade.

        We solve for the optimal contract by neglecting for simplicity the moral costs of cheating

that consumers and firms may expect to incur when fighting. The firm solves the following problem.

                       max  - [ + (1 - 2)(1 - )(1 - )] - (1 - )                                             (10)
                         ,


                        . .        - [ + (1 - 2)(1 - )(1 - )] - (1 - )  [0, ]                               (11)

                   [1 - (1 - )(1 -  )]( -  - ) + (1 - )(1 - )(- - )

                  + (1 - )[1 - (1 - )(1 - )](-) + (1 - )(1 - )(1 - )( - )  . (12)

        Equation (10) is the firm's profit, equal to the premium  minus the expected payment of

the transfer minus transaction costs. Equation (11) states that the profit must be non-negative and

below the market level . If profits are above , the firm loses the customer. If profits are negative,

the firm does not sell the policy. We assume that when the firm makes exactly the market profit  it

chooses the transfer  that maximizes consumer welfare. Equation (12) guarantees that the

consumer is willing to buy the insurance contract, where the consumer's outside option is

parameterized by .




10
  As we discuss in the proof of prediction 4, a sufficient condition for the prediction on the expense ratio to be
robust when  is endogenous and/or the competition constraint is possibly slack, is that the optimal indemnity
() is increasing in trust  and the transaction cost  is large enough. The prediction on the loss ratio is
instead fulfilled (in a way consistent with prediction 4), when in addition the probability  () with which the
indemnity is paid drops sufficiently fast in trust so that  ()() decreases in .

                                                       22
        As we show in the Appendix, the optimal contract has the following properties. With full

trust,  = 1, the contract is perfectly enforced. As a result, the firm provides full insurance,  = .

As trust drops,  falls, contract enforcement becomes imperfect. Thus, the firm provides less than

full insurance  < , it bears transaction costs  , and its profits fall. 11 The drop in profits is caused by

two effects. First, when  is lower, the enforcement of compensation is less precise. The value of

insurance drops, which reduces the amout of consumer surplus that the firm can extract via the

premium . Second, when  is lower, the firm must pay higher deadweight transaction costs, which

also reduces profits. This implies that as  falls the insurance price  increases relative to the

transfer . When  is low enough, these effects are so strong that gains from trade fall to zero and

the insurance contract is not sold. This analysis leads to the following prediction.

Prediction 4 Higher trust  increases the profits of the firm. With quadratic utility, it also reduces the

ratio between the premium and the value insured /, provided transaction costs  are high enough.

        When trust is low, cheating is widespread on both sides. As a result, the enforcement of

insurance contracts is highly conflictual. This has two key consequences. First, it creates deadweight

transaction costs, which render insurance expensive. Second, it distorts the enforcement of

payments, which reduces the value of insurance. The fact that insurance is expensive and imperfect

reduces consumer demand for this service, in turn reducing the profits of the firm.



4. Empirical Analysis of Model Predictions

        We next assess model predictions with the data. We first look at predictions concerning trust

and enforcement outcomes, which are described by Prediction 1. We then differentiate between

theft and non theft claims in the data, looking at predictions on the substitutability between trust

and unverifiability, as described by Prediction 2. We next look at the relationship between trust and

the cost structure, as described by Prediction 3. Finally, we consider the more welfare related link

between prices and firm profits and trust, as described by Prediction 4.

 This is true provided the profit constraint is not binding. We show that this is indeed the case when cheating
11

 is sufficiently severe because in this case the firm must accept a lower profit to have the consumer buy.

                                                      23
4.1 Trust and Claims

        According to Prediction 1, countries with higher trust should exhibit fewer opened claims,

fewer rejected claims, and higher settlement rates. Table 4 presents a cross-country analysis of

these predictions. The dependent variables for the regressions in Panel A are business unit data,

those in Panel B are from the claims data. To proxy for honesty we include in the regressions Trust,

which is the standard measure from the World Values Survey defined as the percentage of

respondents who answered that "generally speaking, most people can be trusted".                     We also

consider a frequently used measure of efficiency of the judiciary defined as an estimate ­ in calendar

days ­ of the duration of dispute resolution for the collection of a bounced check from the moment

a plaintiff files the lawsuit in court, until the moment of actual payment (Djankov et al. 2003). We

use (ln) Check collection to capture the fact that the legal system may affect verifiability  (even

though many claims are so small that court enforcement is highly unlikely). Finally, all specifications

also control for (ln) GDP per capita in the regressions.

        Panel A presents the results using business unit data. Consistent with the predictions of the

model, Panel A shows that higher Trust is associated with fewer claim initiations, fewer claim

rejections, and fewer days to settle. The effect of a one standard deviation increase in Trust (roughly

the difference between France and Japan) is to reduce claim initiations by 0.37 of a standard

deviation, claim rejections by 0.71 of a standard devation, and days to settle by 0.42 of a standard

deviation. Trust seems to have sizable economic effects on insurance disputes.

        The results for Check Collection, our measure of judicial inefficiency, are much weaker. The

only statistically significant result is that judicial inefficiency is associated with more claim initiations,

i.e. a one-standard deviation increase in the length of time it takes to collect on a bounced check

increases the fraction of claim initiations by 0.47 of a standard deviation. A higher ln GDP per capita

is associated with more claim initiationss and longer time to settle, which reinforces the view that it

is trust rather than development that leads to smoother functioning insurance markets.


                                                     24
        Panel B presents the results using claims data. Consistent with the findings in Panel A, Trust

is associated with fewer disputes and rejections, settlements that are more generous, and a faster

settlement process. The estimates imply that a one standard deviation increase in Trust is associated

with a reduction in disputes by 0.53 of a standard deviation, a fall in rejections by 0.69 of a standard

deviation, and a decline in the (ln) number of days for the final proposal by 0.58 of a standard

deviation. The estimates also imply that a similar increase in Trust is associated with a reduction of

0.50 of a standard deviation in the fraction of Settlements-lower-net-assessed-value, and higher

ratios of Settlement-to-initial-claims and Settlement-to-net-assessed-value by 0.48 and 0.45 of a

standard deviation, respectively.

        The top panel in Figure 1 illustrates the results for Claims Fully Rejected and Trust. By

comparison, Ln Check Collection is (marginally significantly) associated with more rejected claims,

settlements that are less generous, and a slower settlement process. The bottom plot in Figure 1

illustrates the result for Claims Fully Rejected and Ln Check Collection. Again, the evidence on ln GDP

per capita indicates that, if anything, insurance markets are more contentious in richer countries.

We note that the results on Trust hold also without the per capita income control.



4.2 Theft vs Non-theft Claims

        According to Prediction 2, higher trust should be especially beneficial for the enforcement of

claims that are hard to verify. In that regard, the consensus among industry practitioners is that

theft claims are the hardest to verify. For each country c and outcome variable Y, we compute the

difference between the average value for theft claims (, ) and the average value for all other

claims (, ).           Because theft claims are the hardest to verify, they constitute our low

verifiability group. Since data regarding why the claimant suffered damages comes from our dataset

on claims, we can only implement our empirical strategy for the outcomes variables in Panel B of




                                                  25
Table 4. 12 We then regress the difference between the outcomes of theft and non-theft claims on

Trust, (ln) Check Collection, and (ln) GDP per capita, i.e.

        , - , =  + 1  + 2 ln( ) +  ln(  ) +  .

The model predicts that 1 < 0 when the dependent variable is a proxy for cheating and 1 > 0

when it is a proxy for the generosity of the settlement. It makes the opposite predictions for 2 .

           Table 5 reports regression results using the same controls as in Table 4, i.e. Trust, Check

Collection, and Ln GDP per capita in all specifications. The new outcome variable is the fraction of

theft claims. As Figure 2 illustrates, in the cross-section, the fraction of theft claims declines sharply

with Trust while Check Collection plays no role, consistent with the view that theft claims are very

difficult to verify. Furthermore, the results in columns 2 through 7 support the prediction that Trust

plays a larger role in mitigating opportunism for claims that are harder to verify than for claims that

are easier to verify. Specifically, as predicted by the model, Trust is associated with relatively less

conflict ­as proxied by fewer disputes, fewer rejections, and faster settlements--and relatively more

generous settlements ­ as proxied by fewer settlement lower than net assessed value and higher

ratios of settlements-to-initial-claim and settlements-to-net-assessed-value.

           The estimated coefficients in Table 5 imply that a one-standard deviation increase in Trust is

associated with a reduction in the difference between Claims Fully Rejected for theft and non-theft

claims of 0.71 of a standard deviation. Figure 3 sheds light into this result. The top panel shows the

partial correlation plot for fully rejected theft claims and Trust, while the bottom panel shows the

corresponding graph for non-theft claims. While the coefficient for Trust is negative in both panels

of Figure 3, it is much larger in absolute value for theft claims than for non-theft ones.



4.3 Costs, Prices and Profits

           In Prediction 3, higher trust affects the cost structure: it reduces both the loss ratio and the

expense ratio. Prediction 4 holds that it reduces annual premia (prices), and raises profits.


12
     Because in our sample, there are no theft claims in Austria and Japan, we drop these countries from Table 5.

                                                        26
        Table 6 addresses these predictions. As before, we include Trust, Check Collection, and Ln

GDP per capita in all regressions. Consistent with Prediction 3, the estimated coefficients on Trust

imply that a one-standard deviation increase in Trust is associated with a reduction in the expense

and loss ratios of 0.75 and 0.77 of a standard deviation, respectively. Turning to Prediction 4, we

assess profitabiltiy by the ratio of after tax profits to gross written premiums and prices by the ratio

of the gross yearly premium paid by the claimant to the total sum insured in the year before the

claim was settled. The estimated coefficients on Trust imply that a one-standard deviation increase

in Trust is associated with an increase in profit margins of 0.86 of a standard deviation and a a

reduction in premium to sum insured of 0.58 of a standard deviation

        Table 6 also shows that while Check Collection is largely insignificant with the exception of

premium to sum insured. Finally, GDP per capita is associated with modestly higher losses and lower

profit margins. The estimated coefficients on Ln GDP per capita imply that a one-standard deviation

increase in Ln GDP per capita is associated with an increase in the loss ratio of 0.44 and a decrease in

profit margins of 0.38 of a standard deviation, respectively.

        In sum, Trust matters for both price margins and profitability, as predicted by the theory.



4.4. Robustness

        As a robustness check, we examine the role of corruption and market competition.

Corruption is a further proxy for institutional development. We include the Herfindahl index to

capture the idea that market concentration may make it costly for insurance companies to behave

opportunistically and, as a result, act as a substitute for trust and judicial efficiency. Panels A and B

in Appendix D shows what happens to the results in Table 4 when we add Corruption and the

Herfindahl Index.    The estimated coefficients for Trust and Check Collection remain largely

unchanged by the additional control variables. Note that while Trust remains statistically significant

in all regressions, Check Collection is statistically significant in only two. The coefficients for

Corruption and Herfindahl index have the predicted signs but are rarely significant. Trust remains the


                                                   27
consistently significant predictor of the outcomes we measure. Finally, Panels C and D in Appendix D

show that the results on Trust for theft vs. non-theft claims in Table 5 and for costs, prices, and

margins in Table 6 are robust to controlling for corruption and market competition 13.




5. Conclusion

        We have proposed a new model of homeowners insurance, in which consumers can make

invalid claims and firms can deny valid claims. In this environment, especially when the disputes are

too small for courts, trust and honesty are critical factors that shape insurance contracts. We

described the equilibrium insurance contracts in this model, and showed how they depend on the

quality of the legal system and the level of trust. We then brought the predictions of the model to a

data set of both business unit data and individual claims data, for 28 independently operated

country business units of a multinational insurance company. We studied the filing of claims, the

disputes over claims, the rejections of claims, and the payment of claims in this data, as well as the

cost and pricing of insurance. Particularly with respect to trust, the evidence is broadly consistent

with the predictions of the model.         Cultural factors appear to shape insurance markets in

economically meaningful ways, just as they shape other spheres of human activity.




13
  We also tried a placebo test in which, both for our sample and for a larger smaple of 62 countries, we
examine the determinants of the size of life and non-life insurance sectors, much more aggregate variables
than what we examine here. Neither sector's size is correlated with trust or check collection in our data.

                                                   28
Bibliography

Aghion, Philippe, Yann Algan, Pierre Cahuc, and Andrei Shleifer, 2010, Regulation and Distrust,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(3), 1015-1049.

Arrow, Kenneth J., 1974, The Limits of Organization, (Norton & Company Inc. New York).

Asmat, Danial P. and Sharon Tennyson, 2014, Does the Threat of Insurer Liability for "Bad Faith"
Affect Insurance Settlements?, Journal of Risk and Insurance 81(1) 1-26.

Burgeon, Jean-Marc and Pierre Picard, 2014, Fraudulent Claims and Nitpicky Insurers, American
Economic Review 104(9), 2900-2917.

Crocker, Keith J. and John Morgan, 1998, Is Honesty the Best Policy? Curtailing Insurance Fraud
through Optimal Incentive Contracts,. Journal of Political Economy 106(2), 355-375.

Crocker, Keith. J. and Sharon Tennyson, 2002, Insurance Fraud and Optimal Claims Settllement
Stategies, Journal of Law and Economics 45(2), 469-507.

Dionne, Georges, Florence Giuliano and Pierre Picard, 2009, Optimal Auditing with Scoring: Theory
and Application to Insurance Fraud, Management Science 55(1), 58-70.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Courts,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2), May, 453-517.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer, 2013, Human
capital and regional development, Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(1), 105-16.

Guiso, Luigi, 2012, Trust and Insurance Markets, Economic Notes 41 (1­2), 1­26.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales, 2006, Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(2), 23-48.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales, 2008, Trusting the stock market, Journal of Finance
63, 2557­2600.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza and Luigi Zingales, 2013, The Determinants of Attitudes toward Strategic
Default on Mortgages, Journal of Finance 68(4), 1473-1515.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, Trust in
Large Organizations, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 87, 333-338.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, 1998, Law and
Finance, Journal of Political Economy 106(6), 1113-1155.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, 2008, The
Economic Consequences of Legal Origins, Journal of Economic Literature 46(2), 285-332.




                                                  29
Proofs

                                        1
Proof of Proposition 1 Define  =    . Then, the equilibrium is  =  ( ), where  (. ) Is the cdf of
                                 1-
. The function  ( ) is such that  (0) = 0 because   0. As a result,  = 0 is always an
equilibrium. Furthermore,  ( ) is increasing and concave in  because () > 0 and   () < 0.
We also know that at  = 1,  ( )  1. Thus, if (0) > 1 there is a equilibrium   (0,1] with  = 1
for   1. Because at the interior equilibrium it must be that  ( )/ = ( ) < 1, we have
that:
                                                ( )
                                             =       > 0,
                                             1 - ( )
so that  increases in verifiability .


Prediction 1 The proof of the prediction immediately follows by inspection of Equations (4), (5) and
(6). Higher  reduces / and  /, and increases .


                                                                                      
Prediction 2 Equilibrium honesty in transaction  is pinned down by (, ) =   . To ease
                                                                                   1-
notation, denote  = ( , ) Since  (. ) Is increasing, it is immediate to prove that (, ) increases
in its arguments. Under an exponential distribution () =  - , the equilibrium becomes:
                                                         
                                                       -  
                                             1 -  =     1- .

It is immediate to find that
                                                -
                                                  
                                                   
                                         =       1- > 0.
                                          1 - 
It is then immediate to see that:

                       2               -
                                         
                                                 2          -
                                                              
                                                               
                          =             1-  -                1- ,
                            (1 -  ) 2         1 -    1 - 
         
so that      < 0 if and only if  > 1 - . For any  < 1, this holds true provided  is large enough
        
(note that higher  also exerts an indirect effect, increasing aggregate trust ).
       Consider now the predictions about litigation. First, more verifiable claims have lower  /.
Second, more verifiable claims have higher . Indeed,
                                
                                                        
                                 = -                     <0
                                     [ + (1 - )(1 - )] 
                                                      2

                                           
          (1 - 2)(1 - )[ + (1 - )(1 - )] +  [(1 - )(1 - ) +  ]
          =                                                    > 0.
                            [ + (1 - )(1 - )]2
Consider now the effects of aggregate trust on these gaps.
                            2                               
                               [ + (1 - )(1 - )] + 2(1 - )
                       = -                                   ,
                                    [ + (1 - )(1 - )]3
Which is positive provided

                                                  30
                           2                               
                              [ + (1 - )(1 - )] + 2(1 - )   < 0.
                                                           
Under the exponential distributon this is equivalent to:
                                                         
                  [1 - (1 -  )]  1- + (1 - ) + 2(1 - )        < 0,
                                                       1 - 
which is also fulfilled for  sufficiently large. A similar result holds for  :
           2    2                               
                   [ + (1 - )(1 - )] + 2(1 - )    [(1 - )(1 - ) + ]
                                                
                                              
                   - [ + (1 - )(1 - )](1 - 2)
                                              
                                                      
                                   2               
Thus, a sufficient condition for     < 0 is that  > 0, which we established before to be true for
                                                      
                                                 
 sufficiently large, which we express as  > . 



Prediction 3 The proof of the prediction follows by inspection of Equations (8) and (9).


Prediction 4 Consider the monopoly problem of a firm selling insurance to a captive consumer. We
then analyze the profit constraints in Equation (11).
                                   max  - [ + (1 - 2)] - (1 - )
                                    ,

. .      (1 - )( -  - ) + (- - ) + (1 - )(1 - )(-) + (1 - )( - )  .


For simplicity we define  = (1 - )(1 - ) the probability of an enforcement error. Of course, in
our comparative statics we must consider the inverse relationship between the error rate  and trust
. Denote by  the Lagrange multiplier associated with the constraint. The first order conditions
are:

                                               
:                                       1 -     = 0,
                                           

                                            
:                                   -  +     = 0,
                                             

where  is the set of all states (accident without error, accident with error, no accident without
error, and no accident with error),  is the set of states where  is paid (accident without error and
                                                                                                 
no accident with error) and  is their total probability,  is the probability of state , and        is
marginal utility in state . The following two properties hold.

First,  > 0. If  = 0 the firm could raise the premium while still having the consumer to participate.
Second, by the two first order conditions, the average marginal utility obtained across states in
which  is paid should be equal to the average marginal utility obtained across states in which  is
not paid.

Consider now the implications of these two conditions. If trust is full,  = 1, the error rate is zero,
 = 0. Then,  is paid if an only if there is an accident, so the optimal contract equalizes the marginal


                                                   31
utility ( -  - ) when the accident occurs and the marginal utility (-) when it does not
occur. The optimal contract achieves full insurance,  = , and the first best is obtained.

Suppose that the first best contract with  =  is signed and add a small amount of enforcement
errors  > 0. Then, the average marginal utility when  =  is paid drops because ( - ) <
 (-), and the average marginal utility when  =  is not paid increases because (- - ) >
(-). If at this point  is increased above , and  is increased so that buyer participation stays
binding (which as we will see below requires  =  ), the marginal utility in states where the
transfer is not paid raises even further, while the marginal utility in states where the transfer is paid
goes down relative to the case  = . As a result,  =  is excessive and in the optimal contract less
than full insurance is provided, namely  < . Low trust reduces coverage. Of course, it also creates
transaction costs.

If trust is very low,  = 0, contract enforcement is highly distorted and transaction costs are
prohibitive. If  is large enough and/or if  sufficiently close to 1/2, the firm must make negative
profits to induce the consumer to buy. The insurance market breaks down.

Consider now the effect of higher trust on firm profits. If the competition constraint is binding, it
means that insurance creates enough surplus that the contract is signed and it also measn that the
profit per contract is fixed. As a result, trust does not affect profit. Suppose therefore that the
competition constraint is slack, so that  is determined by the consumer's participation constraint.
By the envelope theorem, an increase in trust  causes the following change in the profit at the
optimum:
     
       (1 - 2) +  -  {[(- - ) - ( -  - )] + (1 - )[( - ) - (-)]}.
     
Disregarding the transaction cost  , a sufficient condition for the profit to increase is:
          (1 - 2)
                  + [( -  - ) - (- - )] - (1 - )[( - ) - (-)] > 0.
              
At the optimum, 1/ is the average marginal utility across states in which  is paid but also the
average marginal utility across states in which  is not paid. We can rewrite this as:

                
-    + (1 - )    + [( -  - ) - (- - )] - (1 - )[( - ) - (-)]
                           
                 > 0,

which can in turn be rewritten as:


                                        
   ( -  - ) - (- - ) -      + (1 - )     - [( - ) - (-)] > 0.
                                                               


Because the marginal utility across states in which  is paid is always lower than or equal than
( -  - ), the first term in square bracket is positive by concavity of utility. Because the
marginal utility across states in which  is not paid is always higher than or equal than (-), the
second term in square brackets is also positive by concavity of utility. Thus, profits increase with
trust.




                                                   32
                                                                                               
Consider now the comparative statics concerning /. Under quadratic utility ( ) =  -                 2 it is
                                                                                               2
                                                                
easy to find, using the optimality condition  ( / ) =  ( /1 -  ) that  is equal to:

                   1 - (1 - )(1 - )            (1 - )(1 - )
              =                       -                               .
                 + (1 - 2)(1 - )(1 - ) (1 - ) - (1 - 2)(1 - )(1 -  )

 increases in . Using this expression for , consider now the behavior of /. There are two cases
two consider. In the first case, the competition constraint is binding and we have:
                           + (1 - ) + [ + (1 - 2)(1 - )(1 - )]
                          =
                                           
It is immediate to see that as  inceases, this ratio falls for given . Furthermore, higher trust 
increases , which further reduces / because  + (1 - ) > 0.

If the competition constraint is not binding, then  is set so that the consumer is indifferent between
buying insurance and his outside option . By differentiating the consumer's participation constraint
with respect to  (akin to a drop in ), we obtain:
                                                                               1 
        -[( -  - ) - (- - )] + (1 - )[( - ) - (-)] +                          -   = 0.
                                                                                
 This implies:
                                               
                                            =   + ,
                                               
where  -[( -  - ) - (- - )] + (1 - )[( - ) - (-)]. / increases with 
(and hence drops with trust ) provided:
                                       
                               -  > 0   ( -  ) -  < 0.
                                       
Because the insurer is making positive profits, we have that  -   > (1 - ) > 0. Furthermore,
the same reasoning used to show that profits increase in trust implies that < (1 - 2)/ . As a
result, a sufficient condition for / to go down with trust is that:
                                    
                                     (1 - ) - (1 - 2) 2 < 0.
                                    
          
Because      < 0, the condition is fulfilled provided  is large enough.
          

Consider finally the implications of an endogenous indemnity  for the quantities in Prediction 3.
With respect to the expense ratio  nothing changes. Consider first the case in which the
competition constraint is binding (which is the one considered in Section 3.4). In this case,  this
quantity unambiguously decreases in trust  when  is fixed, and so it continues to decrease in trust
when  increases with trust, too. In the case of quadratic utility,  montonotically increases in trust,
so the prediction concerning  is confirmed in this case. Suppose now that the competition
constraint is slack. In this case, a sufficient condition for  to drop in trust is that transaction cost 
be large enough. Indeed, previous analysis implies that when the competition constraint is binding:
                                        
                                  =  =   - (1 - ),
                                        
so that,  = (1 - ) / is decreasing in  provided:

                                                   33
                                                     
                 - - (1 - )          < 0   + (1 - )   - (1 - ) > 0,
                                                     
so that, considering as before that profits must be non-negative  >   + (1 - ) and that <
(1 - 2)/, a sufficient condition for  to decrease in trust is equal to:
                                                 
                            + (1 - )  +           - (1 - 2)(1 - ) > 0,
                                                 
which is fulfilled provided  is large enough. Thus, prediction 3 on  is confirmed in the entire
                 
range provided      > 0 as in the case of quadratic utility and  is large enough.
                 

The prediction with respect to the loss ratio  is more complex. The reason is that the loss ratio
can be rewritten as:
                                                  
                                                =  .
                                                  
That is, the loss ratio is equal to the overall probability of paying the transfer times the inverse of the
price margin. The fact that the price margin / decreases with , as from Prediction 4, tends to
cause the loss ratio to increase with trust, contrary to prediction 3. Despite this force, the loss ratio
can still decrease in trust if higher  strongly reduces the probability of payment  . In particular, it is
easy to check that prediction 3 for the loss ratio remains valid when the expected payment  
decreases in trust. This prediction is not fulfilled in the quadratic utility case, because in this case  
can be shown to increase in trust. However, it is fulfilled provided the probability of payment is
sufficiently more sensitive to trust than the optimal indemnity .




                                                    34
                                                                                  FIGURE 1

Partial correlation plots of Claims Fully Rejected and Trust (top) and Ln Check Collection (bottom). In
both panels, we control for Trust, Ln Check Collection, and Ln GDP per Capita.




                                                            Claims Fully Rejected and Trust
                     .2




                                             TUR               PRT
                                                                      HRV
    Claims Fully Rejected (residual)




                                                                             HUN
                              .1




                                                         FRA            GRC
                                                                      COL   HKG
                                                                     MEX

                                                            ECU                       SVN              NLD
                   0




                                                                                     DEU POL
                                                      ROM
                                                                  ESP         PAN              ITA
                                                                                             IND
                                                                     JPN
                                                                     ARG
        -.1




                                                                                     BGR                THA


                                                                                                                                            CHN
                     -.2




                                                                                              AUT                CHE

                                       -.2               -.1                  0                .1                   .2               .3
                                                                                  Trust (residual)
                                       coef = -.65019168, (robust) se = .1302176, t = -4.99




                                                   Claims Fully Rejected and Ln Check Collection
                     .2
    Claims Fully Rejected (residual)




                                                                                                            HUN
                                                                                                        HRV
                                                                                                         PRT
                              .1




                                                                                                                                           SVN
                                                                                                                                            POL
                                                                             NLD                           GRC             CHN
                                                                                                                 COL                 ITA
                                                                            HKG
                                                                                                  MEX
                                                                                                 DEU
                  0




                                                                                       FRA
                                                               TUR                                            THA
                                                                                     IND
                                                                                                 ECU
                                                                                                 PAN
                                                                                                                         CHE
                                                                                                                   BGR
       -.1




                                                                                       ESP
                                                                                       ROM                                 AUT
                                                                      JPN                            ARG
                     -.2




                                       -2                             -1                     0                                   1
                                                                      Ln Check Collection (residual)
                                       coef = .04228924, (robust) se = .02193454, t = 1.93




                                                                                     35
                                                                           FIGURE 2

Partial correlation plots of Theft Claims and Trust (top) and Ln Check Collection (bottom). In both
panels, we control for Trust, Ln Check Collection, and Ln GDP per Capita.




                                                               Theft Claims and Trust
                 .3




                                                              ARG
                           .2
   Theft Claims (residual)




                                                                               SVN
                                                              MEX
                                      TUR
                  .1




                                                        PRT            PAN
                                                                                                NLD
                                                  FRA                  HKG
                                                    ECU
                                                               HRV                    IND
                                                                                      POL
         0




                                                               COL
                                                                 GRC          DEU
                                                                                                           CHE
                                                          ESP
                                                                                         ITA
                                              ROM               JPN
                 -.1




                                                                              BGR
                                                                      HUN

                                                                                         AUT       THA
                                                                                                                                     CHN
                 -.2




                                -.2               -.1                  0                .1                   .2               .3
                                                                           Trust (residual)
                                coef = -.45916129, (robust) se = .14633488, t = -3.14




                                               Theft Claims and Ln Check Collection
                                                                                               ARG
                 .2




                                                                                                                                    SVN
     Theft Claims (residual)




                                                                      NLD
                        .1




                                                                                             MEX
                                                                                            PAN
                                                                                                     PRT                             POL
                                                                                                                  CHE
                                                                     HKG      IND
              0




                                                        TUR                        FRA          HRV
                                                                                            ECU
                                                                                            DEU                     CHN       ITA
                                                                                                 GRC COL

                                                                                                            BGR
   -.1




                                                                                ESP                      THA
                                                                                                         HUN        AUT
                                                               JPN
                                                                                   ROM
                 -.2




                                -2                             -1                     0                                   1
                                                               Ln Check Collection (residual)
                                coef = .01893202, (robust) se = .03005615, t = .63




                                                                              36
                                                                                 FIGURE 3

Partial correlation plots of Claims Fully Rejected and Trust for the subsamples of Theft claims (top)
and Non-Theft claims (bottom). In both panels, we control for Trust, Ln Check Collection, and Ln GDP
per Capita.


                                                      Trust and Fully Rejected Theft Claims
                     .4




                                                           FRA PRT
                                         TUR
                                                                       COL
                                                                         GRC
    Claims Fully Rejected (residual)




                                                                           HKG
                                .2




                                                                             HUN
                                                               ECU
                                                                     ESP             BGR
                                                                                     DEU
                                                                       HRV
                                                                     MEX
                       0




                                                                                          IND POL
                                                                              PAN         SVN
                                                     ROM
             -.2




                                                                                                        NLD
                                                                     ARG                          ITA
                                                                                                                                 CHN
                                                                                                          THA
     -.4




                                                                                                                 CHE
                     -.6




                                       -.2               -.1                 0              .1                        .2    .3
                                                                              Trust (residual)
                                       coef = -1.4985395, (robust) se = .36003415, t = -4.16




                                                   Trust and Fully Rejected Non-Theft Claims
                     .3




                                             TUR
    Claims Fully Rejected (residual)
                                .2




                                                                       HRV
                                                                             HUN
                       .1




                                                                  GRC                         ITA
                                                     ROM   PRT MEX                   SVN
                                                                      HKG                                                        CHN
                                                         FRA                                POL
              0




                                                                                    DEU                 NLD
                                                                                            IND          THA
                                                                  ESP
                                                                  ARG        PAN
                                                                    COL
                                                                     JPN
     -.1




                                                            ECU                              AUT

                                                                                    BGR                         CHE
                     -.2




                                       -.2               -.1                 0                .1                  .2       .3
                                                                                 Trust (residual)
                                       coef = -.28488953, (robust) se = .23068639, t = -1.23




                                                                                    37
                           Table 1: Aggregate Homeowners Insurance Business Segment Data
The table shows the aggregate homeowners segment data for the firm in each country. We report averages of three years
of data. The data was provided by the underwriting department and the claims department of the Firm in each country.



                                Claims                                  Costs
                              Rejected                                                            Gross Written
                  Claims /               Settlement     Expense         Loss       Profit
                              Claims /                                                             Premiums /
                  Policies                  Days         Ratio          Ratio      Margin
                               Claims                                                                Policies
 Country             (1)         (2)        (3)            (4)           (5)         (6)               (7)


 Argentina          0.16        0.28       149.4          0.48          0.52         0.00              214
 Austria            0.17        0.10        n.a.          0.34          0.56         0.08             1,055
 Bulgaria           0.15        0.28       145.3          0.53          0.47         0.00              166
 China              0.04        0.10       42.7           0.34          0.21         0.34               64
 Colombia           0.23        0.26       151.2          0.48          0.60        -0.07              189
 Croatia            0.12        0.34       144.7          0.49          0.55        -0.04              191
 Ecuador            0.14        0.22       121.9          0.44          0.55         0.01              n.a.
 France             0.18        0.16       212.5          0.37          0.75        -0.13              333
 Germany            0.16        0.16       62.8           0.39          0.47         0.10              345
 Greece             0.22        0.28       205.6          0.41          0.64        -0.05              346
 Hong Kong          0.03        0.14       61.2           0.39          0.32         0.25              198
 Hungary            0.22        0.12       80.9           0.34          0.49         0.13              158
 India              0.05        0.15       80.7           0.29          0.42         0.19               82
 Italy              0.33        0.12       151.8          0.38          0.62         0.00              293
 Japan              n.a.        0.20       75.3           n.a.          0.37         n.a.              n.a.
 Mexico             0.28        0.28       196.5          0.43          0.56         0.01              120
 Netherlands        0.07        0.07       66.0           0.31          0.27         0.32              155
 Panama             0.13        0.14       65.3           0.46          0.44         0.08              138
 Poland             0.18        0.24       121.5          0.40          0.52         0.07              249
 Portugal           0.34        n.a.       198.9          0.48          0.68        -0.16              316
 Romania            0.13        0.19       36.3           0.40          0.38         0.19              267
 Serbia             0.08        0.28       178.5          0.37          0.57         0.05               65
 Switzerland        0.24        0.22       99.0           0.34          0.23         0.35             1,067
 Spain              0.26        0.12       45.3           0.36          0.63         0.00              196
 Slovakia           0.03        0.36        n.a.          0.48          0.54        -0.02               64
 Slovenia           0.35        0.25       139.9          0.45          0.68        -0.13              484
 Thailand           0.09        0.06       76.2           0.31          0.21         0.35              109
 Turkey             0.20        0.38       241.4          0.52          0.51        -0.03              242
 Mean               0.17        0.20       121.2          0.41          0.49        0.07               273




                                                         38
                                                                      Table 2: Claims Data

The table shows the data obtained from the analysis of the first 20 claims closed by the Firm in 2013. The numbers are averages across claims for each country.

                Value claimed                                   Settlement
                                Claims below    Net Assessed                 Settlement /                   Settlement <     Final       Claimant
                 by insured                                        / Net                     Claims Fully                                             Premium to
 Country                        one month of       Value /                   Initial Claim                  Net Assessed   Proposal      Disputed
                    (USD)                                        Assessed                     Rejected                                                Sum Insured
                                Average Wage    Initial Claim                 = [3] x [4]                       Value        Days        Decision
                  (Median)                                        Value
                     (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)             (7)         (8)            (9)           (10)
 Argentina          1,802            0.40           0.88           0.67          0.59           0.15            0.45       163.50          0.35          0.19%
 Austria            1,687            0.75           0.99           0.92          0.91           0.10            0.20       306.30          0.20          0.12%
 Bulgaria            364             0.85           0.88           0.62          0.55           0.15            0.40       173.69          0.45          0.14%
 China               265             0.50           0.90           0.82          0.74           0.00            0.20        38.00          0.10          0.08%
 Colombia            741             0.50           0.80           0.62          0.50           0.35            0.45       173.39          0.45          0.14%
 Croatia             542             0.80           0.87           0.56          0.48           0.40            0.85       144.25          0.45          0.14%
 Ecuador             231             0.90           0.70           0.66          0.46           0.25            0.35       139.25          0.30          0.15%
 France             1,347            0.55           0.90           0.70          0.63           0.30            0.60       291.17          0.55          0.12%
 Germany            6,638            0.25           0.74           0.72          0.53           0.20            0.45       100.85          0.35          0.10%
 Greece              807             0.50           0.93           0.58          0.54           0.35            0.55       276.93          0.45          0.11%
 Hong Kong           970             0.55           0.85           0.71          0.60           0.20            0.60        81.35          0.20          0.06%
 Hungary             321             0.85           0.64           0.68          0.44           0.40            0.63        84.36          0.25          0.14%
 India               208             0.65           0.63           0.91          0.57           0.05            0.17        56.67          0.17          0.12%
 Italy              1,328            0.55           0.90           0.51          0.47           0.30            0.65       160.40          0.70          0.15%
 Japan              2,230            0.70           1.02           0.88          0.90           0.05            0.10        42.13          0.10          0.12%
 Mexico              291             0.60           0.92           0.65          0.60           0.30            0.35       191.63          0.40          0.15%
 Netherlands        2,236            0.50           0.95           0.97          0.92           0.10            0.30        58.17          0.10          0.04%
 Panama             1,235            0.45           0.89           0.91          0.80           0.15            0.60        85.67          0.25          0.10%
 Poland              285             0.55           0.71           0.53          0.37           0.35            0.85       152.82          0.65          0.17%
 Portugal           1,054            0.60           0.90           0.51          0.46           0.45            0.70       188.50          0.60          0.16%
 Romania             518             0.75           0.86           0.80          0.69           0.25            0.40        71.60          0.25          0.13%
 Serbia              160             0.80           1.05           0.56          0.59           0.20            0.30       181.27          0.25          0.11%
 Slovakia            347             0.75           1.04           0.69          0.72           0.30            0.45        96.68          0.20          0.09%
 Slovenia            428             0.80           1.00           0.26          0.26           0.40            0.83       173.72          0.60          0.16%
 Spain               562             0.90           n.a.           0.83          n.a.           0.15            0.30        52.80          0.10          0.10%
 Switzerland        2,595            0.60           0.90           0.87          0.78           0.05            0.30        74.85          0.05          0.12%
 Thailand            243             0.50           0.93           0.90          0.83           0.08            0.20        71.54          0.15          0.10%
 Turkey              321             0.75           0.82           0.51          0.42           0.30            0.80       232.76          0.65          0.15%
 Mean               1,063            0.64           0.87           0.70          0.61           0.23            0.47       138.01          0.33          0.12%




                                                                               39
                                              Table 3: Correlations of Homeowners Business Segment variables and Claims variables

This Table shows the raw correlations of country level variables for the sample of 28 countries in our study. Significance levels: a if p<0.01; b if p<0.05; c if p<0.10.


                                                                  Business Segment Data                                                               Claims Data



                                                                                                           Ln (Gross                           Settlement
                                                    Rejected       Ln                                                    Claimant    Claims                 Settlement /   Settlement   Ln Final
                                         Claims /                         Expense     Loss      Profit     Written                             < Net
 VARIABLES                                          Claims /   Settleme                                                  Disputed     Fully                 Net Assessed   / Initial    Proposal
                                         Policies                          Ratio      Ratio     Margin     Premiums                            Assessed
                                                     Claims     nt Days                                                  Decision   Rejected                Value          Claim        Days
                                                                                                           / Policies)                         Value




      Business Segment Data

 Rejected Claims / Claims                0.1258

 Ln Settlement Days                      0.5591a    0.6852a

 Expense Ratio                           0.2465     0.7892a    0.5077a

 Loss Ratio                              0.5908a    0.4022b    0.6602a    0.4354b

 Profit Margin                           -0.5479a   -0.5954a   -0.7097a   -0.6889a   -0.9478a

 Ln (Gross Written Premium / Policies)   0.5651a    -0.0560    0.2949     0.0125     0.2179     -0.1565

              Claims Data

 Claimant Disputed Decision              0.5893a    0.4520b    0.7412a    0.5722a    0.6705a    -0.7322a     0.2498

 Claims Fully Rejected                   0.5467a    0.5034a    0.6187a    0.5341a    0.7168a    -0.7459a     0.1405      0.7571a

 Settlement < Net Assessed Value         0.3992b    0.4418b    0.5189a    0.5616a    0.5055a    -0.5678a     0.2142      0.7845a    0.8183a

 Settlement / Net Assessed Value         -0.5392a   -0.6196a   -0.7777a   -0.5982a   -0.6423a   0.6962a     -0.1205      -0.8255a   -0.8020a    -0.7636a

 Settlement / Initial Claim              -0.5200a   -0.4653b   -0.5859a   -0.4681b   -0.6051a   0.6174a     -0.0695      -0.7716a   -0.7599a    -0.7354a      0.8825a

 Ln Final Proposal Days                  0.4595b    0.4850b    0.8316a    0.4937a    0.7282a    -0.7451a    0.4194b      0.7322a    0.6056a     0.5074a       -0.6125a      -0.4612b

 Premium to Sum Insured                  0.5993a    0.4664c    0.6136a    0.5093c    0.5345a    -0.6033a     0.2888      0.6544b    0.4891a     0.4198a       -0.6070a      -0.6227a    0.5371a




                                                                                                40
                                       Table 4: Homeowners Insurance and Trust

This table presents robust OLS regressions for all the countries in our sample. Robust standard errors are shown in
parentheses under each coefficient. Significance levels: a if p<0.01; b if p<0.05; c if p<0.10.

                                           Panel A: Business Segment Data
              VARIABLES                Claims / Policies  Rejected Claims /Claims        Ln Settlement Days
                                             (1)                    (2)                           (3)
              Ln GDP per Capita             0.0750a                  0.0219                   0.3048b
                                            [0.017]                  [0.020]                   [0.135]
              Trust                        -0.2393b                 -0.4296a                  -1.8058c
                                            [0.093]                  [0.150]                   [1.011]
              Ln Check Collection          0.0546b                   -0.0050                   0.2411
                                            [0.022]                  [0.020]                   [0.166]
              Constant                     -0.8073a                  0.1215                    0.8268
                                            [0.189]                  [0.219]                   [1.572]
              Observations                     25                       25                        25
              Adj R2                         53.6%                    31.1%                     29.7%

                                                  Panel B: Claims Data
                         Claimant                      Settlement <                         Settlement /
                                      Claims Fully                       Settlement /                            Ln Final
                         Disputed                      Net Assessed                         Net Assessed
                                       Rejected                          Initial Claim                        Proposal Days
 VARIABLES               Decision                          Value                                Value
                            (1)            (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)
 Ln GDP per Capita        0.0939b        0.0899 a
                                                          0.1579a           -0.0152           -0.0769c           0.4266a
                          [0.038]        [0.020]          [0.048]           [0.047]            [0.039]           [0.113]
 Trust                   -0.7639b       -0.6502a         -0.8001b           0.5939b           0.5508b           -2.5296a
                          [0.313]        [0.130]          [0.330]           [0.213]            [0.256]           [0.762]
 Ln Check Collection      0.0900         0.0423 c
                                                           0.0681           -0.0741           -0.0944c           0.2375c
                          [0.053]        [0.022]          [0.067]           [0.047]            [0.047]           [0.135]
 Constant                -0.8838c       -0.7332a         -1.2669b           1.0007c           1.8399a            -0.1247
                          [0.490]        [0.223]          [0.560]           [0.543]            [0.483]           [1.115]
 Observations                26             26               26                25                 26                26
 Adj R2                    48.7%          57.8%            32.1%             41.5%              48.1%             49.8%




                                                           41
                Table 5: Homeowners Insurance: Difference between Theft Claims and Non-Theft Claims

 This table presents robust OLS regressions for all the countries in our sample. Robust standard errors are shown in
 parentheses under each coefficient. Significance levels: a if p<0.01; b if p<0.05; c if p<0.10.

                                                     Difference Between Theft and Non-Theft Claims
                                  Claimant                    Settlement <                 Settlement /          Ln Final
                      Theft                     Claims Fully                Settlement /
                                  Disputed                    Net Assessed                 Net Assessed          Proposal
                      Claims                     Rejected                    Initial Claim
                                  Decision                        Value                        Value               Days
    VARIABLES           (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)                (7)


Ln GDP per Capita     -0.1309a     0.0296         0.1153b         0.0226          -0.0555         -0.0731         0.1405
                       [0.024]     [0.073]        [0.051]         [0.060]         [0.043]         [0.045]         [0.135]
Trust                 -0.4592a    -1.0604b        -1.2247a        -0.7976c        0.6827b         0.8543b        -1.4846c
                       [0.146]     [0.408]         [0.339]         [0.376]        [0.301]         [0.302]         [0.715]
Ln Check Collection   0.0189       0.1465b        -0.0002         0.1073c         0.0050          0.0122          -0.0283
                      [0.030]      [0.057]        [0.056]         [0.059]         [0.037]         [0.044]         [0.081]
Constant              1.5804a      -0.4913        -0.5696         -0.3711         0.1661          0.2307          -0.5665
                      [0.297]      [0.622]        [0.512]         [0.720]         [0.398]         [0.472]         [1.239]

Observations            26          24              24              24               23            24              24
Adj R2                 58.8%       54.9%           34.0%           35.2%           4.87%          35.9%           15.0%




                                                             42
                                Table 6: Homeowners Insurance; Cost, Prices and Margins

This table presents robust OLS regressions for all the countries in our sample. Robust standard errors are shown in
parentheses under each coefficient. Significance levels: a if p<0.01; b if p<0.05; c if p<0.10.

                                                                                              Premium to
                                          Expense Ratio     Loss Ratio      Profit Margin
                                                                                              Sum Insured

                        VARIABLES              (1)                (2)            (3)               (4)


            Ln GDP per Capita                0.0214             0.1086b       -0.0949a           0.0039
                                             [0.025]            [0.041]        [0.030]           [0.005]
            Trust                           -0.3669a         -0.8273a          0.9335a          -0.1385a
                                             [0.101]          [0.197]          [0.198]           [0.031]
            Ln Check Collection              -0.0014            0.0356         -0.0220          0.0171a
                                             [0.015]            [0.025]        [0.024]          [0.006]
            Constant                         0.2961             -0.5705        0.8959a            0.289
                                             [0.250]            [0.421]        [0.276]           [0.047]

            Observations                       25                 26             25                26
            Adj R   2
                                              39.7%             60.9%          67.2%             67.9%




                                                           43
                       Appendix A: Country Coverage and Information Requested and Obtained from each Branch of the Insurance Firm
The table shows the scope of the request of information and the data obtained from each of the branches of the insurance firm in the 28 countries of our sample.
The data pertains to the segment of homeowners Insurance only. For each country, we requested the segments data from the underwriting and the claims
department. The data for the actual contracts and claims are also only for Homeowners Insurance. If the data were obtained, we marked the cell with a "Yes."
The contract and claim information includes all the information about the common homeowners contract, additional modules that may be added to it, all contract
forms, all contract information and explanations given to the insured, all claim information and explanations given to the insured and all claim forms to be filed in
in case of a claim. For the columns of actual contracts and actual claims, we include the number of contracts and claims obtained.
                   GDP per capita PPP                                                                  Contract and       Actual
                                                                                        Business                                      Actual Claims      Laws &
 Country                in 2010           Continent             Legal Origin                              Claim         Contracts
                                                                                      Segment Data                                      (number)       Regulations
                         (USD)                                                                         Information      (number)
 Argentina               18,712           America       French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Austria                 43,336           Europe        German Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Bulgaria                15,283           Europe        German Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 China                   9,352             Asia         German Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Colombia                10,901           America       French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Croatia                 20,118           Europe        French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Ecuador                 9,352            America       French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 France                  36,872           Europe        French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Germany                 40,429           Europe        German Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Greece                  28,726           Europe        French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Hong Kong               48,108            Asia         English Common Law                 Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Hungary                 22,404           Europe        German Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 India                   4,405             Asia         English Common Law                 Yes             Yes             20              18              Yes
 Italy                   36,201           Europe        French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Japan                   35,750            Asia         German Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Mexico                  15,535           America       French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Netherlands             45,525           Europe        French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Panama                  15,419           America       French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Poland                  21,771           Europe        German Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Portugal                27,238           Europe        French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Romania                 17,818           Europe        French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Serbia                  12,688           Europe        French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Slovakia                25,159           Europe        German Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Slovenia                28,678           Europe        German Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Spain                   32,507           Europe        French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Switzerland             55,866           Europe        German Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes
 Thailand                13,487            Asia         English Common Law                 Yes             Yes             20              12              Yes
 Turkey                  17,959            Asia         French Civil Law                   Yes             Yes             20              20              Yes


                                                                                 44
                                       Appendix B: Information Requested about Homeowners Insurance Business Segment
This table shows the scope of the information requested for the Homeowners Insurance segment from the branch of the firm in the 28 countries of our sample.
The request asked for information for the years of 2010 to 2012.

                                                              Explanation / Format Requested                                                          Year 1   Year 2   Year 3
 1. Underwriting Department

 List of risks covered in the policy                          Provide the full list of risks covered in the typical policy.

 List of risks that could be covered under the policy         Provide the list of additional risks that could be covered under this policy.

 Number of policies subscribed & break up by peril
  a) Water damages
  b) Fire
  c) liability
  d) Other (1)
  d) Other (2)
  d) Other (3)
 Gross written premium                                        Renewed portfolio (specify currency).

 Gross written premium                                        New portfolio (specify currency).

                                                              Percentage of average acquisition costs (acquisition + general) as a percentage of
 Acquisition costs (percent of Total Gross written premium)
                                                              total gross written premium.

 General expenses (percent of Total Gross written premium)    Average general expenses as percentage of total gross written premium.

 2. Claims Department

 Number claims made                                           Claims reported and incurred in the calendar year.

 Amount of claims made                                        Payments, internal costs and reserves of claims above. Please specify if net or gross
                                                              of deductible. Provide amounts net of deductibles if possible.

 Number claims reopened                                       Claims that were reopened in the calendar year.

 Amount of claims reopened                                    Payments, internal costs and reserves of claims above. Please specify if net or gross
                                                              of deductible. Provide amounts net of deductibles if possible.




                                                                                       45
                                                        Explanation / Format Requested                                       Year 1   Year 2   Year 3

2. Claims Department

Number claims settled/paid                              Ready adjusted claims (closed case) with payment.

Value of claims settled/paid                            The payment of the above claims.

Average Time to settle                                  Average number of days to settle a claim.

Average Time to settle material damages' claims         Average number of days to settle material damages claims.

Average Time to settle bodily injury claims             Average number of days to settle bodily injury claims.

Average Time to settle third party liability claims     Average number of days to settle third party liability claims.

Average Time to respond                                 Average number of days to first respond to a claim.

Number of claims going into court/arbitration/dispute

Value of claims going into court/arbitration/dispute

Number of claims rejected                               Rejected claims = claims without payment gross of deductibles.

Value of claims rejected                                First reserves of finally rejected claims.

Average claim settlement expenses (%)                   Claim settlement expenses as percentage of gross written premiums.
Loss ratio
Combined loss ratio

Deductibles applied:                                    Calculated Total amount of deductibles applied in case of payment.
 a) Water damages
 b) Fire
 c) liability
 d) Other
Breakup of the amount of claims of main categories:
 a) Water damages
 b) Fire
 c) liability



                                                                                46
                                  APPENDIX C: VARIABLE DEFINITIONS

__________________________________________________________________________________________________

BUSINESS SEGMENT DATA FOR HOMEOWNERS' INSURANCE


Claims                          The number of claims made in a given calendar year. Average for the years 2010
                                to 2012.

Number of Policies              The number of homeowners' insurance policies of the insurance company in the
                                country in a given calendar year. Average for the years 2010 to 2012.

Rejected Claims                 The number of claims rejected by the insurance company as a proportion of
                                claims made in a given calendar year. Average for the years 2010 to 2012.

Settlement Days                 The average number of days it takes to settle a claim from the date of the filling
                                of the claim to the date of the settlement of the claim. Settled claims include
                                rejected claims, claims settled by negotiation, and claims settled in court in a
                                given calendar year. Average for the years 2010 to 2012.

Expense Ratio                   The sum of acquisition costs and general expenses divided by Gross Written
                                Premiums. This ratio is equivalent to the percentage of premium used to pay all
                                the costs of acquiring, writing, and servicing the insurance policies. Acquisition
                                costs are the direct costs incurred by the insurer to get a customer or to
                                "acquire" the premium ­ for example, commissions paid to a broker or fronting
                                company. They are the cost accrued by the insurance company in relation to
                                efforts involved in acquiring a new customer. These costs traditionally include
                                marketing and advertising, incentives and discounts, and the staff associated
                                with those business areas, along with other sales staff. General expenses include
                                employee wages, agent and broker commissions, dividends, advertising, legal
                                fees, and other general and administrative expenses (G&A).

Loss Ratio                      The Loss Ratio is the value of settled claims settled, claim settling expenses, and
                                loss adjustment expenses over Gross Written Premiums. It reflects whether a
                                company is collecting enough premiums to cover claims and the expenses
                                related to those claims. We calculate the average for the years 2010 to 2012.

Profit Margin                   We define the profit margin as one minus the Combined Loss Ratio multiplied by
                                one minus the tax rate for each calendar year. The Combined Loss Ratio is the sum
                                of the Expense Ratio and the Loss Ratio. The profit margin is thus equivalent to
                                the difference between total gross written premiums and costs. We use
                                the statutory tax rate from KPMG. We calculate the average profit margin
                                for the three years between 2010 and 2012.

Gross Written Premiums          Total gross written premiums charged by the insurance company to provide the
                                coverage described in each homeowners' policy in a given calendar year.
                                Average for the years 2010 to 2012.

_________________________________________________________________________________________________



                                                    47
__________________________________________________________________________________________________

CLAIMS DATA



Value claimed by insured          The value of the damages the insured party claims at the very beginning of the
                                  claim process. If the insured makes more than one claim, we take the first in
                                  chronological order. If the insured party claims a damage that has no specific
                                  value and by so doing entrusts the insurance company to assess it, this variable
                                  will equal the technically assessed claim value.

Claims below one month of         The percentage of the claims in each country that are smaller than the average
Average Wage                      monthly wage in 2012. The data on average wages comes from the International
                                  Labor Organization Statistics.

Net Assessed Value (NAV)          The assessed value of the damage reported by the claimant as assessed by a
                                  technician or an expert paid by the insurance company net of the applicable
                                  deductible. In most cases, the technician or the expert are not employees of the
                                  insurance company.

Settlement                        The final value at which the claim is settled.

Premium to Sum Insured            The gross yearly premium payed by the claimant as a percentage of the total
                                  sum insured the most recent year before the claim is settled. The total sum
                                  insured is the maximum amount of money that the insurance company might
                                  have to pay, according to the insurance contract.

Claimant Disputed Decision        This variable is equal to one if the claimant disputed the decision on the claim
                                  taken by the insurance company. Disputes include legal processes as well as
                                  complaints filed with the company. The variable is zero otherwise

Claims Fully Rejected             The variable is equal to one if the claim was rejected by the insurance company,
                                  and zero otherwise.

Settlement < Net Assessed Value   The variable is equal to one if the claim was rejected or if part of the claim was
                                  rejected by the insurance company resulting in a settlement lower than the total
                                  assessed value of the damage net of the applicable deductible. The main reasons
                                  of rejection are: (i) limited or capped coverage; (ii) the damage is not covered in
                                  the policy; (iii) the claimant was negligent; (iv) lack of evidence or missing
                                  documents to prove claim or claim made out of time.

Final Proposal Days               The number of days from the filling of the claim to the insurance company's final
                                   proposal to settle the claim.

__________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                                      48
__________________________________________________________________________________________________

Theft Claims                    The proportion of theft claims in the total number of the claims received for
                                each country. Our sample of claims for each country consists of the first 20
                                claims settled in 2013. The types of damages reported in these claims are: (1)
                                theft or burglary; (2) damage caused by water; (3) damage caused by fire; (4)
                                damage caused by an external factor, such as a natural disaster, atmospheric
                                event; (5) damage caused by deterioration or malfunction; (6) vandalism or
                                damage caused by violence; (7) damaged caused by disputes with others; (8)
                                bodily injury; (9) other causes of damage.

__________________________________________________________________________________________________

OTHER VARIABLES



Ln GDP per Capita               The natural logarithm of the 2010 Gross Domestic Product per capita from World
                                Development Indicators (Purchasing Power Parity current international dollars).

Trust                           The percentage of the population that answered they trusted their neighbour
                                when asked the question "can you trust your neighbour or you can never be too
                                careful." Average of all values available for each country between 2000 and
                                2014. Data from the World Values Survey.

Ln Check Collection             The total estimated duration in calendar days of the court procedure for the
                                collection of a bounced check. Data from Djankov et al, (2003).

Corruption                      The index of Corruption from the Heritage Foundation for 2010. This index is
                                based on data from Transparency International.

HHI top 10                      The Herfindalh index is based on market shares in the residential insurance
                                market during the period 2010-2013 for the top 10 firms in that segment in each
                                country.

__________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                                   49
                  Appendix D: Homeowners Insurance; Full Specification with Corruption and Competition

 This table presents robust OLS regressions for all the countries in our sample. Robust standard errors are shown in
 parentheses under each coefficient. Significance levels: a if p<0.01; b if p<0.05; c if p<0.10.

                                              Panel A: Business Segment Data

               VARIABLES                 Claims / Policies      Rejected Claims / Claims   Ln Settlement Days
                                               (1)                        (2)                       (3)

               Ln GDP per Capita              0.0257                     0.0652c                 0.1428
                                              [0.032]                    [0.038]                 [0.337]
               Trust                         -0.3079b                   -0.3632b                -2.1102b
                                              [0.115]                    [0.150]                 [0.862]
               Ln Check Collection            0.0636b                    -0.0148                 0.2389
                                              [0.026]                    [0.023]                 [0.194]
               Corruption                     0.0019                     -0.0017                 0.0072
                                              [0.001]                    [0.002]                 [0.014]
               HHI top 10                     -0.1287                     0.2374                 1.2840
                                              [0.288]                    [0.316]                 [2.063]
               Constant                       -0.4302                    -0.2123                 2.0742
                                              [0.274]                    [0.289]                 [2.246]

               Observations                    25                         25                      25
               Adj R2                         53.7%                      29.4%                   24.6%


                                                    Panel B: Claims Data
                              Claimant                   Settlement <                      Settlement /
                                         Claims Fully                      Settlement /                    Ln Final Proposal
        VARIABLES             Disputed                   Net Assessed                      Net Assessed
                                          Rejected                         Initial Claim                         Days
                              Decision                       Value                            Value
                                 (1)          (2)             (3)                (4)            (5)               (6)

Ln GDP per Capita              0.1624c      0.0885c           0.3080a         0.0021         -0.1244c            0.3603
                               [0.092]      [0.049]           [0.098]        [0.080]          [0.065]            [0.246]
Trust                         -0.6632b     -0.6832a          -0.6319b        0.6491a         0.5199b            -2.5049a
                               [0.310]      [0.123]           [0.264]        [0.184]          [0.189]            [0.789]
Ln Check Collection            0.0794       0.0296             0.0230         -0.631         -0.0708             0.2987c
                               [0.058]      [0.032]           [0.081]        [0.057]          [0.049]            [0.153]
Corruption                     -0.0026      0.0004            -0.0053        -0.0010          0.0014             0.0013
                               [0.003]      [0.002]           [0.003]        [0.003]          [0.003]            [0.010]
HHI top 10                     0.1556       0.6553             1.4592        -0.6829         -0.9379            -2.7534b
                               [0.523]      [0.414]           [0.882]        [0.599]          [0.550]            [1.469]
Constant                      -1.4166c     -0.7117b           -2.417a         0.8577         2.1968a             0.3505
                               [0.762]      [0.341]           [0.670]        [0.580]          [0.371]            [1.637]

Observations                    26           26                26              25              26                 26
Adj R2                         45.0%        59.0%             40.2%           39.0%           50.2%              49.3%



                                                              50
                                 Panel C: Difference between Theft Claims and Non-Theft Claims

                                                           Difference Between Theft and Non-Theft Claims
                                      Claimant                      Settlement <                 Settlement /             Ln Final
                        Theft                        Claims Fully                 Settlement /
                                      Disputed                      Net Assessed                 Net Assessed             Proposal
                        Claims                        Rejected                     Initial Claim
                                      Decision                          Value                        Value                  Days
    VARIABLES             (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)          (6)                    (7)

Ln GDP per Capita       -0.1214c       -0.0554             -0.2105          -0.1504           0.1487         -0.0153       -0.0517
                         [0.064]       [0.129]             [0.127]           [0.123]          [0.131]        [0.086]       [0.155]
Trust                   -0.4352a      -1.2419b            -1.6746a          -0.9798c          1.1393a        0.9901a      -1.9311b
                         [0.151]       [0.452]             [0.302]           [0.471]          [0.238]        [0.310]       [0.811]
Ln Check Collection      0.0217        0.1373c             0.0632           0.1634b           0.0302          0.0234       -0.0634
                         [0.033]       [0.069]             [0.054]           [0.075]          [0.051]        [0.056]       [0.110]
Corruption              -0.0005       0.0040              0.0131a            0.0064           -0.0097c       -0.0028      0.0093
                        [0.003]       [0.004]             [0.004]           [0.004]            [0.005]       [0.003]      [0.008]
HHI top 10              -0.1934       0.7749              -0.4824           -1.0534           -1.8905        -0.7008      2.2575
                        [0.679]       [0.897]             [0.696]           [0.856]            [1.093]       [0.696]      [1.877]
Constant                1.5035a       0.1977              1.8463             0.8599           -1.5046        -0.2491      1.0244
                        [0.461]       [1.001]             [1.076]           [1.102]            [1.014]       [0.649]      [1.078]

Observations              26            24                  24                   24             23            24            24
Adj R2                   55.1%         53.1%               55.9%                37.7%          32.9%         32.9%         20.3%




                                                 Panel D: Costs, Margins and Profits
                                                                                                         Premium to Sum
                                            Expense Ratio            Loss Ratio         Profit Margin
                                                                                                             Insured
                      VARIABLES                     (1)                   (2)                (3)                (4)

             Ln GDP per Capita                    0.0554             -0.0022              -0.0233            0.0092
                                                  [0.042]             [0.060]             [0.052]            [0.015]
             Trust                               -0.3192a            -1.0051a             1.0594a           -0.1314a
                                                  [0.103]             [0.210]             [0.204]            [0.028]
             Ln Check Collection                 -0.0075              0.0464c             -0.0247            0.0160a
                                                  [0.018]             [0.027]             [0.029]            [0.007]
             Corruption                          -0.0013             0.0044b              -0.0030           -0.0002
                                                  [0.001]             [0.002]             [0.002]            [0.001]
             HHI top 10                           0.0837             -0.0690              -0.1894            0.0255
                                                  [0.260]             [0.298]             [0.395]            [0.111]
             Constant                             0.0356              0.2955              0.3255            -0.0118
                                                  [0.347]             [0.525]             [0.381]            [0.113]

             Observations                          25                  26                   25                26
             Adj R2                               37.4%               65.5%                67.9%             65.2%




                                                                     51
