                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               FOREIGN EXCHANGE ORDER FLOW AS A RISK FACTOR

                                        Craig Burnside
                                        Mario Cerrato
                                        Zhekai Zhang

                                     Working Paper 27199
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27199


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We thank Vania Stavrakeva and participants at the Imperial College 2019 Annual Conference in
International Finance for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Craig Burnside, Mario Cerrato, and Zhekai Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Foreign Exchange Order Flow as a Risk Factor
Craig Burnside, Mario Cerrato, and Zhekai Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 27199
May 2020
JEL No. F31,G15

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper proposes a set of novel pricing factors for currency returns that are motivated by
microstructure models. In so doing, we bring two strands of the exchange rate literature, namely
market-microstructure and risk-based models, closer together. Our novel factors use order flow
data to provide direct measures of buying and selling pressure related to carry trading and
momentum strategies. We find that they appear to be good proxies for currency crash risk.
Additionally, we show that the association between our order-flow factors and currency returns
differs according to the customer segment of the foreign exchange market. In particular, it
appears that financial customers are risk takers in the market, while non-financial customers serve
as liquidity providers.

Craig Burnside                                   Zhekai Zhang
Department of Economics                          Adam Smith Business School
Duke University                                  Gilbert Scott Building
213 Social Sciences Building                     Glasgow G12 8QQ
Durham, NC 27708-0097                            United Kingdom
and NBER                                         z.zhang.1@research.gla.ac.uk
craig.burnside@duke.edu

Mario Cerrato
Adam Smith Business School
Gilbert Scott Building
Glasgow G12 8QQ
United Kingdom
Mario.Cerrato@glasgow.ac.uk
1         Introduction
Two strands of the exchange rate literature offer explanations of anomalies in foreign ex-
change markets that are at odds with one another. One strand, which we refer to as the
stochastic discount factor (SDF) approach, uses frictionless common-information environ-
ments to explain the behaviour of exchange rates. In this framework, whether the underlying
model is a reduced-form model or a structural representative agent model, the returns to
various currency-based investment strategies are interpreted as compensation for risk.1 The
other strand uses a market microstructure framework in which agents have heterogeneous
information. In these models customer order flow is a key determinant of bilateral exchange
rate changes and, therefore, currency excess returns.2 In this paper we explore whether
the empirical facts are, in fact, consistent with both the reduced-form SDF approach and
the market microstructure approach. We argue that, in fact, empirical evidence that might
normally be interpreted as favourable to the SDF approach is also compatible with the
order-flow driven view of the world.
        To give an example, a commonly studied anomaly in foreign exchange markets is the
profitability of the carry trade, which is a zero-cost investment strategy in which an investor
borrows short term funds in low interest rate currencies and lends equivalent amounts short
term in high interest rate currencies. According to the uncovered interest-rate parity (UIP)
condition, this investment strategy should have zero expected returns, both conditionally
and unconditionally. However, it is well-established that carry trades have been profitable
in historical data, and this is considered to be a puzzle akin to the equity premium puzzle
in stock markets.3
        According to the SDF approach, any asset that bears a positive mean excess return is
risky, in the sense that the returns to the asset are systematically correlated with some mea-
sure of risk. According to this view, carry trades are profitable because holding long positions
in high interest rate currencies financed by short positions in low interest rate currencies is
risky. Finding measures of risk that are systematically correlated with carry trade returns
has, however, not been easy. Lustig and Verdelhan (2007) argue that a consumption-based
    1
     A non-exhaustive list includes Lustig and Verdelhan (2006), Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), Verdelhan
(2010), Colacito and Croce (2011), Lustig and Verdelhan (2012), Lustig et al. (2014).
   2
     See, among others, Evans and Lyons (2002), Cerrato et al. (2011), Evans (2011), Evans and Rime (2012),
Cerrato et al. (2015), Breedon et al. (2016), and Menkhoff et al. (2016).
   3
     See, for example, Fama (1984a), Engel (1996), Burnside (2012), Burnside (2014), and Engel (2016).



                                                    1
model can price the cross-section of currency returns as well as explain the returns to the
carry trade. Burnside (2011) argues that consumption-based risk factors are, however, un-
related to currency returns and that their results are explained by the properties of weakly
identified estimators. Burnside et al. (2011), Menkhoff et al. (2012a) and Burnside (2012)
have argued that standard measures of risk used to price stock returns do not appear to
be successful in pricing currency returns. Lustig et al. (2011) show that their carry-trade
portfolio, HMLFX, is useful in pricing the cross-section of currency returns but they do not
explain the carry-trade portfolio, itself, with some other underlying factor. Menkhoff et al.
(2012a) price the cross-section of currency returns with a global currency volatility factor.
They find that high interest rate currencies have a tendency to depreciate when volatility
in currency markets increases, while low interest rate currencies provide a hedge. But their
factor is only weakly linked to a particular economic theory.
      In this paper we let the microstructure literature guide the construction of a model that
explains carry trade returns using the SDF approach. In this literature, the emphasis is
on how dispersed information is aggregated within the market and translated into price
changes.4 The simplest models are linear and relate exchange rate changes to news about
fundamentals that are common knowledge and changes that are driven by net order flow in
the foreign exchange market. For a particular currency, net order flow is the value of buy
orders, net of sell orders, faced by foreign exchange dealers. Order flow, itself, is driven by
the common and dispersed information received within the customer market (i.e. the agents
in the market other than dealers). The literature emphasizes the importance of the market's
structure, with dealers interacting directly with customers but also with each other through
an inter-dealer market. This is usually captured, in models, by having sequential market
stages where customers arrive first, and the inter-dealer market clears later. What the models
show is that in market equilibrium, the change in the spot rate of a currency's value over
some interval is related linearly to the order flow that dealers face over that interval, and
this is the basis on which these models have been evaluated empirically.
      We use order-flow data to construct risk factors that are designed to capture notions
of currency crash risk. In particular we measure buying and selling pressure in the foreign
exchange market that is relevant to particular currency investment strategies, with the em-
phasis being on the carry trade. Our main risk factor, which we refer to as a carry-trade
  4
      See Evans (2011) for a comprehensive review.



                                                     2
order-flow factor, sums the value of buy orders for high interest rate currencies and the value
of sell orders for low interest rate currencies, having normalized the measures of order flow
to the scale of the market for each currency. When carry trade activity is strong, we expect
the value of this factor to increase. When carry trade activity is weaker we expect it to have
a lower value. Most importantly, if carry-trade investors dominate the market and suddenly
reverse their positions, we might expect our factor to turn negative because there is net
selling pressure on the high interest rate currencies. We find that this factor is strongly
associated with the returns to a variety of carry trade portfolios, and is very successful in
pricing the cross-section of currency returns. We find that a similar factor performs well in
pricing currency momentum portfolios.
   Our paper is related to two branches of the empirical literature. The microstructure
literature focuses on bilateral exchange rate behaviour. Lyons et al. (2001) and Evans and
Lyons (2002) show that order flow maps a significant part of customers' private information
into price discovery and it can explain a large part of exchange rate variation as well as, by
extension, currency excess returns. Evans and Lyons (2009) argue that order flow conveys
information about future macroeconomic conditions and that this information filters into the
exchange rate. They show that order-flow data have significant predictive power for future
macroeconomic variables.
   Another branch of the literature emphasizes currency crashes. Galati et al. (2007) find
that excess returns to carry trades tend to reverse abruptly under market stress. They
provide evidence from international banking data that currency flows are associated with
these reversals. Brunnermeier et al. (2008) propose a novel theoretical model which links
customer order flow to currency excess returns via the risk premium. They emphasize the
role of risk averse market dealers who use the information in order flow to adjust the risk
premium when they quote the spot rate. In their model, investors who engage in carry trades
build their position gradually but liquidate their positions quickly, causing a currency crash.
As market dealers predict the future unwind, they increase the risk premium associated
with carry trade portfolios. Differently from Brunnermeier et al. (2008), in this paper we
generalize that idea by extending it to the cross-section of currency returns and we provide
a natural empirical measure of carry-trading pressure in the foreign exchange market. In
related work, Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2008) propose a liquidity spiral model in which,
as currencies crash, losses to carry trade positions force investors to further liquidate their



                                              3
positions causing liquidity to dry up quickly. Inspired by the volatility factor of Menkhoff
et al. (2012a), Rafferty (2012) constructs a global currency skewness factor, by measuring
intramonth daily skewness, signed by the interest differential versus the US dollar, and
averaged across a basket of currencies. This factor can be thought of as a reduced-form
measure of crash risk. His factor prices both carry trade and momentum portfolios. Our
factor is somewhat related, but measures signed order flow rather than currency movements
themselves.
   Another important feature of our data is that order flow behaves systematically differently
across distinct segments of the customer side of the market. In particular, we find that
aggregate order flow is related to currency returns in the same way that order flow for
financial customers (hedge funds and asset managers) is. On the other hand, we tend to see
an inverse relationship for the order flow of non-financial customers (private and corporate
customers). When the order flow of financial customers leans more towards taking carry trade
positions, carry trade portfolios tend to do well. But we see the opposite pattern for non-
financial customers. This suggests that order flow conveys different information to dealers
depending on its origin within the customer base. It also suggests that a certain degree
of risk sharing happens within the customer base, not just between customers and dealers
and within the inter-dealer market. In this respect, our paper is also related to Menkhoff
et al. (2016) who, using a large data-set of customer order flow from a large foreign exchange
dealer, show that order flow carries important information which can be used for predicting
currency returns. They also show that financial flows contain information which have a
long-term impact on currency returns and that financial and non-financial customers trade
in opposite directions and therefore they provide evidence of risk sharing taking place in the
customer market. Our paper, on the other hand, focuses mainly on how order flow is related
to the carry trade rather than exchange rate predictability.
   In Section 2 we describe the currency portfolios that we analyze in our empirical work.
These include standard interest-rate sorted portfolios used in the extant literature, carry-
trade portfolios, and a set of portfolios sorted on the basis of order flow. In Section 3 we
introduce our order-flow related pricing factors. Sections 4 and 5 contain the bulk of our
empirical work, which is based on sample of weekly data from 2001 to 2012. We study the
behavior of various currency portfolios in this period, as well as the performance of standard
risk factors used in the prior literature. We then show cross-sectional asset pricing results for



                                               4
our order-flow based pricing factor. In Section 6 we explore a brief extension to momentum
portfolios. Section 7 concludes.


2     Currency Portfolios
Let Sk,t be the exchange rate between the US dollar (USD) and foreign currency k , measured
as foreign currency units (FCUs) per USD. Define sk,t = ln St . The logarithmic return to
borrowing one US dollar (USD) in the short term money market and investing it in a short-
term security denominated in foreign currency k , is

                              rk,t+1 = ik,t - it - (sk,t+1 - sk,t )                       (1)

where it is the US interest rate and ik,t is the foreign interest rate. The uncovered interest

parity (UIP) condition states that

                                   Et (sk,t+1 - sk,t ) = ik,t - it ,                      (2)

or, equivalently, that
                                           Et rk,t+1 = 0,                                 (3)

where Et is the expectations operator given information available at time t. That is, if
the foreign interest rate exceeds the US interest rate, the foreign currency is expected to
depreciate by the amount of the interest differential.
    Let Fk,t be the one period forward exchange rate between the same currencies, and let
fk,t = ln Fk,t . Up to a log approximation, covered interest parity (CIP) implies that

                                      ik,t - it = fk,t - sk,t .                           (4)

Therefore, assuming that CIP holds, the log return to being long foreign currency k and
short the USD is
                                      rk,t+1 = fk,t - sk,t+1 .                            (5)

Thus, under CIP, the UIP condition implies forward rate unbiasedness:

                                          Et sk,t+1 = fk,t                                (6)




                                                  5
2.1      Carry Trade Strategies
Carry trade strategies generally involve systematically managing a portfolio in which the
investor borrowing funds in low interest rate currencies and invests (or lends) in high interest
rate currencies. Under uncovered interest parity, however, we would not expect this strategy
to be profitable because Et rk,t+1 = 0. However, the empirical failure of UIP condition is
well-documented.5 In fact, it is widely understood that nominal exchange rates are well
approximated, empirically, as random walks; i.e. Et sk,t+1  sk,t .6 When this is true

                                       Et rk,t+1  ik,t - it = fk,t - sk,t .                                     (7)

This fact provides motivation for carry trade strategies because it suggests that by system-
atically borrowing low interest rate currencies and lending in high interest rate currencies,
the investor can expect to earn profits equal to the interest differential.
      We study several carry trade strategies discussed in the previous literature. Burnside
et al. (2011) introduce an equally-weighted carry trade (EWC) strategy that is also studied
by Burnside et al. (2011) and Burnside (2012). This strategy uses the USD as a base currency.
Each of the Nt foreign currencies in the available data is treated as follows. If the currency
has a higher interest rate than the USD, the investor lends in that currency and borrows
1/Nt dollars. If the currency has a lower interest rate than the USD, the investor borrows
that currency and lends 1/Nt dollars. Thus, the total bet of this strategy is normalized to
one USD. The return of the EWC portfolio between t and t + 1 is:
                   Nt                                                 Nt
          EWC            1                                                   1
         rt +1 =            sign(fk,t - sk,t ) · (fk,t - sk,t+1 ) =             sign(fk,t - sk,t ) · rk,t+1 .   (8)
                   k=1
                         Nt                                           k=1
                                                                             Nt

      Following Lustig et al. (2011), at each date t, we also allocate the available currencies
into five portfolios, labeled P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5, with P1 corresponding to the currencies
with the lowest interest rates, and P5 containing those currencies with the highest interest
rates. Each portfolio holds an equally weighted long position in its constituent currencies
financed by borrowing dollars. Hence, the log return of the ith portfolio is

                             Pi                1                          1
                            rt +1 =                (fk,t - sk,t+1 ) =         rk,t+1 ,                          (9)
                                      kKi,t
                                              Ni,t                    kK
                                                                         Ni,t
                                                                           i,t

  5
     Hansen and Hodrick (1980), Bilson (1981), Fama (1984b) provide early tests. More recently, Engel
(1996) and Burnside (2014) provide updated tests of UIP.
   6
     The classic reference is Meese and Rogoff (1983).

                                                          6
where Ki,t is the set of currencies in the ith portfolio and Ni,t is the number of currencies in
the ith portfolio.
      Lustig et al. (2011) use P1­P5 to construct two additional portfolios: the DOL portfolio
and the HML portfolio. Their version of the DOL portfolio is an equally weighted average of
the P1 through P5 portfolios. By contrast, we construct DOL as the equal weighted average
of the currency excess returns for nine of the G10 currencies:7

                                        DOL       1
                                       rt +1 =                 rk,t+1 .                     (10)
                                                  9
                                                      k{G10}


This ensures that our DOL portfolio has a consistent definition across the different currency
samples that we use by always measuring the tendency of the USD to depreciate or appreciate
against the other G10 currencies.
      The HML portfolio is a typical high-minus-low portfolio which takes a long position in
the P5 portfolio and a short position in the P1 portfolio. In this sense, it can be thought of
as a carry trade portfolio that finances long positions in the highest interest rate currencies,
financed by borrowing the lowest interest rate currencies. Its return is

                                            HML     P5     P1
                                           rt +1 = rt+1 - rt+1 .                            (11)

      We also follow Daniel et al. (2017) by constructing a spread-weighted carry trade portfolio
(SPD) and a dollar-neutral carry trade portfolio (DNC). The SPD portfolio modifies the
EWC portfolio by weighting each currency based on the size of its interest differential relative
to the average absolute interest differential. The return of SPD portfolio is
                                     Nt
                            SPD                fk,t - sk,t
                           rt +1 =           Nt
                                                                   · (fk,t - sk,t+1 )       (12)
                                     k=1     j =1 |fj,t - sj,t |

      The EWC and SPD carry trade strategies are rationalized based on the perspective of a
US investor who believes that each exchange rate is a random walk and that the position
in each currency should be based on whether the expected return is positive or negative.
The decision to buy each currency is based on the interest rate differential with the USD,
and this means these portfolios are not dollar neutral. The DNC portfolio, by contrast, is
constructed in a way that means there is no basis currency. Each currency is included in
  7
    The nine currencies are EUR, JPY, GBP, CHF, AUD, NZD, CAD, SEK, NOK, with the USD being left
out as it is the base currency in our analysis.



                                                      7
an equally-weighted way depending on its interest rate relative to the median interest rate
among all the currencies. Thus, the return of the DNC portfolio is
                                    Nt
                         DNC              1
                        rt +1   =            sign(fk,t - sk,t - t ) · (fk,t - sk,t+1 ),                (13)
                                    k=1
                                          Nt

where t = median{fk,t - skt }N
                             k=1 .
                              t



       For the 2001­12 period, we form the P1­P5, EWC, SPD, DNC, HML and DOL portfolios
using data for a set of 20 of the most liquid currencies according to trading volume.8 The
portfolios are formed on a weekly basis, each with a holding period of one week. Descriptive
statistics for the portfolio returns are summarized in Table 2. It shows the mean (median)
return, standard deviation, skewness, kurtosis, Sharpe ratio and the first order autocorrela-
tion coefficient. We also report two coskewness measures relative to the returns to the DOL
portfolio.9 Portfolios with higher coskewness earn higher returns when global volatility is
high. Thus, greater coskewness is often interpreted as making a portfolio more effective as
a hedge against global volatility.
       As Table 2 shows, the mean returns monotonically increase from portfolio P1 to portfolio
P5 with the lowest return being 1.6% (on an annual basis) and the highest being 13.1%. The
mean return of the DOL portfolio is 5.3%. This suggests that investors require a positive
risk premium to invest in non-US short-term securities. Volatility also displays an increasing
pattern moving from P1 to P5, but it does not rise in proportion to the expected return,
so the Sharpe ratios also increase from P1 to P5. So high interest rate currencies still yield
higher returns after a standard adjustment for risk.
       All of the carry trade portfolios have positive average returns and large Sharpe ratios.
The SPD and HML portfolios have the largest mean returns (11.7% and 11.6%), and the
   8
      The currencies in our data set are the EUR, JPY, GBP, CHF, AUD, NZD, CAD, SEK, NOK, MXN,
BRL, ZAR, KRW, SGD, HKD, TRY, HUF, PLN, CZK, and SKK. We observe the exchange rates from the
first week of November 2001 to the fourth week of March 2012. Appendix A provides further details.
    9
      Following Harvey and Siddique (2000) a direct measure for coskewness is
                                                      E [t+1 2  M,t+1 ]
                                           SKS =                           ,
                                                   E [t+1 ] E [2
                                                           0. 5
                                                                   M,t+1 ]

where t+1 is the innovation of the excess return of a portfolio, and M,t+1 is the innovation of the excess
return of some market factor (here we use the DOL factor). The innovations are constructed using first order
autoregressive models for both the portfolio return and the DOL return.
  The second coskewness measure is based on the regression
                                              DOL          DOL 2
                                rt+1 = 0 + 1 rt +1 + SKD (rt+1 ) + ut+1 ,
                                                 DOL 2
where rt+1 is the return on some portfolio and (rt+1 ) is a proxy for market volatility.


                                                         8
largest Sharpe ratios (1.11 and 0.99), followed by DNC and EWC. The returns of all of the
portfolios are negatively skewed, indicating the possibility of large negative realizations of the
returns. However, for portfolio P1 the skewness coefficient is approximately zero, suggesting
that it is less subject to the potential for big losses.

2.2        Order Flow and Exchange Rates
We also form portfolios based on order flow data for the set of currencies in our data set.
In order to do so, we use a unique data set, from one of the top foreign exchange dealers,
covering more than eleven years (2001­2012) of weekly end-user order flow for up to 20
currencies.10 Let xk,t denote the aggregate order flow (the total value of buy orders, net of
sell orders) for currency k in the interval between periods t and t + 1. Typically, empirical
implementations of order flow models relate the change of the exchange rate to this flow, as
well as to changes in observable fundamentals (such as the interest differential between the
two currencies), and an error term. Our intention, here, is not to implement a specific order
flow model. Instead, in our preliminary analysis, we demonstrate the apparent correlation
between order flow and exchange rate changes at the weekly frequency.
       In Table 1 we present estimates of the following equation:

                                    sk,t+1 - sk,t = ak + xk,t bk + uk,t+1 ,                  (14)

where uk,t+1 is an error term. Given that we measure exchange rates in FCUs per USD, and
xk,t measures net buy orders of the foreign currency, we expect negative estimates of bk . In
fact, this is what we see in Table 1, with bk being positive and statistically significant for
17 of our 20 currencies. This evidence is suggestive that order flow data may be useful in
explaining exchange rate changes and the returns to currency investments.

2.3        Order Flow Portfolios
Order flow is not easily compared across currencies, due to the heterogenous volume of trade
in each of the currencies. Therefore, to make such comparisons we adjust the aggregated
order flow for currency k at time t with the standard deviation of the order flow of currency
j over the full sample. That is, we define adjusted order flow as
                                                          xk,t
                                               yk,t =            .                           (15)
                                                        std(xk )
  10
       Appendix A provides further details of our data set.

                                                        9
      At each week t, we sort the 20 currencies into five portfolios according to yk,t , which are
labeled O1, O2, . . . , O5 where O1 consists of the currencies with greatest selling pressure
(lowest, or most negative, order flow) and O5 consists of the currencies with the greatest
buying pressure (most positive order flow). These are not tradable portfolios because the
measure of order flow is contemporaneous to the return. Our purpose in studying these
portfolios is, in fact, to measure the degree to which order flow and the returns are associ-
ated. We also define a buy-minus-sell (BMS) portfolio, which is long portfolio O5 and short
portfolio O1.
      Table 3 shows summary statistics for these portfolios. There is a clear monotonically
increasing pattern in the expected returns and Sharpe ratios of the O1­O5 portfolios. Unlike
the interest rate sorted portfolios, P1­P5, the standard deviations of the returns do not
vary much across the five portfolios. Unsurprisingly, the average of the O1­O5 portfolios
(indicated by `Avg' in Table 3) behaves similarly to the DOL portfolio in Table 2. The
BMS portfolio earns a large positive average return, with a very large Sharpe ratio. These
results, in a sense, confirm the notion that contemporaneous order flow is strongly positively
correlated with exchange rate changes and currency returns.
      We also have data on order flow that is disaggregated by the customer type: Asset
Manager (AM), Hedge Fund (HF), Corporate (CO), and Private Client (PC). However,
these data are only available for nine developed country currencies, so we sort the currencies
into four portfolios rather than five.11 As these are all major currencies we do not normalize
order flow by its standard deviation. These results are also reported in Table 3. For Asset
Managers and Hedge Funds the pattern across portfolios is the same as for aggregate order
flow. The portfolios with the most buying pressure earn the largest returns. For Corporate
customers the pattern is partially reversed, and for Private Clients it is sharply reversed:
The portfolios with the most buying pressure earn negative returns, while the ones with the
most selling pressure earn positive returns.12
      Next, we compare the informational content of order flow with that of interest differen-
tials and volatility innovations. Menkhoff et al. (2012a) show that a global volatility proxy
contains important information which can be used to price returns of carry trade portfolios.
Relatedly Menkhoff et al. (2012b) show that momentum strategies are more profitable among
currencies that have greater idiosyncratic volatility. In both cases, the implication is that
 11
      The nine currencies are EUR, JPY, GBP, CHF, AUD, NZD, CAD, SEK, NOK.
 12
      Cerrato et al. (2011) show that these customer groups tend to act as liquidity providers.


                                                      10
volatility has an association with the riskiness of and return to holding different currencies
and currency portfolios. We believe that the apparent importance of volatility is strongly
linked to order flow and that, in fact, order flow contains the relevant information to price
returns of carry trade portfolios.
      To provide the reader with a first intuitive view of this, we double sort our currencies in
two different ways with the results being shown in Tables 4 and 5. In Table 4, we first sort our
currencies into three portfolios based on their short term interest rates. Thereafter, within
each portfolio, we sort currencies into two bins based on the magnitude of order flow.13 The
main conclusion of Table 4 is that even after considering interest rates, a strategy consisting
in buying a portfolio with the highest buying pressure (high order flow) and selling a portfolio
with the highest selling pressure (low order flow), gives a positive and statistically significant
return. In other words, taking interest rates into account does not drive out order flow as
an important apparent determinant of currency returns.
      In Table 5, we first sort our currencies into three portfolios based on their idiosyncratic
volatility innovation, and thereafter on the magnitude of order flow. Again, even after
considering idiosyncratic volatility innovations, a portfolio of the currencies with the highest
buying pressure has an economically and statistically significantly higher return than the
one with the greatest selling pressure.


3       A Carry-Trade Order-Flow Factor
The empirical results presented in Tables 3­5 suggest that order flow contains significant
information that could be relevant for pricing the returns to carry trade portfolios, and
potentially the returns to other currency trading strategies. In this section, we propose a
set of novel pricing factors based on order flow that are motivated by microstructure models
and the prevalence of carry trading in foreign exchange markets.
      Our first factor is based on the aggregate order flow measure that we described above.
In particular, this factor, which we denote as CTOF, is defined as
                                               1
                                CTOFt+1 =                 yk,t · sign(fkt - skt ).                     (16)
                                               Nt   kNt

If investors build portfolios based on carry trade considerations, we might expect, yk,t to
be positive for high interest rate currencies and yk,t to be negative for low interest rate
 13
      We build a total of just six portfolios due to the limited number of currencies in our sample.

                                                      11
currencies. Thus, we would expect CTOF to generally be positive. But yk,t should also
reflect news that arrives after investors form their portfolios, because it measures order flow
between periods t and t + 1. If arriving news is favorable to carry trades, we would expect
CTOF to be especially high. On the other hand, if news arrives that induces investors to
cash out their carry trade positions, CTOF will fall, and possibly even turn negative. In a
sense, therefore, CTOF can be interpreted as a factor that measures the degree of sentiment
in favor of carry trading.14
       We also consider alternative carry-trade order-flow factors that use our order flow data
disaggregated by customer segment: Asset Manager, Hedge Fund, Corporate, and Private
Client. These are denoted as CTAM, CTHF, CTCO and CTPC. In a sense, these factors
measure the degree of carry trade activity by each customer type. As we saw, above, order
flow behaves differently across customer segments, so we expect the risk premium to change
across customers segments as well.15
       We now explore the relationship between our carry-trade order-flow factor and the excess
returns of carry trade strategies. To do this, we divide the sample into four sub-samples that
are selected according to order flow size. The first sub-sample contains the 25% of the weeks
within our full sample with the lowest values of CTOF and the fourth sub-sample contains
the 25% of the weeks within our full sample with the largest values of CTOF. Finally, we
compute the mean return across the sub-samples after employing four different carry trade
strategies (i.e. HML, SPD, EWC and DNC). Figure 1 shows the main results. High yield
currencies are highly affected by the carry trade order flow and vice versa. The average
excess return of the portfolios increases as we move from the left to the right. Figure 2
shows the same results across the different customer segments described above. Financial
customers (i.e. asset managers and hedge funds) are the most highly affected in periods of
high carry trade activity while non-financial customers (i.e. corporate customers and private
clients) can even profit during these times.
       These results suggest that there is a clear relationship between carry-trade order-flow and
the excess returns of carry trade strategies, and that this relationship differs by the customer
segment. We explore these results further in what follows.
  14
      Burnside (2012) suggests that a significant part of trading activity in foreign exchange markets is trig-
gered by carry trade investors. Breedon et al. (2016) show that there is a strong relationship between order
flow data and currency forward premia.
   15
      See Cerrato et al. (2015) and Menkhoff et al. (2016).




                                                      12
4        The Risk Exposure of Currency Portfolios
In this section, we measure the risk exposures of the portfolios we constructed in Section 2.1.
To do so we follow the standard approach in the literature, which is to perform time series
regressions of the returns of these portfolios on vectors of risk factors. These risk factors
include ones selected from the literature, as well as the novel order-flow based factor we
introduced in Section 3. Each time series regression is of the form

                       e
                      ri,t =  i + f t i +   i,t ,   i = 1, . . . , N,   t = 1, . . . , T,         (17)

       e
where ri,t is the excess return of portfolio i at time t, ft is a k × 1 vector of risk factors (not
a vector of forward rates!), N is the number of portfolios and T is the sample size. In this
part of our analysis, we consider the five interest-rate sorted currency portfolios, P1­P5, as
well as the two carry trade portfolios, EWC and SPD.

4.1       Betas of Traditional Pricing Factors
We begin by considering the two risk factors similar to those proposed by Lustig et al. (2011):
DOL and HML. Table 6, we start with the DOL and HML factors proposed by Lustig et al.
(2011). Overall, the results are in line with what has been documented in the empirical
literature. For the interest-rate sorted portfolios, P1­P5, the betas for DOL are scaled near
unity, although in our sample they increase in magnitude across P1 through P4, and then
decline for P5. The betas for the HML factor increase across portfolios for the HML portfolio
(although they are small in magnitude for P2, P3 and P4). P1 has a negative exposure to
HML, indicating that it is a hedge against carry trade risk. By contrast the beta is large
and positive for P5, indicating that it is highly exposed to carry trade risk. These results
are not surprising given the construction of the factors.16 We also note that EWC and SPD
are both positively and statistically significantly exposed to DOL and HML.
       Table 7 shows results for factors similar to those used by Menkhoff et al. (2012a), which
are DOL and a global volatility innovation factor (DVOL). The DVOL factor is constructed
by measured as the change of the cross-sectional average of the intra-week volatility for
each currency in our sample. In Menkhoff et al. (2012a) the same measure is used but it
is computed on an intra-month basis. Again, the results are in line with what has been
  16
   This follows from the fact that DOL is similar to the average of P1­P5 while HML is P5 minus P1. See
Burnside (2010) for further details.


                                                    13
documented in the literature. The pattern in the betas for DOL are similar to what we
observed for the DOL-HML model. For DVOL, the betas are positive for the low-interest-
rate currency portfolios (P1 and P2) and negative, and increasingly so, for the high-interest-
rate portfolios (P3, P4 and P5). This indicates that when global currency volatility rises,
high interest rate currencies tend to do poorly, while low interest rate currencies, again, act
as a hedge against increasing volatility. Not surprisingly, EWC and SPD are both negatively
exposed to DVOL, although the beta for EWC is not statistically significant.

4.2       Betas of the Carry Trade-Order Flow Factor
Table 8 shows results obtained using our aggregate carry-trade order-flow risk factor, CTOF,
in tandem with the DOL factor. The pattern in the betas for DOL are similar to what we
observed for the DOL-HML and DOL-DVOL models. The results indicate that portfolios
with higher interest rates (P3, P4, and P5) have positive and statistically significant exposure
to CTOF. The lower interest rate portfolios (P1 and P2) have negative and, in the case of
P1, statistically significant exposure to CTOF. The betas are monotonically increasing as
we move from P1 to P5. These results mean that when the order flow data suggest stronger
trading pressure consistent with the carry trade, i.e. when CTOF increases, the high interest
rate portfolios earn higher returns and the low interest rate portfolios earn lower returns.
The pattern reverses if investors reverse their carry trade holdings and CTOF decreases.17
As a consequence, low interest rate portfolios act as hedges against a reversal of investors'
carry trade positions, while high interest rate portfolios are exposed to this risk. The carry
trade portfolios, EWC and SPD, are both positively and significantly exposed to CTOF.
       A potential concern with our order-flow risk factor, CTOF, is that it might explain
the interest differential component of the return, but not the change of the exchange rate.
Suppose, for example, that order flow simply responds to changes in interest rates with agents
taking on stronger buying (seeling) positions when a currency's interest differential widens
favorably (unfavorably). If this were the case, CTOF might not represent an improvement
over average absolute interest differentials as an explanatory variable. As it turns out, this is
very much not the case. Instead, we find that CTOF is much more correlated with changes
in the change of the exchange rate component of the return. To demonstrate this, we break
  17
     If there is more positive order flow to high interest rate currencies, and more negative order flow to low
interest rate currencies, our CTOF factor increases. If the reverse happens, it decreases. Thus, CTOF acts
like an indicator of the pressure on currency markets consistent with investors executing carry trades.



                                                      14
the returns to each portfolio into the component due to the interest differentials between the
underlying currencies and the dollar, and the component due to the change in the exchange
rate:
             Pi      Pi,f -s    Pi,s              1                        1
            rt +1 = rt+1     + rt +1 =                (fk,t - sk,t ) +         (sk,t - sk,t+1 ).     (18)
                                         kKi,t
                                                 Ni,t                  kK
                                                                          Ni,t
                                                                         i,t


In Table 9 we report the separate betas of these two components with respect to our two
factors. As is clear from the table, most of the explanatory power of CTOF runs through
                                                                                        Pi,s
its relationship with the exchange rate component of the return. In fact, the betas of rt +1
                                                       Pi                         18
with respect to CTOF are almost identical of those of rt +1 with respect to CTOF.


4.3     Risk Exposures Before and After the Financial Crisis
If the CIP and UIP conditions hold, then, as we saw above, the forward rate unbiasedness
condition, (6), holds. For foreign currency k , this condition can be rewritten as

                                     Et sk,t+1 - sk,t = fk,t - sk,t .                                (19)

Consequently, UIP is often tested by running the regression

                              sk,t+1 - sk,t = 0 + 1 (fk,t - sk,t ) +       k,t ,                     (20)

and testing the null hypothesis that (0 , 1 ) = (0, 1). As a vast literature has documented,
estimates of 1 often deviate significantly from 1 and are often negative, especially for the
major currencies.19 However, there may have been a structural break around the time of the
Global Financial Crisis of 2008, as documented by Bussiere et al. (2018) and Burnside (2019).
Burnside (2019) demonstrates this by estimating equation (19) using rolling samples of five
years of monthly data. When these samples encompass or post-date the crisis period, the
estimates become unstable, have a wider cross-sectional distribution and are often positive.
Relatedly, Burnside (2019) documents that even after the crisis was over, the profitability
of the carry trade did not return to the same levels it achieved before the crisis. Finally,
Mancini-Griffoli and Ranaldo (2010) and Du et al. (2018) document that during and after
  18                                                                  Pi,s
     In additional results (not reported here) we further decompose rt +1  into two additional components.
To do so we use an equation similar to (14) to split the change in the exchange rate for each constituent
currency into a component "due to" order flow and a component that is unexplained. We find a closer
relationship between the order flow component and CTOF than we do between the unexplained component
and CTOF, although, in both cases, the pattern in the betas is similar (increasing in magntitude from P1
through P5).
  19
     Burnside (2014) provides recent estimates for industrialized and emerging market currencies.

                                                     15
the crisis there seem to have been deviations from CIP as measured using money market
interest rate data and bid-ask spreads.
      Given the apparent instability of the time series behavior of exchange rates, in the Ap-
pendix we investigate whether there were changes in the nature of the risk exposures of the
currency portfolios around the time of the crisis. Tables A6­A8 are analogous to Tables 6­8,
but provide estimates of the factor betas over two subsamples: The period leading up to the
financial crisis (ending in October 2007), and the period that encompasses and post-dates
the financial crisis (November 2007 through March 2012). We find some evidence for insta-
bility in the factor betas across these subsamples. Betas are very stable for the DOL-HML
model, but this is not surprising given its construction.20 On the other hand, there is a
fairly striking decrease in the magnitude and statistical significance of the exposures of the
different portfolios to DVOL and an apparent increase in the importance of DOL within the
DOL-DVOL model. For our order-flow based model the main difference across subsamples
is an increase of the exposures of the higher interest rate currency portfolios (P3­P5) to the
DOL factor, and more especially the CTOF factor.

4.4       Disaggregated Order Flow
Cerrato et al. (2011) show that order flow is highly informative but, crucially, knowing
the motivation for trading is also informative. For example, the motivation of leveraged
hedge funds and the information content in their order flow may be very different than
that of corporate customers. They show that the order flow of financial customers is highly
informative, and this suggests that the risk exposures of our currency portfolios may differ
depending on how we measure order flow (specifically, for which customers we measure it).
      Table 10 shows the results using our disaggregated order flow factors that were defined
in Section 3. The upper panel provides the results for financial customers (CTAM, CTHF),
while lower panel provides the results for non-financial customers (CTCO and CTPC). Many
of the betas are statistically significant. What stands out in the table is the switch in the
pattern in the betas for P1­P5 with respect to our order-flow factors as we move from finan-
cial to non-financial customers. The regressions indicate that the betas for Asset Managers
and Hedge Funds (CTAM, CTHF) increase as we move from P1 to P5, much as they do
for the aggregate order-flow factor, CTOF. The betas of the EWC and SPD portfolios are
 20
      See Burnside (2010) for further details.



                                                 16
positive, as for aggregated order flow. A traditional interpretation would be that the high
interest rate portfolios are more exposed to risk, as measured by CTAM and CTHF. The
reverse pattern is observed for the betas with respect to CTCO and CTPC. The fact that
the results for CTAM and CTHF are similar to those for CTOF may not be surprising given
that financial order flow is more variable than nonfinancial order flow, and it accounts for
more of the variation in total order flow.
       These results suggest a risk-sharing story consistent with the one in Menkhoff et al.
(2016), in that different group of customers (i.e. financial and non-financial) appear to trade
in different directions and, therefore, risk sharing takes place in the customer market, not
just in the inter-dealer market as suggested in Evans and Lyons (2009).21


5        Cross-Sectional Asset Pricing
In this section, we follow the standard generalized method of moments (GMM) approach to
estimate linear stochastic discount factor (SDF) model, discussed in Cochrane (2005) and
used by Lustig et al. (2011), Burnside et al. (2011), and Menkhoff et al. (2012a) among many
others. Let re be an N × 1 vector of excess returns where N is the number of test assets. If
mt is an SDF for these returns, then

                                              E (re m) = 0                                            (21)

where E is the unconditional expectations operator. As is standard in the literature, we
specify the SDF as a linear function of a k × 1 vector of risk factors, f :

                                          m = 1 - (f - µ) b,                                          (22)

where µ = E (f ) and b is a k × 1 vector of parameters. Given this definition, the mean of
the SDF is normalized to 1.
       When equation (21) is combined with equation (22) it becomes

                                         E (re ) = cov(re , f )b.                                     (23)

Our other moment restriction is
                                               E (f ) = µ.                                            (24)
  21
    Barber and Odean (2013), for the equity market, show that private investors (i.e. uninformed investors)
tend to lose money from trading.


                                                    17
This motivates the use of the following GMM estimators for b and µ


                                        ^
                                        b = (C W C )-1 C W r
                                                           ¯e ,                                      (25)

                                                 µ   ¯
                                                 ^ = f,                                              (26)
                                    ¯ is the sample mean of f , C is the sample covariance
      ¯e is the sample mean of re , f
where r
matrix between re and f , and W is some positive definite weighting matrix. For the results
reported in this paper, we use an N × 1 identity matrix for W .22
       Equation (23) can also be written as

                                  E (re ) = cov(re , f )- 1
                                                        f f b = ,                                    (27)

with  = cov(re , f )- 1
                    f being an N × k matrix of factor  and  = f b being a k × 1 vector

of risk prices. This is the beta representation of the pricing model, which we also estimate
using GMM methods described in Cochrane (2005) and the appendix to Burnside (2011).
       When estimating either the SDF representation of the model or the beta representation, it
is important that the matrix cov(re , f ) has full column rank (i.e. its rank should be k ). When
this condition fails, the model is not properly identified, both estimators have non-standard
asymptotic distributions, and tests for the validity of the model also have non-standard
distributions as discussed in Burnside (2016). Therefore, we perform the tests proposed by
Kleibergen and Paap (2006) (KP) for testing the rank of cov(re , f ). We mainly work with
models where k = 2. If cov(re , f ) has rank 0, it means neither risk factor is correlated with
the return vector. If cov(re , f ) has rank 1, it means one risk factor is uncorrelated with the
return vector or a linear combination of the two risk factors is uncorrelated with the return
vector.
       As test assets, we use the returns to the five portfolios sorted on the interest rate differ-
entials described above (P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5). Since the HML and DNC portfolios are
closely related to P1­P5 we do not include them as test assets.23 We also do not include
EWC and SPD as test portfolios.
  22
     Details of the computation of the parameter estimates and standard errors are provided in the online
appendix to Burnside (2011).
  23
     HML is simply P5 minus P1, while DNC would be pure linear combination of the portfolios if there were
an even number of them instead of an odd number.




                                                   18
5.1    Traditional Pricing Factors
In Table 11, we start with the DOL and HML factors proposed by Lustig et al. (2011). The
results are in line with what has been documented in the empirical literature. The SDF
parameter (b) for the HML factor is positive and statistically significant, as is the associated
risk price (). For the DOL factor both parameters are positive, but neither is statistically
significant (except ^ DOL , according to the Fama-MacBeth method). The cross-sectional fit of
the model is excellent, and it passes the specification tests shown in Table 11. Additionally,
the KP test strongly rejects the null of reduced rank.
   Table 12 shows results for a model similar to the one used by Menkhoff et al. (2012a),
which includes DOL and DVOL as factors. Qualitatively, the results are in line with what
has been documented in the literature. The SDF parameter and the risk price of DVOL
are both negative, indicating that portfolios with greater exposure to higher volatility (i.e.
lower returns when volatility increases) have higher mean returns. However, neither ^  bDVOL
nor ^ DVOL is statistically significant at conventional significance levels, except when we use
the Fama-MacBeth method. The cross-sectional fit of the model is excellent, and it passes
the specification tests shown in Table 12. The KP test marginally rejects the null hypothesis
of reduced rank at the 5% level. This likely reflects the imprecision in the estimates of the
betas for most of the portfolios.
   In sum, our estimates of the traditional models are similar to those found in the literature.
despite the fact that our sample period and frequency of our data are different.

5.2    CTOF as a Risk Factor
Table 13 shows cross sectional asset pricing results using our aggregate carry-trade order-
flow risk factor, CTOF, in tandem with the DOL factor. The empirical evidence in Table
13 strongly supports CTOF as a pricing factor. The SDF parameter (b) and risk price ()
for the CTOF factor are positive and statistically significant. Thus, portfolios more positive
exposure to CTOF carry larger risk premia. The cross-sectional fit of the model is excellent,
and it passes the specification tests shown in Table 13. Additionally, the KP test strongly
rejects the null hypothesis of reduced rank at less than the 1% level.




                                              19
5.3    Disaggregated Order Flow
We now investigate whether the order flow factors associated with particular customers are
relatively more important in explaining the mean returns of our currency portfolios. Table
14 show the results using our disaggregated order flow factors that were defined above.
The results for financial customers (CTAM, CTHF), in panels (a) and (b), while those for
non-financial customers (CTCO and CTPC) are found in panels (c) and (d).
   The estimated SDF coefficients and risk premia are positive and statistically significant
for hedge funds (CTHF), with the results being similar for asset managers (CTAM), but
at lower levels of statistical significance. The models for financial customers both pass the
specification and KP rank tests.
   The results for nonfinancial customers (CTCO, CTPC) are somewhat weaker in terms of
statistical significance. What stands out, qualitatively, is the sign reversal of the estimated
SDF coefficients and risk premia, which are both negative.
   The results seem to indicate that the positive sign of , when we used aggregate order
flow, is driven by financial order flow, which may not be surprising since financial order
flow is more variable and accounts for more of the variation in total order flow. The sign
reversals are consistent with Menkhoff et al. (2016) who show that the order flow of financial
customers generates the highest cross-sectional spread in excess returns while the order flows
of corporate and private clients generate negative spreads in portfolio excess returns.

5.4    Factor Mimicking Portfolio
Following Breeden et al. (1989) and Menkhoff et al. (2012a), we create factor-mimicking
portfolios for each of DVOL, CTOF, CTAM, CTHF, CTCO and CTCP. The factor mim-
icking portfolio is a zero cost strategy that mimics the corresponding factor. For each of the
above factors, ft , the following regression is performed:

                                                 e
                                       ft = c + rt  + u,                                  (28)

       e
where rt is the 5 × 1 vector containing the returns on P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5. The factor
mimicking portfolio return is
                                                  e ^
                                          ftFM = rt ,                                     (29)

where ^ is the OLS estimate of .



                                              20
   In Table 15, we report the weights each portfolio attaches to P1­P5 as well as the mean
of the estimated factor-mimicking portfolio return. We find the factor mimicking portfolio
loadings for DVOL are in line with Menkhoff et al. (2012a). The loadings decrease from
positive for P1 and P2 to negative for P3, P4 and P5. This is not surprising as the returns
to the low interest rate portfolios tend to be high when volatility increases, and low when it
decreases. The opposite pattern is observed for high interest rate currencies.
   For the CTOF factor the portfolio weights are negative for P1 and P2 and positive for
P3, P4 and P5. This is consistent with what we have already seen, which is that high interest
rate currencies have higher returns when the order flow to them is larger. The pattern is
similar for the disaggregated order-flow factors, CTAM and CTHF. The CTPC factor has,
roughly-speaking, a reversed pattern in the loadings, while CTCO has no consistent pattern
in the portfolio weights and almost none of them are statistically significant.
   The signs of the average factor-mimicking-portfolio returns are consistent with the risk
price estimates from our cross-sectional asset pricing exercise, except for the CTCO factor,
which has a small positive average return (0.03%) and a negative risk price.

5.5      Economic Interpretation
In this section we argue that our carry trade factor, CTOF, can be viewed as a proxy for the
realization of crash risk. When CTOF is large and positive, this indicates that investors--
in particular hedge funds and asset managers--are taking on larger long positions in high
interest rate currencies financed by larger short positions in low interest rate currencies.
They earn higher returns at these times, but the positions they are taking on involve more
risk. When they reverse these positions, CTOF becomes large and negative, and our results
show that high interest rate currencies tend to depreciate at these times, while low interest
rate currencies appreciate. The microstructure interpretation is that the investors' collective
reversal of their positions in response to the arrival of new information leads to the currency
crash.
   While this seems like a completely reasonably interpretation of our findings one might
wonder whether the behavior of CTOF can be captured by changes in volatility or changes
in currency skewness. For example, Menkhoff et al. (2012a) find that carry trades tend to
lose money in times of high currency volatility and Rafferty (2012) finds that carry trades
tend to lose money when currency returns are more left-skewed. To see whether CTOF is


                                              21
capturing the same information, in Table 16, we perform simple regressions of CTOF, and
our disaggregated order-flow factors, on DVOL and on a similar skewness factor.24 The
estimated coefficients have the expected signs, and in most cases are statistically significant,
but the R2 are rather small. Our conclusion is that there is more to our order-flow factors
than is captured in measures of volatility and skewness.


6        Momentum
As documented by Burnside et al. (2011), Lustig et al. (2011), and Menkhoff et al. (2012b),
momentum strategies in the foreign exchange market are also profitable. These strategies
involve buying a basket of currencies with previously high returns and selling a basket with
previously lower returns. The literature has concluded that it is difficult to rationalise the
return of such strategies with traditional risk factors. In this section, we show that order
flow can help to rationalise the empirically observed high returns from this trading strategy.
       Similar to our approach for the carry trade, we form five momentum portfolios (M1, M2,
M3, M4 and M5) based on either the return over the previous week, or the return over the
previous four weeks. We assume investors open new positions each week and the holding
period is one week. Portfolio M1 contains the currencies with the lowest lagged returns and
portfolio M5 has the highest lagged returns. We also consider a momentum HML portfolio
(M5 minus M1). Table 17 provides a variety of summary statistics for these portfolios, in our
full sample as well as in the pre-financial crisis period. Consistent with the prior literature,
we find that, especially with the strategy based on four-week lagged returns, a momentum
strategy was highly profitable in historical data.
       Next we present cross-sectional asset pricing results when using the order flow as a factor
to price momentum portfolios. We build a momentum-based order-flow factor, MOOF, using
a similar approach to the one we used for the carry-trade factor:
                                   1
                     MOOFt+1 =                yk,t · sign(rkt + rkt-1 + rkt-2 + rkt-3 ).             (30)
                                   Nt   kNt

Our baseline factor is based on the sign of the past four weeks' returns for each currency,
but we found similar results when using different lagged returns to define the factor.
  24
    We use daily DOL returns to calculate the 30 days rolling sample skewness and use the end of each week
data to generate the weekly series.




                                                     22
   Table 18 shows the betas of the momentum portfolios with respect to our aggregate
momentum order-flow risk factor, MOOF, in tandem with the DOL factor. The pattern in
the betas for DOL are similar to what we observed for the earlier carry trade-based models.
The results indicate that portfolios with greater momentum (M4 and M5) have positive and
statistically significant exposure to MOOF. The portfolios with less momentum (M1 and M2)
have negative and, in the case of M1, statistically significant exposure to MOOF. The betas
are monotonically increasing as we move from M1 to M5. These results mean that when
the order flow data suggest stronger trading pressure consistent with momentum trading,
i.e. when MOOF increases, the positive momentum portfolios earn higher returns and the
negative momentum portfolios earn lower returns. The pattern reverses if investors reverse
their momentum trades and MOOF decreases. As a consequence, low momentum portfolios
act as hedges against a reversal of investors' momentum positions, while high momentum
portfolios are exposed to this risk.
   Table 19 shows the results using disaggregated momentum order flow factors analagous
to the ones we defined
   for the carry trade in Section 3. The upper panel provides the results for financial cus-
tomers (MOAM, MOHF), while lower panel provides the results for non-financial customers
(MOCO and MOPC). Many of the betas are statistically significant, especially for the outer
portfolios. As for the carry trade case, what stands out in the table is the switch in the pat-
tern in the betas for M1­M5 with respect to our order-flow factors as we move from financial
to non-financial customers. The regressions indicate that the betas for Asset Managers and
Hedge Funds (MOAM, MOHF) increase as we move from M1 to M5, much as they do for
the aggregate order-flow factor, MOOF. The reverse pattern is observed for the betas with
respect to MOCO and MOPC.
   Table 20 shows cross-sectional asset pricing results using aggregated order flow and Table
21 shows analogous results using momentum factors based on order-flow disaggregated by
customer segment. Overall, the results are very encouraging and suggest that order flow
contains important information that can also be used to price momentum portfolio returns.
It is worth to point out the very different results that we obtain across the different trading
segments. The estimated coefficients are, for the most part, statistically significant and they
carry the same signs as in Table 14.
   Notably, the carry-trade order-flow factor and the momentum order-flow factor are ap-



                                              23
proximately uncorrelated (their correlation coefficient is 0.012). This finding is consistent
with results in the literature suggesting that carry trade and momentum returns are approx-
imately uncorrelated and that separate pricing factors are required to price carry trade and
momentum portfolios.


7     Conclusion
We have demonstrated that, at the weekly frequency, order-flow is closely associated with
systematic patterns in currency returns. We have shown that if currencies are sorted on
the basis of aggregated normalized order-flow, portfolios of currencies with stronger buying
pressure tend to appreciate relative to currencies with weaker buying (or strong selling)
pressure. At the disaggregated level, we see the same pattern when we use the order-flow
of financial customers (hedge funds and asset managers). However, the pattern is reversed
when we use the order-flow of non-financial customers (corporates and private customers).
This suggests that a form of risk sharing takes place in the foreign exchange market, not just
between dealers and non-dealers, but within the confines of the non-dealer customer base.
    We have also explored the use of order-flow based risk factors in a traditional SDF
approach to cross-sectional asset pricing. In particular, we built order-flow based factors
that tend to increase in size if order flow reveals more buying pressure in the direction of
currencies that have higher interest rates than the US dollar. We referred to these as carry-
trade order-flow factors and we showed that they perform extremely well when we price a
cross-section of currency returns. When aggregate order-flow or financial order flow increases
towards buying more high interest rate currencies and selling low interest rate currencies,
returns to the carry trade have a tendency to increase. Similarly when our order-flow factor
suggests a reversal of carry trade positions, returns to the carry trade decrease. We also
find that a similarly motivated set of momentum-based order-flow factors can price the
cross-section of returns ordered on the basis of past currency momentum.
    In sum, our results suggest that results in the extant literature, which are based on
reduced-form factors such as the HML factor of Lustig et al. (2011), or the global currency
volatility factor of Menkhoff et al. (2012a), may lend support to a microstructure model-
based interpretation of the data.




                                             24
References
Barber, B. M., and T. Odean. 2013. The Behavior of Individual Investors. In G. M. Con-
  stantinides, M. Harris, and R. M. Stulz (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance,
  vol. 2B, chap. 22, pp. 1533­1570. Elsevier.

Bilson, J. F. O. 1981. The "Speculative Efficiency" Hypothesis. The Journal of Business
  54:435­451.

Breeden, D. T., M. R. Gibbons, and R. H. Litzenberger. 1989. Empirical tests of the
  consumption-oriented CAPM. The Journal of Finance 44:231­262.

Breedon, F., D. Rime, and P. Vitale. 2016. Carry trades, order flow, and the forward bias
  puzzle. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 48:1113­1134.

Brunnermeier, M. K., S. Nagel, and L. H. Pedersen. 2008. Carry trades and currency crashes.
  NBER macroeconomics annual 23:313­348.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and L. H. Pedersen. 2008. Market liquidity and funding liquidity. The
  Review of Financial Studies 22:2201­2238.

Burnside, C. 2010. A Note on Sorts and Cross-Sectional Regressions. Duke University.

Burnside, C. 2011. The cross section of foreign currency risk premia and consumption growth
  risk: Comment. American Economic Review 101:3456­76.

Burnside, C. 2012. Carry Trades and Risk. In J. James, I. Marsh, and L. Sarno (eds.),
  Handbook of Exchange Rates, Wiley Handbooks in Financial Engineering and Economet-
  rics, chap. 10, pp. 283­312. Wiley.

Burnside, C. 2014. The Carry Trade in Industrialized and Emerging Markets. Journal
  Economia Chilena 17:48­78.

Burnside, C. 2016. Identification and inference in linear stochastic discount factor models
  with excess returns. Journal of Financial Econometrics 14:295­330.

Burnside, C. 2019. Exchange Rates, Interest Parity, and the Carry Trade. In Oxford Research
  Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance. Forthcoming: Oxford University Press.

Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, I. Kleshchelski, and S. Rebelo. 2011. Do Peso Problems
  Explain the Returns to the Carry Trade? Review of Financial Studies 24:853­891.

Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo. 2011. Carry Trade and Momentum in Currency
  Markets. Annual Review of Financial Economics 3:511­535.

Bussiere, M., M. D. Chinn, L. Ferrara, and J. Heipertz. 2018. The New Fama Puzzle. NBER
  Working Paper No. 24342.

                                            25
Cerrato, M., H. Kim, and R. MacDonald. 2015. Microstructure order flow: statistical and
  economic evaluation of nonlinear forecasts. Journal of International Financial Markets,
  Institutions and Money 39:40­52.

Cerrato, M., N. Sarantis, and A. Saunders. 2011. An investigation of customer order flow in
  the foreign exchange market. Journal of Banking & Finance 35:1892­1906.

Cochrane, J. H. 2005. Asset Pricing, vol. 1.

Colacito, R., and M. M. Croce. 2011. Risks for the long run and the real exchange rate.
  Journal of Political economy 119:153­181.

Daniel, K., R. J. Hodrick, and Z. Lu. 2017. The carry trade: Risks and drawdowns. Critical
 Finance Review 6:1­62.

Du, W., A. Tepper, and A. Verdelhan. 2018. Deviations from Covered Interest Rate Parity.
 Journal of Finance 73:915­957.

Engel, C. 1996. The Forward Discount Anomaly and the Risk Premium: A Survey of Recent
  Evidence. Journal of Empirical Finance 3:123­92.

Engel, C. 2016. Exchange Rates, Interest Rates, and the Risk Premium. American Economic
  Review 106:436­474.

Evans, M. D., and R. K. Lyons. 2002. Order flow and exchange rate dynamics. Journal of
  political economy 110:170­180.

Evans, M. D., and R. K. Lyons. 2009. Forecasting exchange rate fundamentals with order
  flow. Georgetown University and UC Berkeley Working Paper .

Evans, M. D., and D. Rime. 2012. Micro approaches to foreign exchange determination. In
  J. James, I. Marsh, and L. Sarno (eds.), Handbook of Exchange Rates, Wiley Handbooks
  in Financial Engineering and Econometrics, chap. 3. Wiley.

Evans, M. D. D. 2011. Exchange-Rate Dynamics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Fama, E. F. 1984a. Forward and spot exchange rates. Journal of monetary economics
  14:319­338.

Fama, E. F. 1984b. Forward and Spot Exchange Rates. Journal of Monetary Economics
  14:319­38.

Galati, G., A. Heath, and P. McGuire. 2007. Evidence of carry trade activity .

Hansen, L. P., and R. J. Hodrick. 1980. Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal Predictors of
  Future Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis. Journal of Political Economy 88:829­853.


                                               26
Harvey, C. R., and A. Siddique. 2000. Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests. The
  Journal of Finance 55:1263­1295.

Kleibergen, F., and R. Paap. 2006. Generalized reduced rank tests using the singular value
  decomposition. Journal of econometrics 133:97­126.

Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan. 2011. Common risk factors in currency markets.
  The Review of Financial Studies 24:3731­3777.

Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan. 2014. Countercyclical currency risk premia.
  Journal of Financial Economics 111:527­553.

Lustig, H., and A. Verdelhan. 2006. Investing in foreign currency is like betting on your
  intertemporal marginal rate of substitution. Journal of the European Economic Association
  4:644­655.

Lustig, H., and A. Verdelhan. 2007. The cross section of foreign currency risk premia and
  consumption growth risk. The American economic review 97:89­117.

Lustig, H., and A. Verdelhan. 2012. Exchange rates in a stochastic discount factor framework.
  Handbook of Exchange Rates pp. 391­420.

Lyons, R. K., et al. 2001. The microstructure approach to exchange rates, vol. 12. MIT press
  Cambridge, MA.

Mancini-Griffoli, T., and A. Ranaldo. 2010. Limits to Arbitrage during the Crisis: Funding
 Liquidity Constraints and Covered Interest Parity. Swiss National Bank Working Paper
 2010-14.

Meese, R. A., and K. Rogoff. 1983. Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: Do
 they fit out of sample? Journal of International Economics 14:3­24.

Menkhoff, L., L. Sarno, M. Schmeling, and A. Schrimpf. 2012a. Carry trades and global
 foreign exchange volatility. The Journal of Finance 67:681­718.

Menkhoff, L., L. Sarno, M. Schmeling, and A. Schrimpf. 2012b. Currency momentum strate-
 gies. Journal of Financial Economics 106:660­684.

Menkhoff, L., L. Sarno, M. Schmeling, and A. Schrimpf. 2016. Information flows in foreign
 exchange markets: Dissecting customer currency trades. The Journal of Finance 71:601­
 634.

Rafferty, B. 2012. Currency returns, skewness and crash risk .

Verdelhan, A. 2010. A habit-based explanation of the exchange rate risk premium. The
  Journal of Finance 65:123­146.

                                             27
            Table 1: Exchange Rates and Order Flow for Individual Currencies


                ak × 100    bk × 100     R¯2                ak × 100 bk × 100   R¯2
        AUD       -0.149      -1.148    0.055        KRW      -0.060   -1.487  0.024
                 (0.086)     (0.294)                         (0.069   (0.506)
        BRL       -0.122      -1.599    0.013        MXN       0.053   -1.107  0.004
                 (0.098)     (0.600)                         (0.065   (0.841)
        CAD       -0.066      -0.584    0.018        NOK      -0.075   -2.450  0.040
                 (0.055)     (0.200)                         (0.076   (0.493)
        CHF       -0.079      -0.372    0.019        NZD      -0.167   -4.234  0.099
                 (0.069)     (0.112)                         (0.079   (0.576)
        CZK       -0.128      -5.329    0.019        PLN      -0.098   -4.077  0.037
                 (0.083)     (1.983)                         (0.098)  (1.108)
        EUR       -0.174      -0.265    0.063        SEK      -0.086    0.481  0.000
                 (0.064)     (0.059)                         (0.076)  (0.451)
        GBP       -0.020      -0.256    0.017        SGD      -0.071   -1.039  0.038
                 (0.059)     (0.085)                         (0.029)  (0.257)
        HKD        0.000      -0.038    0.006        SKK      -0.141    0.979 -0.002
                 (0.003)     (0.018)                        (0.072 ) (2.265)
        HUF       -0.039      -5.783    0.035        TRY       0.072   -4.789  0.094
                 (0.096)     (1.506)                         (0.085)  (0.629)
        JPY       -0.001      -0.504    0.077        ZAR       0.005   -3.833 0.070
                 (0.058)     (0.087)                         (0.107)  (0.568)

Note: The table reports estimates of equation (14),

                              sk,t+1 - sk,t = ak + xk,t bk + uk,t+1 ,

where sk,t is the natural log of the exchange rate between the US dollar (USD) and foreign
currency k , measured as foreign currency units (FCUs) per USD, xk,t is the aggregate order
flow (the total value of buy orders, net of sell orders) for currency k in the interval between
periods t and t + 1, and uk,t+1 is an error term. Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors
are reported in parentheses.




                                                28
      Table 2: Interest-Rate Sorted and Carry-Trade Portfolios: Summary Statistics


                  Portfolio     P1       P2            P3        P4       P5
                  Mean (%)     1.60    4.92          5.89       7.15    13.14
                  SD           6.80     9.24          9.31     11.86    12.77
                  SR           0.24    0.53          0.63       0.60     1.03
                  Skew        -0.03    -0.80         -0.52     -0.92    -0.77
                  AC1         0.07     -0.01          0.06     -0.01   -0.10
                  Coskew1      0.44    -0.10         -0.04     -0.37    -0.34
                  Coskew2      5.49    -1.03         -0.49     -6.39    -8.94
                  Portfolio   DOL      EWC           SPD      HML       DNC
                  Mean (%)     5.27    4.55          11.74    11.64      2.67
                  SD           9.00     6.66         10.59    11.72      3.51
                  SR           0.59    0.68          1.11       0.99     0.76
                  Skew        -0.57    -1.13         -0.97     -0.78    -1.13
                  AC1          0.02   -0.11         -0.09    -0.17     -0.17
                  Coskew1      0.10    -0.34         -0.38     -0.44    -0.45
                  Coskew2      0.00    -4.56         -8.27    -14.59    -4.44

Note: The table reports the descriptive statistics for currency portfolios P1­P5, which are
sorted on the basis of short term interest rates. We also report statistics for the DOL,
EWC, SPD, HML and DNC portfolios. It reports the annualized mean return (%), standard
deviation (SD), Sharpe ratio (SR), and skewness (Skew) for each portfolio. We also report
the first order autocorrelation coefficient (AC1) and its significance (***1%, **5%, *10%).
We also report two measures of coskewness between the individual portfolios and the DOL
portfolio. Coskew1 and Coskew2 corresponded, respectively, to SKS and SKS as described
in the main text.




                                               29
                    Table 3: Order-Flow Portfolios: Summary Statistics


                         O1       O2     O3      O4      O5        Avg.     BMS
            A) Aggregated order flow/Full sample
            Mean (%) -8.31       2.74    7.77  10.82 18.39          6.24    26.75
                       (3.84) (3.01) (2.89) (3.09) (3.25)          (2.93)   (2.52)
               SD       10.47    9.63   10.07   9.24    9.71        8.84     7.18
               SR       -0.79   0.28     0.77   1.17    1.89        0.71     3.73
            B) Disaggregated order flow/Major currency sample
                       Asset manager
            Mean (%) -7.71       3.81    5.80  14.54                4.11    22.25
                       (3.21) (3.57) (3.38) (3.05)                 (2.96)   (2.37)
               SD        9.98   11.02 11.07     9.38                9.08     7.39
               SR       -0.77   0.35     0.52   1.55                0.45     3.01
                       Hedge fund
            Mean (%) -8.64       3.68    5.72  15.30                4.02    23.95
                       (3.23) (3.74) (3.33) (3.12)                 (2.94)   (2.91)
               SD        9.69   11.56 10.56     9.60                9.05     8.17
               SR       -0.89   0.32     0.54   1.59                0.44     2.93
                       Corporate
            Mean (%) 6.52       7.25     8.66   0.85                5.82     -5.66
                       (3.32) (3.50) (2.93) (3.25)                 (2.92)   (2.07)
               SD        9.67   10.84 10.66 10.05                   8.98     7.78
               SR       0.67     0.67   0.81    0.09                0.65     -0.73
                       Private client
            Mean (%) 24.18       7.24   1.48   -6.12                6.69 -30.30
                       (2.76) (4.05) (3.68) (3.01)                 (2.97) (2.40)
               SD        9.66   11.04 11.21     9.62                9.06   8.03
               SR       2.50     0.66   0.13   -0.64                0.74   -3.77

Note : For each of the portfolios O1­O5, which are sorted by contemporaneous order flow,
this table reports the annualized mean excess return (with heteroskedasticity consistent
standard errors reported in parentheses), standard deviation (SD) and Sharpe ratio (SR) for
currencies sorted on contemporaneous order flow. Column 'Avg.' shows the average across
all portfolios. Column 'BMS' (buy minus sell) reports the return of holding O5 long and
O1 short. The first panel reports statistics for portfolios based on normalized aggregated
order flow for the full sample of 20 currencies. The lower panels report statistics portfolios
based on disaggregated order flow for a smaller sample of nine major currencies, where the
disaggregation is by customer type.




                                             30
        Table 4: Double Sorts on Interest Rate and Order Flow: Mean Returns (%)


                                                 Interest   rate
                        Order flow     Low     Medium        High    HML
                           Sell        -3.74     3.19        2.31     6.05
                                      (2.63)    (3.34)      (4.16)   (2.91)
                           Buy          7.59    10.42       15.83     8.24
                                      (2.36)    (3.04)      (4.19)   (3.85)
                           BMS        11.33      7.23       13.52
                                      (2.14)    (1.61)      (2.86)

Note : This table reports the annualized mean returns (with heteroskedasticity consistent
standard errors in parentheses) for six double-sorted portfolios based on interest rate and
the value of aggregated order flow.


    Table 5: Double Sorts on Volatility Innovation and Order Flow: Mean Returns (%)


                                           Volatility   Innovation
                     Order flow    Low     Medium        High HML (Vol)
                        Sell       6.48      0.13        -5.20     -11.68
                                  (2.50)    (2.97)      (4.25)     (2.98)
                        Buy       14.37     12.81         9.44      -4.93
                                  (2.11)    (2.78)      (4.69)     (3.76)
                        BMS        7.89     12.68       14.64
                                  (1.61)    (1.44)      (2.58)

Note : This table reports the annualized mean returns (with heteroskedasticity consistent
standard errors in parentheses) for six double sorted portfolios based on volatility innovations
and the value of aggregated order flow.




                                               31
           Table 6: Betas of the Carry Trade Portfolios for the DOL-HML Model


                                        -DOL  -HML R  ¯2
                            P1   0.02   0.71   -0.26 0.79
                                (0.02) (0.02) (0.02)
                            P2   0.00   0.93   0.00  0.82
                                (0.02) (0.02) (0.02)
                            P3   0.00   0.89   0.11  0.84
                                (0.02) (0.02) (0.02)
                            P4   -0.03  1.03    0.28 0.84
                                (0.03) (0.03) (0.04)
                            P5   0.02   0.71   0.74  0.94
                                (0.02) (0.02) (0.02)
                            EWC -0.02   0.41   0.32  0.83
                                (0.02) (0.03) (0.02)
                            SPD  0.04   0.60    0.57 0.88
                                (0.03) (0.03) (0.02)

Note : We present estimates of the time series regressions
                              e
                             rit =  i + f t i +   it ,   t = 1, . . . , T,
        e
where rit is the excess return of portfolio i at time t, and ft is a vector of the two risk factors,
DOL and HML. Estimates of i are scaled by 100. The portfolios are P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5
(the portfolios sorted by interest rate) as well as the carry trade portfolios EWC and SPD,
described in the main text. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. We use weekly
data, from the first week of November 2001 to the fourth week of March 2012.




                                                  32
         Table 7: Betas of the Carry Trade Portfolios for the DOL-DVOL Model

                                  -DOL  -DVOL                    ¯2
                                                                 R
                      P1   -0.03  0.60    0.19                  0.62
                          (0.02) (0.04) (0.07)
                      P2   0.00   0.94    0.11                  0.83
                          (0.02) (0.02) (0.09)
                      P3   0.02   0.94   -0.09                  0.83
                          (0.02) (0.03) (0.08)
                      P4   0.02   1.15   -0.21                  0.78 CTOF
                          (0.03) (0.05) (0.12)
                      P5   0.15   1.02   -0.41                  0.55
                          (0.05) (0.08) (0.19)
                      EWC 0.03    0.55   -0.12                  0.56
                          (0.03) (0.05) (0.09)
                      SPD   0.14  0.84   -0.32                  0.54
                          (0.05) (0.07) (0.14)

Note : We present estimates of the time series regressions
                            e
                           rit =  i + f t i +   it ,   t = 1, . . . , T,
         e
where rit  is the excess return of portfolio i at time t, and ft is a vector of the two risk
factors, DOL and DVOL. Estimates of i are scaled by 100. The portfolios are P1, P2, P3,
P4 and P5 (the portfolios sorted by interest rate) as well as the carry trade portfolios EWC
and SPD, described in the main text. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. We use
weekly data, from the first week of November 2001 to the fourth week of March 2012.




                                                33
         Table 8: Betas of the Carry Trade Portfolios for the DOL-CTOF Model

                                     -DOL  -CTOF                      ¯2
                                                                      R
                         P1   -0.05  0.62   -0.65                    0.63
                             (0.02) (0.04) (0.10)
                         P2   0.00   0.94   -0.07                    0.82
                             (0.02) (0.02) (0.09)
                         P3   0.04   0.91   0.57                     0.84
                             (0.02) (0.03) (0.11)
                         P4   0.05   1.12   0.77                     0.78
                             (0.03) (0.06) (0.14)
                         P5   0.19   0.98   1.23                     0.56
                             (0.05) (0.08) (0.21)
                         EWC 0.06    0.51    0.84                    0.60
                             (0.03) (0.05) (0.12)
                         SPD  0.19   0.79    1.27                    0.57
                             (0.05) (0.07) (0.19)

Note : We present estimates of the time series regressions
                            e
                           rit =  i + f t i +   it ,   t = 1, . . . , T,
         e
where rit  is the excess return of portfolio i at time t, and ft is a vector of the two risk
factors, DOL and CTOF. Estimates of i are scaled by 100. The portfolios are P1, P2, P3,
P4 and P5 (the portfolios sorted by interest rate) as well as the carry trade portfolios EWC
and SPD, described in the main text. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. We use
weekly data, from the first week of November 2001 to the fourth week of March 2012.




                                                34
                Table 9: Decomposing the Betas for the DOL-CTOF Model

                            rf -s                                        rs
                      -DOL  -CTOF            ¯2
                                             R                        -DOL  -CTOF       ¯2
                                                                                        R
           (×100)    (×100) (×100)                       (×100)
      P1    -0.028     0.05        -0.43   -0.002          -0.03       0.62     -0.64   0.64
           (0.002)    (0.09)      (0.43)                  (0.02)      (0.04)   (0.10)
      P2    0.001      0.07        -0.17   -0.002          -0.01       0.94      0.06   0.82
           (0.002)    (0.07)      (0.29)                  (0.02)      (0.03)   (0.09)
      P3    0.025      0.05        -0.07   -0.003          0.01        0.92      0.58   0.84
           (0.003)    (0.08)      (0.35)                  (0.02)      (0.03)   (0.11)
      P4    0.065      0.01         0.24   -0.003          -0.03       1.13      0.76   0.78
           (0.003)    (0.09)      (0.39)                  (0.04)      (0.06)   (0.15)
      P5    0.193      0.16         2.18   0.002           -0.01       0.99      1.21   0.56
           (0.008)    (0.26)      (1.23)                  (0.06)      (0.09)   (0.21)

Note : We present estimates of the time series regressions

                             rit = i + ft i +     it ,   t = 1, . . . , T,
                            Pi,f -s     Pi,s
where rit is, alternately, rt       or rt    the two components of the excess return of portfolio
i at time t, and ft is the vector of the two risk factors, DOL and CTOF. The portfolios are
P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 (the portfolios sorted by interest rate), described in the main text.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses. We use weekly data, from the first week of
November 2001 to the fourth week of March 2012.




                                                35
   Table 10: Betas of the Carry Trade Portfolios for Disaggregated Order-Flow Factors


                      Asset Managers                               Hedge Funds
                       -DOL  -CTAM           ¯2
                                             R                     -DOL  -CTHF        ¯2
                                                                                      R
      P1   -0.04       0.61      -1.04      0.64        -0.05      0.59      -1.30   0.65
          (0.02)      (0.04)    (0.20)                 (0.02)     (0.04)    (0.18)
      P2   0.00        0.94      -0.29      0.83         0.00      0.93       0.21   0.83
          (0.02)      (0.02)    (0.19)                 (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.18)
      P3   0.03        0.93       0.61      0.83        0.03       0.94       0.58   0.83
          (0.02)      (0.03)    (0.16)                 (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.19)
      P4   0.03        1.14       1.10      0.78        0.03       1.16       0.90   0.78
          (0.03)      (0.05)    (0.32)                 (0.03)     (0.06)    (0.26)
      P5   0.16        1.02       1.17      0.55        0.17       1.05       1.54   0.55
          (0.05)      (0.08)    (0.39)                 (0.05)     (0.08)    (0.45)
      EWC 0.05         0.53       1.25      0.60         0.06      0.56       1.45   0.61
          (0.03)      (0.05)    (0.26)                 (0.03)     (0.05)    (0.20)
      SPD   0.16       0.83       1.50      0.55         0.17      0.86       1.76   0.55
          (0.05)      (0.07)    (0.35)                 (0.05)     (0.07)    (0.33)
                         Corporate                                Private Clients
                       -DOL  -CTCO           ¯2
                                             R                     -DOL  -CTPC        ¯2
                                                                                      R
      P1   -0.02       0.59      0.60       0.61        -0.03      0.59       2.74   0.66
          (0.02)      (0.04)    (0.44)                 (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.34)
      P2   0.00        0.93       0.42      0.83        0.00       0.93       0.17   0.82
          (0.02)      (0.03)    (0.34)                 (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.32)
      P3   0.01        0.94      -0.84      0.83        0.02       0.94      -1.14   0.83
          (0.02)      (0.03)    (0.36)                 (0.02)     (0.03)    (0.30)
      P4   0.01        1.16      -1.00      0.77        0.02       1.16      -2.34   0.78
          (0.03)      (0.06)    (0.57)                 (0.03)     (0.05)    (0.58)
      P5   0.14        1.05      -0.83      0.54        0.15       1.05      -3.31   0.56
          (0.06)      (0.08)    (0.83)                 (0.05)     (0.08)    (0.94)
      EWC 0.02         0.56      -1.41      0.57        0.04       0.56      -4.00   0.67
          (0.03)      (0.05)    (0.53)                 (0.02)     (0.04)    (0.48)
      SPD   0.13       0.86      -1.34      0.53         0.15      0.86      -4.55   0.58
          (0.05)      (0.07)    (0.68)                 (0.05)     (0.06)    (0.76)

Note : We present estimates of the time series regressions
                            e
                           rit =  i + f t i +   it ,   t = 1, . . . , T,
         e
where rit  is the excess return of portfolio i at time t, and ft is a vector of the two risk
factors, DOL and a disaggregated carry-trade order-flow factor (as indicated). Estimates of
i are scaled by 100. The portfolios are P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5 (the portfolios sorted by
interest rate) as well as the carry trade portfolios EWC and SPD, described in the main
text. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Data are weekly.

                                                36
                       Table 11: Estimates of the DOL-HML Model


                         GMM Estimates
                                  DOL HML          R2     HJ
                         b        2.87   7.74     0.94   1.10
                                 (5.04) (3.68)          [0.78]
                                  0.10   0.22
                                 (0.08) (0.10)
                         Fama-MacBeth Estimates
                                  DOL HML          R2     2
                                  0.10   0.22     0.94   2.70
                                 (0.05) (0.07)          [0.61]
                         KP Rank Tests
                                  Stat.   d.f.  p-value
                         Rank(0) 234.3    10     [0.00]
                         Rank(1) 153.0     4     [0.00]

Note : We present estimates of the SDF and beta representations of the DOL-HML model,
as well as KP reduced-rank tests. The test assets are P1­P5, the five portfolios sorted on
interest rate. The first panel shows the estimates of the SDF coefficients, b, from first stage
GMM, corresponding risk prices, , the cross-sectional R2 and Hansen-Jagannathan distance
(HJ). Estimates of  are scaled by 100. The second panel shows estimates of  obtained using
the Fama-MacBeth method with no intercept. A 2 measure of fit is also reported. The
third panel reports KP rank tests. In all panels, standard errors are reported in parentheses,
and p-values in square brackets. The Shanken correction is used for the Fama-MacBeth
standard errors. We use weekly data, from the first week of November 2001 to the fourth
week of March 2012.




                                              37
                Table 12: Estimates of the Volatility (DOL-DVOL) Model


                        GMM Estimates
                                 DOL DVOL         R2     HJ
                        b        0.97   -1.03    0.85   1.10
                                (6.00) (0.95)          [0.78]
                                 0.11   -25.7
                                (0.12) (23.7)
                        Fama-MacBeth Estimates
                                 DOL DVOL         R2     2
                                 0.11   -25.7    0.85   6.43
                                (0.06) (11.2)          [0.17]
                        KP Rank Tests
                                 Stat.   d.f.  p-value
                        Rank(0) 381.0    10     [0.00]
                        Rank(1)   9.4     4     [0.05]

Note : We present SDF and beta representation estimates for the DOL-DVOL model, as well
as KP reduced-rank tests. The test assets are P1­P5, the five portfolios sorted on interest
rate. The first panel shows the estimates of the SDF coefficients, b, from first stage GMM,
corresponding risk prices, , the cross-sectional R2 and Hansen-Jagannathan distance (HJ).
Estimates of  are scaled by 100. The second panel shows estimates of  obtained using the
Fama-MacBeth method with no intercept. A 2 measure of fit is also reported. The third
panel reports KP rank tests. In all panels, standard errors are reported in parentheses, and
p-values in square brackets. The Shanken correction is used for the Fama-MacBeth standard
errors. We use weekly data, from the first week of November 2001 to the fourth week of
March 2012.




                                            38
        Table 13: Estimates of the Carry-Trade Order-Flow (DOL-CTOF) Model


                        GMM Estimates
                                 DOL CTOF         R2     HJ
                        b        -0.49   1.44    0.79   5.07
                                (5.11) (0.66)          [0.17]
                                 0.10    8.46
                                (0.07) (3.71)
                        Fama-MacBeth Estimates
                                 DOL CTOF         R2     2
                                 0.10    8.46    0.79   7.18
                                (0.06) (3.45)          [0.13]
                        KP Rank Tests
                                 Stat.   d.f.  p-value
                        Rank(0) 288.7     10    [0.00]
                        Rank(1) 43.9      4     [0.00]

Note : We present SDF and beta representation estimates for the DOL-CTOF model, as well
as KP reduced-rank tests. The test assets are P1­P5, the five portfolios sorted on interest
rate. The first panel shows the estimates of the SDF coefficients, b, from first stage GMM,
corresponding risk prices, , the cross-sectional R2 and Hansen-Jagannathan distance (HJ).
Estimates of  are scaled by 100. The second panel shows estimates of  obtained using the
Fama-MacBeth method with no intercept. A 2 measure of fit is also reported. The third
panel reports KP rank tests. In all panels, standard errors are reported in parentheses, and
p-values in square brackets. The Shanken correction is used for the Fama-MacBeth standard
errors. We use weekly data, from the first week of November 2001 to the fourth week of
March 2012.




                                            39
               Table 14: Estimates of the Disaggregated Order-Flow Model


                   (a) Asset Managers                        (b) Hedge Funds
     GMM Estimates
              DOL CTAM           R2     HJ           DOL      CTHF       R2        HJ
     b        3.88     1.92     0.66   6.77          7.74      2.60     0.75      5.90
             (4.66) (1.20)            [0.08]        (3.89)    (1.16)             [0.12]
              0.12     5.12                          0.11      5.10
             (0.07) (3.09)                          (0.06)    (2.30)
     Fama-MacBeth Estimates
              DOL CTAM           R2     2            DOL      CTHF       R2        2
              0.12     5.12     0.66   8.64          0.11      5.10     0.75      7.71
             (0.06) (2.43)            [0.07]        (0.06)    (2.26)             [0.10]
     KP Rank Tests
              Stat.     d.f.  p-value                Stat.     d.f.    p-value
     Rank(0) 254.03     10     [0.00]               244.04     10       [0.00]
     Rank(1) 36.71       4     [0.00]                45.11      4       [0.00]
                        (c) Corporate                     (d) Private clients
     GMM Estimates
              DOL CTCO              R2       HJ      DOL      CTPC       R2        HJ
     b        13.31 -12.34         0.55     5.65     7.91      -3.72    0.74      4.06
             (6.43) (9.61)                 [0.13]   (5.05)    (2.27)             [0.25]
               0.12   -4.72                          0.11      -2.23
             (0.07) (3.72)                          (0.08)    (1.37)
     Fama-MacBeth Estimates
              DOL CTCO              R2       2       DOL      CTPC       R2        2
               0.12   -4.72        0.55     9.14     0.11      -2.23    0.74      7.84
             (0.06) (3.30)                 [0.06]   (0.06)    (1.01)             [0.10]
     KP Rank Tests
              Stat.    d.f.      p-value             Stat.     d.f.    p-value
     Rank(0) 253.6     10         [0.00]             260.4     10       [0.00]
     Rank(1) 7.12       4         [0.13]              24.6      4       [0.00]

Note : We present SDF and beta representation estimates for the carry-trade order flow
model using disaggregated order flow for different customer groups, as well as KP reduced-
rank tests. CTAM is the order flow factor for Asset Managers. CTHF is the order flow
factor for Hedge Funds. CTCO is the order flow factor for Corporate customers. CTPC is
the order flow factor for Private Clients. See the note to Table 13 for other details.




                                            40
                           Table 15: Factor-Mimicking Portfolios


                        Factor-Mimicking Portfolio Weights           Mean Return
                        P1       P2      P3       P4     P5              (%)
            DVOL       5.89     5.16   -4.29    -4.15 -4.51             -79.0
                                           
            CTOF     -7.06      -1.56 6.70       2.11  1.74              58.4
                                                    
            CTAM     -5.55     -1.68 3.57      3.07     -0.30            21.8
                           
            CTHF     -6.43      0.94    1.69     0.49   0.52             14.7
            CTCO       0.71    0.79 -0.63       -0.25   0.13              1.3
            CTPC      3.88      0.31 -0.99 -1.04 -0.24                   -8.6

Note : This table reports factor-mimicking portfolios based on the five interest-rate sorted
portfolios, P1­P5, for each of the pricing factors DVOL, CTOF, CTAM, CTHF, CTCO, and
CTPC. The portfolio weights are the estimated coefficients,     ^, from an OLS regression of
each factor on the vector of five portfolio returns, r. The asterisks indicate the significance
level of each coefficient based on heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors (*** for 1%,
** for 5%, * for 10%). The average return is the mean of r        ^ for each factor-mimicking
portfolio expressed in annualized percent.




Table 16: Projections of DVOL and SKEWNESS on the Carry-Trade Order-Flow Factors


                                DVOL                            SKEWNESS
                     Intercept               ¯2
                                             R         Intercept            R¯2
                            (×100)                            (×100)
           CTOF         -3.28   -8.63      0.0296         -3.04    4.93 0.0058
                       (1.04)    (2.14)                  (1.02)    (2.20)
           CTAM         -1.14   -4.62      0.0185         -1.17     -0.43 -0.0017
                       (0.71)    (1.48)                  (0.72)    (1.61)
           CTHF         -1.67      1.27    0.0002         -1.52    3.08 0.0071
                       (0.66)    (1.79)                  (0.67)    (1.39)
           CTCO         -0.79    -1.11     0.0060         -0.79      0.08 -0.0018
                       (0.39)    (0.49)                  (0.38)    (0.73)
           CTPC          0.16      0.41    -0.0012         0.17      0.41 -0.0014
                       (0.33)    (0.70)                  (0.33)    (0.80)

Note : This table reports OLS estimates (intercept and slope coefficient,  ) of regres-
sions of DVOL and a similar SKEWNESS measure on our carry-trade order -flow factors.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are in parentheses. Significance levels are indicated
by ***1%, **5% and *10%.



                                              41
                   Table 17: Momentum Portfolios: Summary Statistics


                          M1        M2   M3    M4      M5    HML (Mom)
            A) Full Sample
                        Momentum defined over one lagged week
            Mean (%) 6.69          6.20  6.83 6.32     6.96      0.27
                        (3.00) (2.49) (2.65) (2.75) (3.36)     (2.95)
            SD            9.38     8.40  8.74 8.69     9.22      9.09
            SR            0.71     0.74  0.78 0.73     0.75      0.03
            Skew         -0.43 -0.52 -0.42 -0.43 -0.51          -0.08
                       Momentum defined over four lagged weeks
            Mean (%) 3.86          5.40  6.61 8.57    10.61      6.75
                        (2.83) (2.98) (2.72) (2.75) (3.03)     (2.51)
            SD            8.90     8.96  8.61 8.70     9.19      8.77
            SR            0.44     0.60  0.77 0.99     1.16      0.77
            Skew         -0.44 -0.40 -0.36 -0.41 -0.60          -0.13
            B) Pre-financial crisis
                        Momentum defined over one lagged week
            Mean (%) 5.96          8.20 10.30 7.99    14.53      8.57
                        (3.05) (2.88) (3.27) (3.00) (3.67)     (3.49)
            SD            7.77     7.39  7.79 7.26     7.81      7.76
            SR            0.77     1.11  1.32 1.10     1.86      1.11
            Skew         -0.44 -0.37 -0.48 -0.41 -0.41          -0.07
                       Momentum defined over four lagged weeks
            Mean (%) 4.14          9.09  9.55 9.04    17.24    13.10
                        (2.90) (3.19) (3.24) (3.30) (3.35)     (2.85)
            SD            7.15     7.36  7.61 7.83     8.40      7.63
            SR            0.58     1.23  1.25 1.15     2.05      1.72
            Skew         -0.24 -0.18 -0.17 -0.52 -0.71          -0.29

Note : The table reports the descriptive statistics for currency portfolios M1­M5, which are
sorted on the basis of lagged currency returns over either one of four weeks.. It reports
the annualized mean return (%) (with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors reported
in parentheses), standard deviation (SD), Sharpe ratio (SR), and skewness (Skew) for each
portfolio. The holding period of the portfolios is one week in both cases. We report results
for both our full sample (panel A) and the pre-financial crisis sample (panel B).




                                            42
          Table 18: Betas of the Momentum Portfolios for the DOL-MOOF Model


                                          -DOL  -MOOF R ¯2
                            M1     -0.03  0.95   -0.70 0.64
                                  (0.04) (0.06) (0.17)
                            M2     0.02   1.00   -0.17 0.78
                                  (0.03) (0.05) (0.12)
                            M3     0.00   0.96    0.01 0.81
                                  (0.03) (0.03) (0.11)
                            M4     0.04   0.91    0.30 0.76
                                  (0.03) (0.02) (0.11)
                            M5     0.11   0.83    0.72 0.56
                                  (0.04) (0.05) (0.17)

Note : We present estimates of the time series regressions
                              e
                             rit =  i + f t i +   it ,   t = 1, . . . , T,
        e
where rit is the excess return of portfolio i at time t, and ft is a vector of the two risk factors,
DOL and MOOF. Estimates of i are scaled by 100. The portfolios are M1, M2, M3, M4
and M5 (the portfolios sorted by momentum), described in the main text. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses. We use weekly data, from the first week of November 2001 to
the fourth week of March 2012.




                                                  43
    Table 19: Betas of the Momentum Portfolios for Disaggregated Order-Flow Factors


                     Asset Managers                                Hedge Funds
                      -DOL  -MOAM           ¯2
                                            R                     -DOL  -MOHF        ¯2
                                                                                     R
       M1    -0.02    0.95      -0.98      0.63         -0.06     0.96      -1.56   0.65
            (0.04)   (0.06)    (0.34)                  (0.04)    (0.06)    (0.35)
       M2    0.02     1.00      -0.27      0.78         0.01      1.00      -0.51   0.78
            (0.03)   (0.05)    (0.22)                  (0.03)    (0.05)    (0.26)
       M3    -0.01    0.97      0.20       0.81         0.00      0.96       0.21   0.81
            (0.03)   (0.03)    (0.18)                  (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.14)
       M4    0.05     0.90       0.08      0.75          0.06     0.90      0.84    0.76
            (0.03)   (0.02)    (0.17)                  (0.03)    (0.02)    (0.17)
       M5    0.11     0.83       0.60      0.55          0.13     0.82      0.94    0.56
            (0.04)   (0.05)    (0.25)                  (0.04)    (0.05)    (0.29)
                        Corporate                                Private Clients
                      -DOL  -MOCO           ¯2
                                            R                     -DOL  -MOPC        ¯2
                                                                                     R
       M1    -0.04    0.96      1.87       0.63         -0.06     0.96       3.38   0.66
            (0.04)   (0.07)    (0.62)                  (0.04)    (0.06)    (0.57)
       M2    0.02     1.00       0.56      0.78          0.01     1.00      1.00    0.79
            (0.03)   (0.05)    (0.45)                  (0.03)    (0.05)    (0.42)
       M3    -0.01    0.96      -0.62      0.81         -0.01     0.96      0.22    0.81
            (0.03)   (0.03)    (0.41)                  (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.34)
       M4    0.04     0.90      -1.05      0.76         0.06      0.90      -1.41   0.76
            (0.03)   (0.02)    (0.38)                  (0.03)    (0.02)    (0.41)
       M5    0.12     0.82      -0.71      0.55         0.13      0.82      -2.12   0.56
            (0.04)   (0.05)    (0.54)                  (0.04)    (0.05)    (0.54)

Note : We present estimates of the time series regressions
                            e
                           rit =  i + f t i +   it ,   t = 1, . . . , T,
         e
where rit  is the excess return of portfolio i at time t, and ft is a vector of the two risk
factors, DOL and a disaggregated momentum order-flow factor (as indicated). Estimates of
i are scaled by 100. The portfolios are M1, M2, M3, M4 and M5 (the portfolios sorted by
momentum), described in the main text. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Data
are weekly.




                                                44
         Table 20: Estimates of the Momentum Order-Flow (DOL-MOOF) Model


                        GMM Estimates
                                 DOL MOOF         R2     HJ
                        b       10.63    1.81    0.87   2.08
                                (4.37) (0.78)          [0.56]
                                 0.13   11.29
                                (0.07) (4.91)
                        Fama-MacBeth Estimates
                                 DOL MOOF         R2     2
                                 0.13   11.29    0.87   1.95
                                (0.06) (4.82)          [0.74]
                        KP Rank Tests
                                 Stat.   d.f.  p-value
                        Rank(0) 134.3     10    [0.00]
                        Rank(1) 18.7      4     [0.00]

Note : We present SDF and beta representation estimates for the DOL-MOOF model, as
well as KP reduced-rank tests. The test assets are M1­M5, the five portfolios sorted on four
weeks of lagged currency returns. See the note to Table 13 for other details.




                                            45
         Table 21: Estimates of the Disaggregated Momentum Order-Flow Model


                   (a) Asset Managers                        (b) Hedge Funds
     GMM Estimates
              DOL CTAM          R2     HJ           DOL CTHF             R2        HJ
     b       13.26     3.42    0.61   5.09           8.47   2.42        0.60      4.22
             (5.18) (1.55)           [0.17]         (4.24) (1.21)                [0.24]
              0.14     8.90                          0.13   5.11
             (0.06) (4.10)                          (0.07) (2.54)
     Fama-MacBeth Estimates
              DOL CTAM          R2     2             DOL      CTHF       R2        2
              0.14     8.90    0.61   5.77           0.13      5.11     0.60      4.79
             (0.06) (4.36)           [0.22]         (0.06)    (2.32)             [0.31]
     KP Rank Tests
              Stat.    d.f.  p-value                 Stat.     d.f.    p-value
     Rank(0) 206.3     100    [0.00]                 123.8     10       [0.00]
     Rank(1) 8.70        4    [0.07]                  21.5      4       [0.00]
                        (c) Corporate                     (d) Private clients
     GMM Estimates
              DOL CTCO         R2     HJ            DOL CTPC             R2        HJ
     b        7.36    -8.55   0.32   5.94            9.01   -3.88       0.76      3.03
             (4.63) (4.83)          [0.11]          (4.19) (1.75)                [0.39]
              0.13    -3.67                          0.14   -2.68
             (0.07) (2.07)                          (0.07) (1.21)
     Fama-MacBeth Estimates
              DOL CTCO         R2     2              DOL      CTPC       R2        2
              0.13    -3.67   0.32   7.33            0.14      -2.68    0.76      2.91
             (0.06) (2.07)          [0.12]          (0.06)    (1.12)             [0.57]
     KP Rank Tests
              Stat.    d.f. p-value                  Stat.     d.f.    p-value
     Rank(0) 127.8     10    [0.00]                  154.6     10       [0.00]
     Rank(1) 15.8       4    [0.00]                   39.7      4       [0.00]

Note : We present SDF and beta representation estimates for the momentum order flow
model using disaggregated order flow for different customer groups, as well as KP reduced-
rank tests. MOAM is the momentum order flow factor for Asset Managers. MOHF is the
momentum order flow factor for Hedge Funds. MOCO is the momentum order flow factor
for Corporate customers. MOPC is the momentum order flow factor for Private Clients. See
the note to Table 13 for other details.



                                           46
                                              Figure 1: Aggregate Carry-Trade Order-Flow and Carry-Trade Returns


                                                    CTOF and HML return                                                                  CTOF and SPD return
                                        40                                                                                   40
       Mean HML return in % per annum




                                                                                            Mean SPD return in % per annum
                                        30                                                                                   30
                                        20                                                                                   20
                                        10                                                                                   10
                                         0                                                                                    0
                                        -10   Low          2              3     High                                         -10   Low         2               3    High

                                        -20                                                                                  -20
                                        -30                                                                                  -30
                                        -40                                                                                  -40
                                                        Average value of CTOF                                                               Average value of CTOF


                                                    CTOF and EWC return                                                                  CTOF and EWC return
                                        40                                                                                   40
  Mean EWC return in % per annum




                                                                                            Mean EWC return in % per annum
                                        30                                                                                   30
                                        20                                                                                   20
                                        10                                                                                   10
                                         0                                                                                    0
                                        -10   Low          2              3     High                                         -10   Low         2               3    High

                                        -20                                                                                  -20
                                        -30                                                                                  -30
                                        -40                                                                                  -40
                                                        Average value of CTOF                                                               Average value of CTOF



Note : This figure shows mean annualized excess returns for the carry-trade portfolios HML,
SPD, EWC and DNC depending on the quartile of the distribution of the carry-trade order-
flow factor (CTOF).




                                                                                       47
                                              Figure 2: Disaggregated Carry-Trade Order-Flow and HML Returns


                                                    CTAM and HML return                                                                  CTHF and HML return
                                        40                                                                                   40
       Mean HML return in % per annum




                                                                                            Mean HML return in % per annum
                                        30                                                                                   30
                                        20                                                                                   20
                                        10                                                                                   10
                                         0                                                                                    0
                                        -10   Low          2              3     High                                         -10   Low         2               3    High
                                        -20                                                                                  -20
                                        -30                                                                                  -30
                                        -40                                                                                  -40
                                                       Average value of CTAM                                                                Average value of CTHF


                                                    CTCO and HML return                                                                  CTPC and HML return
                                        40                                                                                   40
  Mean HML return in % per annum




                                                                                            Mean HML return in % per annum
                                        30                                                                                   30
                                        20                                                                                   20
                                        10                                                                                   10
                                         0                                                                                    0
                                        -10   Low          2              3     High                                         -10   Low         2               3    High
                                        -20                                                                                  -20
                                        -30                                                                                  -30
                                        -40                                                                                  -40
                                                        Average value of CTCO                                                               Average value of CTPC



Note : This figure shows mean annualized excess returns for the HML portfolio depending on
the quartile of the distribution of the disaggregated carry-trade order-flow factors CTAM,
CTHF, CTCO and CTPC.




                                                                                       48
Appendix
Data
Our data-set consists of 20 of the most liquid currencies with the largest trading volume
(EUR, JPY, GBP, CHF, AUD, NZD, CAD, SEK, NOK, MXN, BRL, ZAR, KRW, SGD,
HKD, TRY, HUF, PLN, CZK, SKK).
    We use price quotes of spot exchange rate from the first week of November 2001 to
the fourth week of March 2012. All exchange rates are quoted against US dollar, and
we normalize on expressing each exchange rate as the number of foreign currency units
(FCU) per US dollar (USD). The weekly and daily spot exchange rates are obtained from
WM/Reuters (via Datastream).
    We use a unique dataset, from one of the world's largest foreign exchange dealers, that
contains weekly customer order flows for the same 20 currencies from November 2001 to
March 2012. We have order flow data aggregated across four types of clients (9 countries,
EUR, JPY, GBP, CHF, AUD, NZD, CAD, SEK, NOK): asset manager (AM), corporate
clients (CO), hedge funds (HF) and private clients (PC). Asset managers and hedge funds
are recognized as financial customers. Corporate and private clients are recognized as non-
financial customers.
    We believe that the order flows collected from this dealer are representative of the end-
user currency demand in the foreign exchange market given that it has significant market
share. The order flows measure the US dollar value of buyer-initiated minus seller initiated
trades of a currency. A positive net order flow indicate net buying of foreign currency.




                                             49
    Table A6: Exposures of the Carry Trade Portfolios to the DOL and HML Factors


     Subsample             2001M11­2007M10                               2007M11­2012M3
                              -DOL  -HML            R  ¯2                  -DOL  -HML       ¯2
                                                                                            R
     P1              -0.01    0.72    -0.23        0.83          0.03       0.71   -0.28   0.76
                    (0.03) (0.03)    (0.02)                    (0.03)      (0.04) (0.03)
     P2              0.03     0.96     0.01        0.86         -0.05       0.91    0.00   0.80
                    (0.03) (0.03)    (0.02)                    (0.04)      (0.04) (0.03)
     P3              0.06     0.76     0.05        0.81         -0.04       0.99    0.10   0.88
                    (0.02) (0.02)    (0.02)                    (0.04)      (0.03) (0.03)
     P4              -0.01    0.95     0.15        0.80          0.01       1.05    0.35   0.87
                    (0.03) (0.03)    (0.03)                    (0.06)      (0.05) (0.06)
     P5              -0.01    0.73     0.77        0.92          0.03       0.71    0.72   0.95
                    (0.03) (0.03)    (0.02)                    (0.03)      (0.04) (0.03)
     EWC             0.00     0.27     0.27        0.63         -0.02       0.52    0.30   0.92
                    (0.02) (0.05)    (0.03)                    (0.02)      (0.03) (0.02)
     SPD              0.08    0.44     0.56        0.72          0.01       0.74    0.52   0.96
                    (0.04) (0.04)    (0.04)                    (0.03)      (0.03) (0.03)

Note : We present estimates of the time series regressions
                              e
                             rit =  i + f t i +   it ,      t = 1, . . . , T,
        e
where rit is the excess return of portfolio i at time t, and ft is a vector of the two risk factors,
DOL and HML. Estimates of i are scaled by 100. The portfolios are P1, P2, P3, P4 and P5
(the portfolios sorted by interest rate) as well as the carry trade portfolios EWC and SPD,
described in the main text. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Data are weekly.




                                                  50
    Table A7: Exposures of the Carry Trade Portfolios to the DOL and DVOL Factors


    Subsample              2001M11­2007M10                              2007M11­2012M3
                             -DOL  -DVOL            ¯2
                                                    R                     -DOL  -DVOL       ¯2
                                                                                            R
    P1             -0.06      0.72    0.38         0.74       0.01        0.52    0.09     0.53
                  (0.03)     (0.05)  (0.11)                  (0.04)      (0.05)  (0.07)
    P2             0.03       0.96    -0.01        0.86       -0.07       0.92     0.18    0.81
                  (0.03)     (0.03)  (0.08)                  (0.04)      (0.04)  (0.12)
    P3             0.08       0.76     0.01        0.80       -0.02       1.06    -0.09    0.87
                  (0.02)     (0.03)  (0.07)                  (0.04)      (0.04)  (0.09)
    P4             0.03       0.96    -0.12        0.78       0.05        1.28    -0.25    0.80
                  (0.03)     (0.03)  (0.12)                  (0.06)      (0.07)  (0.14)
    P5             0.20       0.76    -0.69        0.42       0.08        1.21    -0.25    0.65
                  (0.07)     (0.06)  (0.22)                  (0.07)      (0.10)  (0.22)
    EWC            0.08       0.28    -0.22        0.30        0.00       0.74    -0.05    0.75
                  (0.03)     (0.06)  (0.07)                  (0.03)      (0.05)  (0.07)
    SPD             0.24      0.47    -0.47        0.27       0.05        1.10    -0.19    0.74
                  (0.06)     (0.06)  (0.14)                  (0.05)      (0.07)  (0.13)

Note : We present estimates of the time series regressions
                              e
                             rit =  i + f t i +   it ,    t = 1, . . . , T,
        e
where rit is the excess return of portfolio i at time t, and ft is a vector of the two risk factors,
DOL and DVOL. Estimates of i are scaled by 100. The portfolios are P1, P2, P3, P4 and
P5 (the portfolios sorted by interest rate) as well as the carry trade portfolios EWC and
SPD, described in the main text. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Data are
weekly.




                                                  51
    Table A8: Exposures of the Carry Trade Portfolios to the DOL and CTOF Factors


    Subsample              2001M11­2007M10                              2007M11­2012M3
                             -DOL  -CTOF            ¯2
                                                    R                     -DOL  -CTOF       ¯2
                                                                                            R
    P1             -0.10      0.71    -0.62        0.73        0.00       0.55    -0.54    0.56
                  (0.03)     (0.05)  (0.21)                  (0.04)      (0.05)  (0.12)
    P2             0.03       0.96    -0.07        0.86       -0.05       0.91    -0.04    0.80
                  (0.02)     (0.03)  (0.15)                  (0.04)      (0.04)  (0.11)
    P3             0.09       0.76     0.23        0.80       -0.01       1.03    0.50     0.87
                  (0.02)     (0.02)  (0.14)                  (0.04)      (0.04)  (0.15)
    P4             0.05       0.96     0.33        0.78        0.06       1.24     0.74    0.80
                  (0.03)     (0.03)  (0.14)                  (0.06)      (0.08)  (0.20)
    P5             0.26       0.78     0.49        0.39        0.11       1.13     1.24    0.67
                  (0.06)     (0.07)  (0.35)                  (0.08)      (0.12)  (0.28)
    EWC            0.11       0.29    0.53         0.30        0.02       0.69    0.67     0.78
                  (0.03)     (0.06)  (0.20)                  (0.03)      (0.05)  (0.12)
    SPD             0.29      0.48     0.67        0.26        0.08       1.03     1.10    0.76
                  (0.06)     (0.06)  (0.29)                  (0.05)      (0.08)  (0.22)

Note : We present estimates of the time series regressions
                              e
                             rit =  i + f t i +   it ,    t = 1, . . . , T,
        e
where rit is the excess return of portfolio i at time t, and ft is a vector of the two risk factors,
DOL and CTOF. Estimates of i are scaled by 100. The portfolios are P1, P2, P3, P4 and
P5 (the portfolios sorted by interest rate) as well as the carry trade portfolios EWC and
SPD, described in the main text. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Data are
weekly.




                                                  52
