                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MALES AT THE TAILS:
              HOW SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS SHAPES THE GENDER GAP

                                          David Autor
                                        David N. Figlio
                                      Krzysztof Karbownik
                                          Jeffrey Roth
                                      Melanie Wasserman

                                      Working Paper 27196
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27196


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020

We thank seminar participants at University of California at Davis. Autor acknowledges support
from the Russell Sage Foundation (Grant #85-12-07). Figlio and Roth acknowledge support from
the National Science Foundation and the Institute for Education Sciences (CALDER grant), and
Figlio acknowledges support from the National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Wasserman acknowledges support
from the National Institute on Aging, Grant #T32-AG000186. We are grateful to the Florida
Departments of Education and Health for providing the de-identified, matched data used in this
analysis. The conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the
positions of the Florida Departments of Education and Health or those of our funders. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27196.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by David Autor, David N. Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeffrey Roth, and Melanie
Wasserman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Males at the Tails: How Socioeconomic Status Shapes the Gender Gap
David Autor, David N. Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeffrey Roth, and Melanie Wasserman
NBER Working Paper No. 27196
May 2020
JEL No. I24,J12,J13,J16

                                         ABSTRACT

Analyzing Florida birth certificates matched to school records, we document that the female
advantage in childhood behavioral and academic outcomes is driven by gender gaps at the
extremes of the outcome distribution. Using unconditional quantile regression, we investigate
whether family socioeconomic status (SES) differentially affects the lower tail outcomes of boys.
We find that the differential effects of family SES on boys' outcomes are concentrated in the
parts of the distribution where the gender gaps are most pronounced. Accounting for the
disproportionate effects of family environment on boys at the tails substantially narrows the
gender gap in high school dropout.

David Autor                                     Jeffrey Roth
Department of Economics, E52-438                Department of Pediatrics
MIT                                             University of Florida
50 Memorial Drive                               PO Box 100296
Cambridge, MA 02142                             Gainesville, FL 32610-0296
and NBER                                        jeffroth@ufl.edu
dautor@mit.edu
                                                Melanie Wasserman
David N. Figlio                                 UCLA Anderson School of Management
School of Education and Social Policy           110 Westwood Plaza C521
Northwestern University                         Los Angeles, CA 90095
2120 Campus Drive                               melanie.wasserman@anderson.ucla.edu
Evanston IL 60208
and NBER
figlio@northwestern.edu

Krzysztof Karbownik
Department of Economics
Emory University
Rich Memorial Building
1602 Fishburne Drive
Atlanta, GA 30322
and NBER
krzysztof.karbownik@emory.edu
Introduction
Women now outpace men in many measures of educational achievement, including the propensity to
graduate from high school, enroll in post-secondary education, and graduate from college. In 2010,
for example, the high school graduation rate among U.S. women was 87 percent, while it was 81
percent among U.S. men (Murnane, 2013). These female-favorable gaps have motivated a burgeoning
literature examining their potential determinants, with recent papers tracing the evolution of gender
disparities during childhood (Buchmann and DiPrete, 2006; DiPrete and Jennings, 2012; Lundberg,
2017; Autor et al., 2019). While realized gender gaps in adult educational outcomes are large, a
wrinkle in the examination of the precursor childhood gender gaps is that these differences appear on
average to be relatively modest. For example, recent work documents that among U.S. eighth grade
students during the early to mid-2000s, boys and girls exhibited modest differences in their mean
test scores, with boys maintaining a small advantage in math and girls maintaining a more robust
advantage in reading (Pope and Sydnor, 2010; Bertrand and Pan, 2013). In behavioral outcomes,
where boys have long experienced a higher incidence of disciplinary problems than girls, the average
female-favorable gap is larger but still modest (Bertrand and Pan, 2013; Autor et al., 2019). In the
Florida public school system that we study here, the gender gap in school absences is a mere 0.45
percentage points, with the average boy and girl both attending more than 94 percent of school
days.
   In this paper, we document and analyze two fact patterns that jointly help to explain why modest
mean gaps between boys and girls in early academic and behavioral outcomes translate into large
differences in realized educational attainment. We first show that female-favorable gaps in behavioral
and academic outcomes during childhood--where present--stem largely from the overrepresentation
of boys in the lower tails of the academic and behavioral outcome distributions. This is visible in the
upper two panels of Figure 1, which plots the fraction of students who are boys at each percentile of
the academic and behavioral outcome distributions among children born in Florida in 1992-1993 who
attended Florida public schools in grades five to eight. Evident from this figure is the substantial
overrepresentation of boys in the bottom quintile of attendance rates (panel A) and reading and
math scores (panel B). Boys make up 49 percent of the sample (the dark horizontal line in each
panel). But at the 10th percentile of the attendance and reading score distributions, boys comprise
55 percent of the population, and their overrepresentation rises convexly at lower percentiles. For
math test scores, males are overrepresented at both the lower and upper tails of the distribution,
yielding a small mean math advantage for boys.
   These childhood lower tail behavioral and academic outcomes are highly predictive of subsequent
high school dropout. As shown in panels C and D of Figure 1, high school dropouts are drawn
disproportionately from the lower tails of the test score and attendance distributions. Children at
the 10th percentile of the math and reading score distributions are almost four times as likely to
leave high school without a degree as those at the 90th percentile. Poor attendance in school is even
more predictive: the dropout ratio among 10th percentile attendees exceeds that of 90th percentile
attendees by a factor of six.


                                                  1
   Figure 1 Panels C and D additionally reveal the second pattern that undergirds our analysis:
boys and girls at the lower tails of the behavioral and academic distributions have a similar likelihood
to drop out of high school; thus, conditional on childhood school performance, there is only a small
remaining gender gap in high school dropout. These two patterns--boys and girls at the tails have
comparable dropout rates, but boys are substantially overrepresented at the tails--suggests that
better understanding why males are overrepresented at the lower tails of the childhood outcome
distribution may help to illuminate why they are more prone to high school dropout.
   This paper tests the hypothesis that these boy-girl differences in tail outcomes stem in part from
differential susceptibility of boys to adverse child-rearing conditions--specifically, that less favorable
home environments differentially raise the prevalence of adverse outcomes among boys relative to
girls. Because these adverse outcomes are determinative of high school dropout, this differential
sensitivity could help explain the large gender gap in dropout. Our analysis employs the universe
of Florida birth records for years 1992-2000, matched to public school test score and disciplinary
outcomes, to assess the effect of childhood environmental influences--family, neighborhoods, and
schools--on the gender gap throughout the distribution of behavioral, academic, and high school
attainment outcomes. To quantify the effect of family socioeconomic status (SES) on the gender
gap throughout the outcome distribution, we use the unconditional quantile regression method of
Firpo et al. (2009).
   Our empirical strategy rests on two assumptions. The first is that child gender is as good as
randomly assigned to family types due to naturally occurring chance determination of the gender
of a child at the time of conception. The second assumption is that the gender gap in potential
outcomes is independent of family SES throughout the outcome distribution. We assess the validity
of these assumptions, first, by testing whether boys are more or less likely than girls to be born to
disadvantaged families. Second, we examine whether family SES differentially affects boys' neonatal
health throughout the distribution. From these tests, we conclude that family environment does
not exert a meaningful differential effect on boys' relative to girls' initial conditions, as measured
both by their initial allocation to family types and by their health at birth--consistent with the
supposition that its impact on outcomes arises postnatally.
   Our empirical analysis has two main results. First, we show that the differential adverse effects
of family disadvantage (proxied by SES) for boys appear to be concentrated in precisely the parts of
the distribution where the gender gaps are most pronounced. These relationships are evident from
unconditional quantile regressions, and they are robust to including detailed controls for confounding
factors. Second, by extrapolating the effects of family environment on the gender gap in grade-
school behavioral and academic outcomes to high school dropout and on-time graduation decisions,
we show that a substantial fraction of the gender gap in high school outcomes can be explained
by the differential effect of family SES on boys' medium-run outcomes. For the lowest decile of
the behavioral and academic outcome distributions, a one standard deviation increase in family
SES--equivalent to the difference between a family with a married high school graduate mother and
a family with an unmarried high school dropout mother--would eliminate over 40 percent of the



                                                    2
decile-specific gender gap in high school dropout. This impact is due to (1) the differential benefits
of family environment for behavioral and academic outcomes of boys at low quantiles and (2) the
positive relationship between these intermediate outcomes and high school completion for both boys
and girls.
        Our paper contributes to a growing literature examining the effect of childhood environment
on the gender gap in educational outcomes. Thus far, this literature has focused on conditional
mean differences. Bertrand and Pan (2013), Autor et al. (2019), and Aucejo and James (2019)
demonstrate that growing up in a more disadvantaged family environment disproportionately harms
boys' childhood outcomes, including disciplinary infractions, standardized test scores, and high
school graduation rates.1 Another strand of the literature characterizes gender gaps throughout
the academic outcome distribution but does not explore their determinants. Contini et al. (2017)
use Italian data and Fryer and Levitt (2010) and Robinson and Lubienski (2011) use U.S. data to
document that the gender gaps in math (favoring males) in kindergarten through eighth grade are
largest at the upper end of the achievement distribution. Ellison and Swanson (2010) show that
boys outscore girls at the far right tail of advanced mathematics. Robinson and Lubienski (2011)
further document that gender gaps in reading (favoring females) are largest at the bottom of the
achievement distribution. This paper departs from the prior literature by, first, documenting the
critical role of gender gaps at the tails of the distribution in explaining large gender disparities in
educational attainment, and second, by exploring the determinants of these tail gaps.


1        Data and empirical approach
1.1       Florida birth certificates linked to school records
Our data come from the universe of birth certificates from Florida for years 1992-2000 linked to public
school records from 2002-03 through 2009-10 school years.2 For each year that a child attends a
Florida public school, our data report the child's Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT)
math and reading scores, as well as records on daily absences and suspensions for grades three
through eight. To measure children's academic performance, we use standardized math and reading
test scores. To measure children's behavioral performance, we compute a "combined attendance
rate" by totaling the number of absences and suspensions in a given academic year, dividing by the
number of school days in the year, and subtracting this absence rate from one. We account for the
higher rates of absences and suspensions during middle school relative to elementary school grades
by normalizing each child's combined attendance rate by the average combined attendance rate in
their grade. To reduce computational demands of the quantile regression models, we average grade
three through eight outcomes, so each child contributes one observation to the analysis for each
    1
     For college attendance, employment, and earnings, Chetty et al. (2016) find a differential advantage of growing
up in a higher income family for boys relative to girls. These longer-run effects documented in the U.S. using
administrative data stand in contrast with findings from Danish administrative data (Brenøe and Lundberg, 2018)
and U.S. survey data (Lundberg, 2017; Lei and Lundberg, 2020).
   2
     Details on the matching procedure are reported in Figlio et al. (2014).



                                                         3
outcome.
         We construct a family SES index from a principal components analysis of demographic variables
reported on the child's birth certificate: maternal education (in years); maternal age at birth (in
years); family structure (married, not married); and Medicaid receipt at the time of birth.3 We
compute a measure of neighborhood SES by aggregating the family SES index to the zip code level
(excluding the child's own family) and assigning children the neighborhood SES of their zip code of
birth. Our measure of school quality is from the Florida Department of Education's school-level gain
scores, measuring schools' estimated average contribution to student outcomes. For each school, we
average the gain scores between 2002 and 2013 and then convert this average into a percentile rank
in the gains distribution across Florida public schools. We assign each child the cumulative quality
of schools attended from grades three through eight, by computing a years-weighted average of the
schools' percentile ranks (Autor et al., 2016). The main sample comprises all children born in Florida
1994-2000 who attended Florida public schools. To compute the relationship between childhood
behavioral and academic outcomes and subsequent high school completion, we additionally analyze
children born in 1992 and 1993, for whom we observe high school graduation outcomes. Summary
statistics are found in Appendix Tables A.2 and A.3.

1.2        Empirical strategy
Our empirical framework for estimating the effect of family SES on the gender gap in children's
outcomes throughout the distribution follows Havnes and Mogstad (2015). Let FYg,s (y ) represent
the cumulative distribution function of educational outcome Y for children with gender g  {m, f },
whose family SES at the time of the children's birth is s  {0, 1}, where one denotes the family is
high SES and zero denotes the family is low SES.4
         First we construct the distributional contrast g , which captures for children of gender g , the
difference in the shares from high and low SES backgrounds who score above a given outcome level
y.

                                    g (y ) = (1 - Fg,1 (y )) - (1 - Fg,0 (y ))
This quantity will be positive if a higher fraction of high SES than low SES children of gender g
score above level y .
         Since family SES is not randomly assigned to children, g will incorporate not only differences
between children due to SES but also differences due to the correlation of SES and other child
and environmental characteristics. For this reason, g does not reflect the pure quantile treatment
effect of SES on the outcomes of children of gender g . We can write 1 - FYg,s (y ) as the sum of two
distributions, g,s (y ) + g,s (y ), which allows us to write:

                              g (y ) = (g,1 (y ) - g,0 (y )) + (g,1 (y ) - g,0 (y )) ,
     3
    Details on the construction of this measure are in Table A.1.
     4
    We use a discrete SES measure here for expositional clarity. The SES measure in our empirical application is
continuous.



                                                         4
where g,1 (y ) - g,0 (y ) is the causal effect of SES on the share of children of gender g who score
above level y , while g,1 (y ) - g,0 (y ) is the difference in the latent distributions of the educational
outcome among children born to high and low SES households. Note that the subscript g  {m, f }
indicates that we are holding gender constant while contrasting across levels of SES. In our definition
of g,s (y ), we include both the direct effect of family SES and the indirect causal effect of SES that
may operate through other correlated channels, such as schools and neighborhoods. We address
these potential environmental confounds in our empirical analysis.
       We can then write the difference-in-differences contrast as follows:

                           DiD (y ) = m (y ) - f (y )
                                      = [(m,1 (y ) - f,1 (y )) - (m,0 (y ) - f,0 (y ))]
                                      - [(m,1 (y ) - f,1 (y )) - (m,0 (y ) - f,0 (y ))]

The first bracketed expression in this equation corresponds to the causal effect of SES on the share
of boys relative to girls who score above outcome level y . The second bracketed expression contains
terms reflecting the potentially confounding difference in the latent distributions of the educational
outcome among high and low SES children. In addition, it contains the potentially confounding
difference in the latent distributions of the educational outcome among boys and girls of a given
SES level. To permit identification of the causal effect of SES on the gender gap in educational
outcomes throughout the distribution, we make the following two assumptions:

Assumption 1. The latent gender gap in g,s (y ) is independent of SES. Hence E [m,1 (y ) - f,1 (y )] =
E [m,0 (y ) - f,0 (y )] for all y .

       Under this assumption, the double difference of the shares of high-SES boys and girls relative to
low-SES boys and girls who score above outcome level y eliminates the bias terms. This assumption
does not require that the latent distribution of educational outcomes is independent of SES for
either sex. Rather, akin to the standard parallel trends assumption in a differences-in-differences
(DD) setting (augmented for a quantile setting), this assumption requires that any gender difference
in latent outcomes is independent of SES and hence can be eliminated by differencing the gender
gap across SES levels. We test the validity of this assumption in section 2.3.5
       If SES were perfectly observed in our data, then assumption 1 would be sufficient to identify
the causal effect of SES on the gender gap throughout the distribution. In practice, we proxy SES
with detailed information from birth certificates. Even under assumption 1, our usage of a proxy
for SES could lead to a spurious correlation between the gender gap in g,s and the proxy, if there
is gender imbalance among family types. This would potentially confound the causal effect of SES
   5
    In a standard DD setting, the assumption that the contrast in outcomes between untreated (here, low SES)
boys and girls is an additive constant permits identification. In the quantile setting, we allow the latent relationship
between SES and the educational outcome to vary without restriction throughout the distribution while imposing
that it does so identically by gender. The double difference of the distributions of outcomes between high-SES boys
and girls relative to low-SES boys and girls eliminates the confounding effect of the g,s terms. Due to the quantile
analysis, this additivity assumption is invariant to monotone transformations of the dependent variable (Athey and
Imbens, 2006), which is not true in a standard DD model.


                                                           5
on the gender gap with the non-random assignment of genders to family types. This confound is
eliminated with the following assumption, the validity of which we test in section 2.3:

Assumption 2. The gender of children is as good as randomly assigned to family SES.

    Bringing this empirical approach to the data, we construct the following contrast:

                        ^DiD (y ) = (Ff,0 (y ) - Fm,0 (y )) - (Ff,1 (y ) - Fm,1 (y )),
                                                                                                    (1)
The estimand ^DiD corresponds to differences in shares of children scoring above each educational
outcome level. To convert these shares into quantile treatment effects, we employ the method
developed by Firpo et al. (2009) to estimate unconditional quantile regression using the recentered
influence function (RIF). This approach estimates the quantile treatment effect by contrasting m
and f and scaling this contrast by the kernel density of the joint distribution of SES and test
scores at a given y . Thus, the RIF analysis recovers the quantile treatment effect by inverting
the cumulative distribution function of the outcome variable in the neighborhood of the treatment
variable.


2     Family environment and the gender gap throughout the distribu-
      tion
2.1    Main results
We estimate baseline gender gaps using the following specification:

                                           Yi =  +  Boyi + ei                                       (2)
where Yi is an academic or behavioral outcome for child i, and Boyi is an indicator for a male child.
To characterize the gender gap throughout the outcome distribution, we replace the dependent
variable in equation (2) with the recentered influence function for each quantile of the academic or
behavioral outcome distribution.
    Next we incorporate the interaction of child gender and family environmental factors into the
specification:

                     Yi =  +  1 Boyi +  2 SESi +  3 (Boyi × SESi ) + X i  + ei                      (3)
where SESi is an index of the family's socioeconomic status at birth, and X i is a vector of other
controls including child race and ethnicity, year and month of birth, and birth order; and we again
replace the dependent variable with the recentered influence function. The coefficient  3 on the
interaction term (Boyi × SESi ) permits the relationship between family SES and outcomes to differ
by child sex. Under our identifying assumptions, this coefficient corresponds to the differential causal
effect of family SES on outcomes of boys relative to girls.
    The first outcome we consider is attendance in grade school, a behavioral outcome. On aver-
age, girls are absent 5.1 percent of school days while boys are absent 5.6 percent of school days
(Table A.3). This mean difference masks considerable heterogeneity in the gender gap throughout

                                                      6
the attendance distribution, however. Figure 2 Panel A reveals this heterogeneity by plotting the
raw gender gap (which we have reversed for expositional purposes to be the girl-boy gap) at 50 per-
centiles of the attendance distribution.6 The positive gender gap indicates that boys have a lower
attendance rate (higher absence rate) at essentially every point in the distribution, consistent with
the overrepresentation of boys at the lower end of the distribution depicted in Figure 1. Relevant to
our analysis, the female-favorable gender gap in attendance is considerably larger at the lower tail
of the distribution. At the 10th percentile, boys miss 1.06 percentage points more school days than
do girls.7 This gap shrinks monotonically as one moves upward in the distribution. The gap at the
90th percentile of the distribution of 0.10 percentage points is less than one-tenth as large as that at
the 10th percentile of the distribution.
      To characterize the effects of family SES on the gender gap throughout the attendance distribu-
tion, we estimate unconditional quantile regressions corresponding to equation (3), which we plot
for 50 percentiles. The coefficients on the interaction term Boyi × SESi plotted in Panel A of Figure
2 indicate that the differential effect of family environment on boys' attendance rates is largest at
the lower end of the distribution, precisely where the gender gap is most pronounced. As the female
advantage in attendance attenuates, the estimated effect of family SES on the gender gap also de-
clines. We estimate that a 1 fall in SES increases the 10th percentile boy-girl gap in absences by
0.63 percentage points. At the median, this effect is only 0.14 percentage points, and at the 90th
percentile, it is a mere 0.03 percentage points.
      These estimated effects can be compared to the observed gender gaps at these percentiles, equal
to 1.06, 0.30, and 0.10, respectively. The estimates imply that a 1 decline in SES is predicted
to expand the lower-tail (10/50) gender gap in attendance by roughly two-thirds of its observed
magnitude.8 Similar to Autor et al. (2019), we find a substantial differential effect of family SES on
boys' behavioral outcomes on average as well. The OLS coefficient on the interaction of boy and
family SES is positive and highly significant, at 0.26 percentage points. Our findings here, however,
indicate that this mean effect is driven almost entirely by the lower half of the distribution. A 1
rise in SES is predicted to close the lower-tail 10/50 boy-girl attendance gap by 0.49 percentage
points while compressing the upper tail 50/90 gap by only 0.11 percentage points.
      The estimates for the academic outcomes--reading and math scores--tell a more nuanced story.
For reading, there is a female advantage, both on average and throughout the distribution. The
female-favorable gap in reading test scores plotted in Figure 2 Panel B largely mirrors that for
attendance. The gender gap in reading narrows from 0.27 at the 10th percentile to 0.09 at
the 90th percentile of the score distribution (coefficients reported in Appendix Table A.5). As with
attendance, we estimate that boys differentially benefit from a more advantaged family environment.
At the 10th percentile, a 1 increase in the family SES index corresponds to a 0.14 closure of the
gender gap in reading, half of the raw gap.
      Math test scores report a small mean male advantage of 0.03 standard deviations (Appendix
  6
    Specifically, we estimate a RIF regression of equation (2) and plot the coefficients on Boyi multiplied by -1.
  7
    RIF regressions estimates corresponding to this figure are reported in Appendix Table A.4.
  8
    0.64 = (0.63 - 0.14) / (1.06 - 0.30)


                                                         7
Table A.6). This mean difference stems from boys outperforming girls above approximately the 20th
percentile of the score distribution. Meanwhile, there is a substantial male disadvantage in math
scores below the 20th percentile. As depicted in Panel C of Figure 2, family SES exerts a differential
effect on boys' versus girls' math scores, but this effect is non-monotone throughout the outcome
distribution. At the tails of the distribution, boys differentially benefit from higher family SES,
while in the middle of the distribution, family SES confers a slight differential benefit to girls.
   In summary, for all three outcomes, the differential effect of SES on boys is amplified at the lower
tail of the distribution, precisely where there are large female-favorable gaps. If we provisionally
interpret these as causal estimates, we would conclude that the differential benefits of a one standard
deviation increase in family environment for boys can explain nearly half of the male disadvantage
at the lower tail of the academic and behavioral distributions.

2.2   The role of other environmental factors
Our hypothesis is that family environment--proxied by SES--is differentially consequential for the
behavioral and academic outcomes of boys relative to girls. While we have so far considered family
SES in isolation, family SES is correlated with other environmental factors that may also affect
behavioral and achievement outcomes, such as the demographics of neighborhoods and the quality
of schools that children attend. To distinguish the role of SES from other correlated factors, we
estimate augmented models of the form:

                           Yi = +  1 Boyi +  2 SESi +  3 (Boyi × SESi ) +
                                4 NBDi +  5 (Boyi × NBDi ) +
                                6 SCHi +  7 (Boyi × SCHi ) + X i  + ei ,                              (4)

where we additionally include controls for a child's neighborhood SES at birth, NBDi , and school
quality, SCHi , as well as the interactions of these attributes with Boyi . Figure 3 displays how
the inclusion of these additional controls affects our main results by plotting the interaction term
Boyi × SESi with and without controls for school quality and neighborhood SES (corresponding OLS
and RIF regression results are reported in Appendix Tables A.7, A.8, and A.9). Panel A shows that
the inclusion of school and neighborhood controls modestly reduces the differential effect of family
SES on boys' attendance, though more than two-thirds of the unadjusted effect remains at the 10th ,
25th , and 50th percentiles. Similarly, the effect of family SES on the gender gap in math and reading
scores is modestly attenuated by these additional environmental controls (Panels B and C), and its
estimated impact remains substantial at the lower tail, where these effects are largest.

2.3   Testing the identifying assumptions
Family SES and the gender gap in potential outcomes: We probe the validity of assumption
1­that the gender gap in potential outcomes is independent of family SES throughout the outcome
distribution­by examining the relationship between family SES and neonatal health. Using equation



                                                   8
(3), we test the relationship between SES and the gender gap in both log birthweight and a health
index based on a principal component analysis of all observed birth outcomes, including birthweight
in grams, gestational length in weeks, one and five minutes Apgar scores, congenital disorders, labor
and delivery complications, abnormal conditions at birth, maternal health problems, and adequacy
of prenatal care. This analysis jointly tests whether family SES differentially affects sex at conception
and the viability of male versus female embryos (as per Trivers and Willard, 1973)--which could
occur if the sensitivity of the fetus to maternal stress levels during pregnancy differs by sex.
   The results of this analysis are presented in Appendix Table A.10. Unsurprisingly, boys weigh
three to four percent more than girls at the time of birth, both on average and throughout the
birthweight distribution. Importantly, we detect almost no economically meaningful relationship
between family SES and the gender gap in birthweight. The mean effect is a precisely estimated zero,
whereas the estimated quantile effects range between plus and minus one percent. To interpret the
magnitude of this relationship, we draw on the fact that, using the same Florida data as employed
here, Figlio et al. (2014) find that a ten percent increase in birthweight generates a 0.05 gain
in children's academic outcomes. Our point estimates for the effect of SES on the gender gaps
in birthweight (+/ - 1%) are an order of magnitude smaller than this effect, implying that any
confounding influence of SES on birthweight could add no more than +/ - 0.005 to the gender gap
in academic outcomes. This is minute relative to the effects we estimate in Figure 2. The conclusion
is similar for the specification examining the neonatal health index.
   We also directly test the sensitivity of our main results to the inclusion of controls for birthweight
and the at-birth health index and their interactions with Boyi . The results are plotted in Appendix
Figure A.1, where we observe that these additional controls have almost imperceptible effects on the
estimated relationship between family SES and the gender gap in academic and behavioral outcomes
throughout the distribution. These findings suggest that the effect of family SES on the gender gap
manifests after birth, lending validity to the assumption that the gender gap throughout the distri-
bution of potential outcomes is independent of family SES.


Exogeneity of gender: We probe the validity of Assumption 2, that boys and girls are as good
as randomly assigned to families, by testing whether child gender is related to family socioeconomic
status. We estimate the following linear probability model for child sex:

                                        Boyi =  +  SESi + ei                                         (5)
where the variables have the same definition as those in the above specifications. Appendix Table
A.11 reports the results. In the full sample of children born in the state of Florida, there is no
relationship between family SES and the probability that a newborn child is male. In our analysis
sample, which matches births to public schooling records, we note that there is a small, positive,
and statistically significant relationship between the likelihood of a male child and family SES. A 1
increase in SES is associated with a 0.007 increase in the fraction of children who are male. Given
its statistical significance, we benchmark the economic magnitude of this relationship in two ways,
both of which indicate that it is unlikely to bias our results.

                                                   9
         First, we compare the relationship between SES and the sex ratio in our matched sample to sex
ratios in the literature. Our coefficient of 0.007 shifts the sex ratio from the sample mean of 1.021
to 1.050. This is within the range of the biological norm in the white U.S. population, which does
not exhibit sex selective behavior (Almond and Edlund, 2008; Almond and Sun, 2017).
         Second, we examine the sensitivity of our results to the imbalance of male children throughout the
family SES distribution by implementing the bounding approach of Lee (2009). As an upper bound,
we assume the excess gender is positively selected and drop the excess males (females) throughout
the SES distribution that are the highest performing in each of our outcomes. As a lower bound, we
assume the excess gender is negatively selected and drop the excess males (females) throughout the
SES distribution that are the lowest performing. We then re-estimate the main specification from
equation (3) using the upper and lower bound samples.9 The results are depicted in Appendix Figure
A.2. For all outcomes, the lower bounds are just below the 95 percent confidence intervals of the
original point estimates in the lower half of the distribution. This pattern supports the notion that,
if the excess gender is negatively selected, the relative prevalence of boys in advantageous family
circumstances does not impact the effects of family SES on the gender gap. In the upper half of the
distribution, the lower bounds are a bit lower than the 95 percent confidence intervals of the original
point estimates, indicating that we may slightly overestimate the differential effects of family SES
on the highest quantiles of the male distribution. The upper bounds for all outcomes substantially
amplify the Boyig × SESis coefficients at the lower tails. Thus, if the overrepresented gender is
positively selected--meaning the highest performing boys are missing from our sample--our main
results understate the differential benefits of family SES for boys.


3         Implications for the Gender Gap in Educational Achievement
What do the effects of family environment on the gender gap throughout the childhood outcome
distribution imply for the gender gap in high school graduation? In our sample, we observe high
school outcomes for cohorts born in 1992 and 1993. Among these cohorts, the gender gap in on-time
high school completion is seven percentage points, while the gap in high school dropout is three
percentage points, both favoring women (Appendix Table A.3).10 To compute the contribution of
family environment to the gender gap in high school outcomes, we scale our unconditional quantile
estimates of family environment on the gender gap in academic and behavioral outcomes by the
relationship between each outcome and high school dropout/completion.
         First, we estimate the relationship between intermediate (attendance, reading scores, math
scores) and high school outcomes (on-time graduation and dropout), using a cubic specification:


             HighSchoolOutcomei =  + f (Attendancei ) + f (Readingi ) + f (Mathi ) + X i  + ei                   (6)
    9
    See Appendix B for the details of the bounding procedure.
    10
    The remaining four percentage points are due to gender differences in the fraction of students who remain in high
school past the on-time completion date. We do not observe whether these students ultimately complete high school.



                                                         10
where f (·) are cubic polynomials of intermediate academic and behavioral outcomes. The regression
results, reported in Appendix Table A.12, confirm the robust predictive power of all three elemen-
tary/middle school outcomes for high school completion. Next, we multiply the quantile-specific
estimates of the coefficient on Boyi × SESi from equation (3) by the marginal effect on the high
school outcome from equation (6), corresponding to the value at the same quantile of the interme-
diate outcome. The results of this extrapolation exercise are presented in Figure 4, where the bars
denote the contribution of a 1 increase in family environment to the gender gap in high school
outcomes through its effects on the gender gap in math, reading, and attendance, respectively. In
our setting, a one standard deviation shift represents, for example, shifting from growing up in a
family with a mother who is an unmarried high school dropout to one in which the mother is a
married high school graduate.
      Panel A depicts the effects for high school dropout, while Panel B plots the effects for on-time
graduation. In Panel A, of the three intermediate outcomes, family environment makes the largest
contribution to the gender gap in dropping out through its effects on attendance. This is due to
the substantial differential effect of family environment on boys' attendance--particularly at the
lower tail of the distribution--and the sizable predictive relationship between elementary/middle
school attendance and subsequent high school dropout.11 Family environment does not contribute
meaningfully to high school outcomes through math or reading test scores. At the 10th percentile
of the attendance distribution, we observe that 2.9 percentage points, or 42 percent, of the decile-
specific gender gap in high school dropout is explained by the contribution of family SES through
attendance alone. When we instead focus on the contribution of family SES to the gender gap
in high school dropout rates through its mean effect on attendance, the contribution is just 1.07
percentage points. Focusing on average effects thus obscures the substantial explanatory power of
SES at the lower tail. Logically, this contribution is much smaller higher in the distribution, where
family environment makes little contribution to gender gaps in childhood school outcomes (Figure
2).
      The results for on-time high school graduation are comparable. At the lowest deciles, family
environment can explain 3.5 percentage points, or 32 percent, of the decile-specific gender gap,
again operating exclusively through its effects on attendance. In contrast, the contribution of family
environment to the gender gap in high school graduation, through its mean differential effect on
boys' attendance, is a mere 1.35 percentage points.


4      Conclusion
Leveraging rich longitudinal data, we document and analyze two patterns that in part explain why
modest mean gaps between boys and girls in early academic and behavioral outcomes translate into
   11
      From Appendix Table A.12, we note that the marginal effect of attendance on high school outcomes is smaller in
magnitude at the lower tail than at the upper tail of the attendance distribution. Due to the substantial differential
effect of SES on boys' attendance at the lower tail of the attendance distribution, however, the overall contribution
of SES to the gender gap in high school outcomes through attendance remains larger at the lower tail.



                                                         11
large differences in educational attainment: first, female-favorable gaps in childhood behavioral and
academic outcomes are driven primarily by a preponderance of boys at the lower tails of the respective
outcome; and, second, conditional on these outcomes, there is only a small remaining gender gap
in high school dropout. Using unconditional quantile regression, we find that family disadvantage
differentially reduces the outcomes of boys at low quantiles, thus expanding the gender gap at the
tails of the distribution. These tail differences translate into substantial gender gaps in the likelihood
of high school non-completion. Family SES is correlated with other environmental attributes, such
as neighborhood SES and school quality, but these correlates only modestly attenuate the differential
effects of family environment on boys' outcomes. We unfortunately cannot directly analyze the effect
of family SES on gender gaps after high school. The disproportionate effects of family circumstances
on the lowest performing boys, however, paired with the predictive power of behavioral outcomes
for high school completion, positions family environment to contribute meaningfully to gender gaps
in long-term educational achievement and likely to adult earnings as well.




                                                   12
References
Almond, Douglas and Lena Edlund, "Son-biased sex ratios in the 2000 United States Census,"
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2008, 105 (15), 5681­5682.
      and Yixin Sun, "Son-biased sex ratios in 2010 US Census and 2011-2013 US natality data,"
  Social Science & Medicine, 2017, 176, 21­24.
Athey, Susan and Guido W Imbens, "Identification and inference in nonlinear difference in
  differences models," Econometrica, 2006, 74 (2), 431­497.
Aucejo, Esteban M. and Jonathan James, "Catching up to girls: Understanding the gender
  imbalance in educational attainment within race," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2019, 34 (4),
  502­525.
Autor, David, David Figlio, Krzysztof Karbownik, Jeffrey Roth, and Melanie Wasser-
  man, "School Quality and the Gender Gap in Educational Achievement," American Economic
  Review Papers and Proceedings, 2016.
  ,     ,   ,   , and   , "Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Behavioral and Educational
  Outcomes," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2019, 11 (3), 338­81.
Bertrand, Marianne and Jessica Pan, "The Trouble with Boys: Social Influences and the
  Gender Gap in Disruptive Behavior," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, jan 2013,
  5 (1), 32­64.
Brenøe, Anne Ardila and Shelly Lundberg, "Gender gaps in the Effects of Childhood Family
  Environment: Do They Persist into Adulthood?," European Economic Review, 2018, 109, 42­62.
Buchmann, Claudia and Thomas A DiPrete, "The Growing Female Advantage in College
  Completion: The Role of Family Background and Academic Achievement," American Sociological
  Review, 2006, 71 (4), 515­541.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Frina Lin, Jeremy Majerovitz, and Benjamin Scuderi,
  "Childhood Environment and Gender Gaps in Adulthood," American Economic Review Papers
  and Proceedings, 2016.
Contini, Dalit, Maria Laura Di Tommaso, and Silvia Mendolia, "The gender gap in math-
  ematics achievement: Evidence from Italian data," Economics of Education Review, 2017, 58,
  32­42.
DiPrete, Thomas A. and Jennifer L Jennings, "Social and Behavioral Skills and the Gender
  Gap in Early Educational Achievement," Social Science Research, 2012, 41 (1), 1­15.
Ellison, Glenn and Ashley Swanson, "The Gender Gap in Secondary School Mathematics at
  High Achievement Levels: Evidence from the American Mathematics Competitions," Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24 (2), 109­128.
Figlio, David N, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth, "The Effects
  of Poor Neonatal Health on Children's Cognitive Development," American Economic Review,



                                                  13
  2014, 104 (12), 3921­3955.
Firpo, Sergio, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux, "Unconditional Quantile Regres-
  sions," Econometrica, 2009, 77 (3), 953­973.
Fryer, Roland G and Steven D Levitt, "An Empirical Analysis of the Gender Gap in Mathe-
  matics," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (2), 210­240.
Havnes, Tarjei and Magne Mogstad, "Is universal child care leveling the playing field?," Journal
  of Public Economics, 2015, 127, 100­114.
Lee, David S, "Training, Wages, and Sample Selection: Estimating Sharp Bounds on Treatment
  Effects," The Review of Economic Studies, 2009, 76, 1071­1102.
Lei, Ziteng and Shelly Lundberg, "Vulnerable Boys: Short-term and Long-term Gender Differ-
  ences in the Impacts of Adolescent Disadvantage," IZA Discussion Paper No. 12944, 2020.
Lundberg, Shelly, "Father Absence and the Educational Gender Gap," IZA Discussion Paper No.
  10814, 2017.
Murnane, Richard J, "U.S. High School Graduation Rates: Patterns and Explanations," Journal
  of Economic Literature, jun 2013, 51 (2), 370­422.
Pope, Devin G and Justin R Sydnor, "Geographic Variation in the Gender Differences in Test
  Scores," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2010, 24 (2), 95­108.
Robinson, J. P. and S. T. Lubienski, "The Development of Gender Achievement Gaps in
  Mathematics and Reading During Elementary and Middle School: Examining Direct Cognitive
  Assessments and Teacher Ratings," American Educational Research Journal, 2011, 48 (2), 268­
  302.
Trivers, Rorbert L and Dan E Willard, "Natural Selection of Parental Ability to Vary the Sex
  Ratio of Offspring," Science, 1973, 179 (4068), 90­92.




                                                 14
Figures and Tables


                                                                              Figure 1: Males at the Tails

                                   I. Fraction Male throughout the Educational and Behavioral Outcome Distribution
                                            A. Attendance                                    B. Test Scores
                65




                                                                                                                   70
                60




                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                        % male
         55
   % male




                                                                                                                   50
                50
                45




                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                 1   10   20   30       40      50       60      70    80    90   99
                40




                                                                                                                                                     Percentiles of distribution
                              1   10   20    30      40       50    60       70      80     90   99
                                            Percentiles of attendance distribution                                                                       Math               Reading



               II. High School Dropout Rate throughout the Educational and Behavioral Outcome Distribution
                              C. Attendance                                   D. Test Scores
                                                                                                                 60
                60




                                                                                                                            50
                         50




                                                                                                      % high school dropout
   % high school dropout




                                                                                                                      40
                   40




                                                                                                               30
            30




                                                                                                        20
    20




                                                                                                                 10
                10




                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                 1   10   20   30       40      50       60      70    80    90   99
                0




                              1   10   20    30        40      50       60      70   80     90   99                                                  Percentiles of distribution
                                                    Percentiles of distribution
                                                                                                                                          Math                   Female               Male
                                       Attendance                Female              Male                                                 Reading:               Female               Male


Note: These figures use data for birth cohorts 1992 and 1993 for whom we can observe both high school graduation outcomes
as well as intermediate educational outcomes. The intermediate outcomes are: attendance rate, mathematics test scores, and
reading test scores, all recorded for grades 5 to 8. Panel A plots the fraction male in each percentile of the attendance (averaged
grades 5 to 8 attendance) distribution. Panel B plots the fraction male in each percentile of the test score (averaged grades
5 to 8 test scores) distributions separately for mathematics (solid navy line) and reading (dashed orange line). Panel C plots
the fraction of high school dropouts at each attendance percentile (averaged grades 5 to 8 attendance) separately for females
(solid navy line) and males (dashed navy line). Panel D plots the fraction of high school dropouts at each test score percentile
(averaged grades 5 to 8 test scores) separately for females (solid lines) and males (dashed lines) and by testing domain (navy
for mathematics and orange for reading).




                                                                                                 15
                          Figure 2: Effect of SES on the Gender Gap throughout the Distribution

                                                                                                A. Attendance




                                                           2
                                                           1.5
                                                       Estimate
                                                           1
                                                           .5
                                                           0




                                                                  2   10        18        26        34   42     50      58     66         74        82        90      98
                                                                                                     Percentiles of distribution

                                                                                               Girl-boy raw gap              (Boy x SES)



                                B. Reading Scores                                                                                                   C. Mathematics Scores




                                                                                                                         .3
        .5




                                                                                                                         .2
        .4  .3




                                                                                                                            .1
   Estimate




                                                                                                                     Estimate
      .2




                                                                                                                    0
        .1




                                                                                                                         -.1
        0
        -.1




                                                                                                                         -.2




                 2   10   18   26     34   42     50      58     66        74        82        90      98                        2   10        18        26        34   42     50      58     66   74   82   90   98
                                       Percentiles of distribution                                                                                                  Percentiles of distribution

                                    Girl-boy raw gap          (Boy x SES)                                                                                     Girl-boy raw gap         (Boy x SES)


Note: The sample is individuals born between 1994 and 2000 in Florida. These figures plots girl-boy gender gaps (navy squares)
and the differential effects of SES on boys (orange circles) for every other percentile of the attendance (Panel A), reading test
score (Panel B), and mathematics test score (Panel C) distributions. The estimates are from RIF regressions (Firpo et al., 2009)
and implemented using the rifreg command in Stata. Each scatterplot series contains 49 estimates. Raw gender gap estimates
come from regressing one of the three outcome variables on a Boy indicator and multiplying these coefficients by -1. Boy x
SES interactions come from regressing one of the three outcome variables on Boy indicator, SES index, interaction between Boy
and SES (the plotted coefficients of interest), race/ethnicity indicators, month of birth indicators, year of birth indicators, and
birth order indicators. Spikes represent 95% confidence intervals based on bootstrapped standard errors with 200 replications.




                                                                                                       16
Figure 3: The Role of Schools and Neighborhoods in the Gender Gap throughout the Distribution

                                                                                       A. Attendance




                                                                   .7
                                                                   .6
                                                        Boy x SES interaction
                                                          .2    .3 .1
                                                                   0 .4    .5


                                                                                10   25                50            75                     90
                                                                                           Percentiles of attendance

                                                                                     Unadjusted
                                                                                     Adjusted by schools and neighborhoods



                                    B. Reading Scores                                                                                    C. Mathematics Scores
                .16




                                                                                                                     .08
                         .12




                                                                                                                              .06
   Boy x SES interaction




                                                                                                        Boy x SES interaction
                  .08




                                                                                                                      .04
           .04




                                                                                                               .02
     0




                                                                                                        0
                -.04




                                                                                                                     -.02
                -.08




                               10   25                50              75              90                                            10     25               50            75       90
                                         Percentiles of reading score                                                                       Percentiles of mathematics score

                                    Unadjusted                                                                                             Unadjusted
                                    Adjusted by schools and neighborhoods                                                                  Adjusted by schools and neighborhoods


Note: The sample is individuals born between 1994 and 2000 in Florida. These figures plots the coefficients on the interaction of
Boy x SES without (navy bars) and with (orange bars) controls for Boy x school quality and Boy x neighborhood SES measures.
Each figure plots estimates from ten unconditional quantile regressions, estimated using RIF regressions (Firpo et al. 2009) and
implemented using the rifreg command in Stata. The quantiles of interest are 10, 25, 50, 75, and 90. Panel A presents results for
attendance, panel B presents results for mathematics test scores, and panel C presents results for reading test scores. Estimates
represented by navy bars come from regressing one of the three outcome variables on Boy indicator, SES index, interaction
between those two (plotted parameter of interest), school quality, neighborhood quality, race/ethnicity indicators, month of
birth indicators, year of birth indicators, and birth order indicators. Estimates represented by orange bars include the same set
of control variables but further add Boy x school quality and Boy x neighborhood SES interactions. Whiskers represent 95%
confidence intervals based on bootstrapped standard errors with 200 replications.




                                                                                            17
                           Figure 4: Implications for the Gender Gap in High School

                                                                                                  A. High School Dropout




                                                                                .5
                            Implied contributions of SES to the gender gap in

                                                                                -.5
                                        high school dropout rates
                                                                                -1.5
                                                                                -2.5
                                                                                -3.5




                                                                                       10   20      30      40         50         60        70     80   90
                                                                                                         Deciles of intermediate inputs

                                                                                                 Mathematics          Reading             Attendance


                                                                                                 B. High School Graduation
                                                                                4
                            Implied contributions of SES to the gender gap in

                                                                                3.5
                                                                                3
                                      high school graduation rates
                                                                                2.5
                                                                                2
                                                                                1.5
                                                                                1
                                                                                .5
                                                                                0




                                                                                       10   20      30      40         50         60        70     80   90
                                                                                                         Deciles of intermediate inputs

                                                                                                 Mathematics          Reading             Attendance


Note: The graphs depict an extrapolation of the intermediate attendance and test score results for high school dropout (Panel
A) and high school graduation (Panel B). We first estimate the relationship between high school dropout or graduation and a
cubic polynomial in attendance, reading test scores, and math test scores in grades 5 to 8, additionally controlling for gender,
SES, race/ethnicity, month of birth dummies, year of birth dummies, and birth order dummies. We compute marginal effects
of attendance, reading scores, and math scores on the two high school outcomes, separately at each decile (10 to 90) of these
independent variables' distributions. Separately, we compute unconditional quantile effects of Boy x SES for 10 to 90 deciles
from our main specifications as described in Figure 2. This figure plots the implied effects of a one standard deviation change in
the SES index (1.51) on high school dropout or high school graduation, operating through the differential effect of SES on boys
relative to girls (Boy x SES interaction) at each decile of the distribution of intermediate inputs. Each bar represents the decile-
specific effect of a one standard deviation change in SES obtained by multiplying marginal effect of a given intermediate input
(attendance, mathematics, or reading) and the Boy x SES coefficient for this input. The dashed lines represent the contribution
of family SES to the gender gap through its average effect on attendance (orange), mathematics (navy), and reading (maroon).
For high school graduation, the implied contributions of the mean effects are 1.35, 0.38, and 0.10 for attendance, mathematics
and reading, respectively. For high school dropout, the implied contributions of the mean effects are -1.07, -0.18, and -0.05 for
attendance, mathematics and reading, respectively. Standard errors are obtained by bootstrapping the procedure 500 times.




                                                                                                                 18
A   Supplemental Figures and Tables

       Figure A.1: Sensitivity of Main Results to the Inclusion of Neonatal Health

                                                                      A. Attendance
                           1.5      1.25
        Boy x SES estimates (attendance)
         .25    .5    .75  0   1




                                               2   10   18    26   34   42     50      58     66    74    82    90    98
                                                                    Percentiles of distribution

                                                        baseline       add birth weight            add health index


                                                                    B. Reading Scores
        -.1 -.05 0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35
               Boy x SES estimates (reading)




                                               2   10   18    26   34   42     50      58     66    74    82    90    98
                                                                    Percentiles of distribution

                                                        baseline       add birth weight            add health index




                                                                            19
                                                                               C. Mathematics Scores




               -.025 0 .025 .05 .075 .1 .125 .15 .175 .2
                     Boy x SES estimates (mathematics)




                                                           2   10   18    26     34   42     50      58     66    74    82    90    98
                                                                                  Percentiles of distribution

                                                                    baseline         add birth weight            add health index


Note: This figure plots the coefficients on the interaction term Boy x SES, from three separate specifications. The navy
squares depict the main results, estimated from equation (3). The orange diamonds plots the estimates from a specification
that additionally controls for log birth weight and its interaction with Boy. The maroon triangles plot the estimates from a
specification that additionally controls for the health index and its interaction with Boy. The health index is based on the
first component of a principal components analysis (PCA) using the following variables: birth weight, gestational age, one and
five minutes Apgar scores, indicator for adequate prenatal care, indicator for maternal health problems in pregnancy, indicator
for congenital disorders, indicator of labor and delivery complications, and indicator for abnormal conditions at birth. Spikes
represent 95% confidence intervals based on bootstrapped standard errors with 200 replications.




                                                                                          20
                               Figure A.2: Bounding the Effects of Gender Imbalance

                                                       A. Attendance



             2.5       2
  Boy x SES interaction
.5      1    01.5




                           2    10   18    26      34     42      50     58     66   74   82   90     98
                                                Quintiles of distribution: attendance

                               Point estimate               95% CI                Upper/lower bound


                                                     B. Reading Scores
             .5       .4
Boy x SES interaction
0    .1   .2 -.1
             -.2.3




                           2    10   18    26     34     42      50     58     66   74    82   90     98
                                                 Quintiles of distribution: reading

                               Point estimate               95% CI                Upper/lower bound




                                                             21
                                                              C. Mathematics Scores




                           .35
                           .3
               .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
                 Boy x SES interaction
                           0
                           -.05




                                         2   10    18    26   34     42      50     58   66    74   82   90     98
                                                          Quintiles of distribution: mathematics

                                             Point estimate            95% CI               Upper/lower bound


Note: The sample is individuals born between 1994 and 2000 in Florida. This figure plots the coefficients on the interaction
term Boy x SES, estimated from equation (3), and provides Lee bounds for the estimates. See Appendix B for details of the
bounding procedure.




                                                                        22
                        Table A.1: Construction of Principal Components SES Index
                                                                                           Second
                                                              First component
                                                                                         component
                         Mother's years of education          0.49                          0.71
                         Married                              0.50                         -0.67
                         Non-medicaid birth                   0.53                         -0.18
                         Mother's age at birth                0.49                          0.17
                         Eigenvalue                           2.27                          0.64
                                     Summary statistics for the first component
                         Mean                                             0.00
                         Standard deviation                              (1.51)
                         Mean boys                                        0.00
                         Standard deviation boys                         (1.51)
                         Mean girls                                       0.00
                         Standard deviation girls                        (1.51)
Note: This table reports the results of a principal components analysis of mother's education (in years), mother's age at birth
(in years), a non-Medicaid birth indicator, and an indicator for parents married at the time of birth. The eigenvectors associated
with the first and second components are reported, as well as their associated eigenvalues. The bottom panel reports summary
statistics of the SES index, defined as the first component of the principal components analysis, for the overall sample, and
separately for boys and girls.




                                                               23
            Table A.2: Sample Selection: Matched Florida Birth and Public School Records

                                              White, Black                Matched to
                                              and Hispanic    With       Florida School             Matched to
                                                 Births    Complete Data    Records                 Outcomes
                                                  (1)          (2)             (3)                     (4)

          White non-Hispanic                       68.4             68.4              66.0              64.4
          Black non-Hispanic                       21.5             21.6              23.9              25.6
          Hispanic                                 10.0             10.0              10.1              10.0

          High school dropout                      18.9             18.8              20.6              21.9
          High school graduate                     60.5             60.6              62.0              62.6
          College graduate                         20.3             20.6              17.4              15.5

          Age 21 or below                          24.1             24.0              26.1              27.4
          Age between 22 and 29                    42.1             42.1              42.2              42.0
          Age between 30 and 35                    24.9             25.0              23.5              22.7
          Age 36 or above                           8.9              8.9               8.3               7.9

          Married at time of birth                 64.3             64.5              61.4              59.2

          Boy                                      51.3             51.3              51.0              50.5

          Birth weight (grams)                    3,343             3,344             3,331            3,326

          N                                      940,609          900,801           734,074           552,819
Note: This table reports summary statistics (means) for the Florida statewide data for individuals born between 1994 and
2000. The first column is the full sample of Florida births 1994-2000, excluding immigrant mothers; the second column drops
the 4.2% of records that are missing key variables; the third column contains the approximately 81% of column 2 records that
were matched to Florida school records; and the fourth column is the subset of column 3 for children who remained in Florida
public schools through third grade and had at least one test score. All demographic characteristics are derived from the birth
certificate.




                                                             24
                                           Table A.3: Summary Statistics

                                       (1)                    (2)                    (3)                   (4)
                                       All                  Males                 Females           Difference (M-F)
    Attendance (raw)                 94.64                  94.42                  94.86                  -0.45
                                     (4.51)                 (4.75)                 (4.24)                (0.01)
    Attendance                       -0.32                  -0.54                   -0.08                  -0.46
    (adjusted)                       (4.52)                 (4.75)                  (4.25)                 (0.01)
    Mathematics                       0.07                   0.08                    0.05                   0.04
                                     (0.90)                 (0.93)                  (0.86)                 (0.00)
    Reading                           0.09                   0.01                    0.16                  -0.15
                                     (0.88)                 (0.92)                  (0.84)                 (0.00)
    Observations                   552,819                 279,352                273,467                 552,819
    High school                      70.67                   66.93                  74.26                  -7.33
    graduate                        (45.53)                 (47.05)                (43.72)                 (0.24)
    High school                      16.49                   18.03                  15.00                   3.03
    dropout                         (37.11)                 (38.44)                (35.71)                 (0.20)
    Observations                   144,945                  71,140                 73,805                 144,945
Note: This table reports summary statistics (means, standard deviations, and standard errors) for outcomes of interest in the
empirical samples used in the main analyses. Rows 1 to 5 are based on individuals born in Florida between 1994 and 2000 whom
we observe with at least one year of outcomes (column 4 of Appendix Table A.2). Rows 6 to 8 are based on individuals born in
Florida between 1992 and 1993 for whom we observe high school graduation outcomes. Column 1 presents means and standard
deviations for children of both genders; column 2 presents means and standard deviations for males; column 3 presents means
and standard deviations for females; while column 4 presents differences in means between columns 2 and 3 with standard errors.




                                                              25
           Table A.4: Distributional Effects of Family SES on the Gender Gap: Attendance


                            (1)        (2)       (3)          (1)        (2)       (3)          (1)        (2)       (3)
                                   A. OLS                             B. Q10                            C. Q25
   Boy × Family                                25.88                             63.28                             30.06
   SES                                         (1.27)                            (3.67)                            (1.98)
   Family SES                       135.19 122.05                     258.23 226.09                     188.17 172.90
                                    (0.71) (0.91)                     (3.15) (3.41)                     (1.71) (1.78)
   Boy                    -48.68 -51.57 -51.54             -106.19 -112.57 -112.51            -59.48 -63.72 -63.69
                          (1.32) (1.27) (1.27)              (3.55) (3.47) (3.77)              (1.83) (1.86) (1.84)

                                   D. Q50                            E. Q75                             F. Q90
   Boy × Family                                13.57                              6.10                              2.60
   SES                                         (1.06)                            (0.76)                            (0.68)
   Family SES                       115.01 108.11                      66.17     63.07                   38.80     37.48
                                    (0.84) (0.94)                      (0.50)    (0.68)                  (0.38)    (0.54)
   Boy                    -30.25 -32.46 -32.45              -16.56 -17.63 -17.62              -9.99 -10.50 -10.50
                          (1.18) (1.10) (1.11)              (0.86) (0.82) (0.77)              (0.72) (0.69) (0.69)
   Child & mother
   controls                 No        Yes       Yes           No        Yes       Yes           No        Yes       Yes
Note: This table reports estimates from OLS and unconditional quantile regression models, where the dependent variable is
the attendance rate, from grades 3 through 8, multiplied by 100. Unconditional quantile regression estimates for 10, 25, 50, 75
and 90 percentiles are obtained using the rifreg command in Stata, developed based on Firpo et al. (2009). Columns 1 reports
the raw gender gap in attendance; columns 2 include the following control variables: family SES index, dummies for maternal
race and ethnicity, child's month and year of birth dummies, and birth order dummies; columns 3 further include the Boy x
SES interaction. For OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses. For unconditional quantile regression,
bootstrapped standard errors with 200 replications are in parentheses.




                                                              26
         Table A.5: Distributional Effects of Family SES on the Gender Gap: Reading Scores


                            (1)        (2)       (3)          (1)        (2)       (3)          (1)        (2)       (3)
                                   A. OLS                             B. Q10                            C. Q25
   Boy × Family                                 1.75                             13.75                              4.19
   SES                                         (0.21)                            (0.48)                            (0.29)
   Family SES                        29.81     28.93                   27.53     20.57                   26.17     24.05
                                     (0.12)    (0.15)                  (0.34)    (0.36)                  (0.21)    (0.22)
   Boy                    -15.02 -16.46 -16.46              -27.42 -28.99 -29.00              -15.57 -17.08 -17.08
                          (0.24) (0.21) (0.21)              (0.52) (0.50) (0.49)              (0.30) (0.31) (0.29)

                                    D. Q50                            E. Q75                            F. Q90
   Boy × Family                                -0.91                             -3.79                             -5.86
   SES                                         (0.23)                            (0.26)                            (0.42)
   Family SES                        30.30     30.75                   31.64     33.56                   32.16     35.13
                                     (0.20)    (0.23)                  (0.23)    (0.26)                  (0.32)    (0.40)
   Boy                    -10.99 -12.52 -12.52              -8.68 -10.05 -10.05               -8.96 -10.20 -10.19
                          (0.29) (0.26) (0.25)              (0.32) (0.27) (0.27)              (0.35) (0.37) (0.36)
   Child & mother
   controls                 No        Yes        Yes          No        Yes        Yes          No        Yes        Yes
Note: This table reports estimates from OLS and unconditional quantile regression models, where the dependent variable is the
standardized reading score, from grades 3 through 8, multiplied by 100. Unconditional quantile regression estimates for 10, 25,
50, 75 and 90 percentiles are obtained using the rifreg command in Stata, developed based on Firpo et al. (2009). Columns 1
reports the raw gender gap in attendance; columns 2 include the following control variables: family SES index, dummies for
maternal race and ethnicity, child's month and year of birth dummies, and birth order dummies; columns 3 further include
the Boy x SES interaction. For OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses. For unconditional quantile
regression, bootstrapped standard errors with 200 replications are in parentheses.




                                                              27
          Table A.6: Distributional Effects of Family SES on the Gender Gap: Math Scores


                            (1)        (2)       (3)          (1)        (2)       (3)          (1)        (2)       (3)
                                   A. OLS                             B. Q10                            C. Q25
   Boy × Family                                 2.34                              3.61                             -1.20
   SES                                         (0.21)                            (0.52)                            (0.29)
   Family SES                        30.07     28.88                   28.20     26.37                   27.38     27.99
                                     (0.12)    (0.15)                  (0.35)    (0.41)                  (0.20)    (0.25)
   Boy                     3.37       1.91      1.90        -7.22      -8.97     -8.98         1.79       0.22      0.22
                          (0.24)     (0.21)    (0.21)       (0.51)     (0.50)    (0.48)       (0.33)     (0.31)    (0.31)

                                   D. Q50                            E. Q75                             F. Q90
   Boy × Family                                -0.56                              2.28                              6.68
   SES                                         (0.24)                            (0.29)                            (0.38)
   Family SES                        29.98     30.27                   32.05     30.90                   33.02     29.64
                                     (0.18)    (0.23)                  (0.22)    (0.25)                  (0.27)    (0.33)
   Boy                     6.11       4.63      4.63         8.11       6.75      6.75        10.53       9.30      9.29
                          (0.27)     (0.25)    (0.24)       (0.30)     (0.27)    (0.27)       (0.41)     (0.36)    (0.41)
   Child & mother
   controls                 No        Yes       Yes           No        Yes       Yes           No        Yes       Yes
Note: This table reports estimates from OLS and unconditional quantile regression models, where the dependent variable is the
standardized mathematics score, from grades 3 through 8, multiplied by 100. Unconditional quantile regression estimates for 10,
25, 50, 75 and 90 percentiles are obtained using the rifreg command in Stata, developed based on Firpo et al. (2009). Columns
1 reports the raw gender gap in attendance; columns 2 include the following control variables: family SES index, dummies for
maternal race and ethnicity, child's month and year of birth dummies, and birth order dummies; columns 3 further include
the Boy x SES interaction. For OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses. For unconditional quantile
regression, bootstrapped standard errors with 200 replications are in parentheses.




                                                              28
                                    Table A.7: Determinants of the Gender Gap throughout the Distribution: Attendance


                                    OLS                       Q10                        Q25                      Q50                      Q75                      Q90
                             (1)     (2)     (3)       (1)     (2)      (3)       (1)    (2)     (3)       (1)    (2)      (3)      (1)    (2)      (3)      (1)    (2)      (3)
      Boy × Family SES      25.86 19.07              63.24    46.67             30.03 24.07              13.56 9.39                 6.09   3.18              2.60   0.52
                            (1.26) (1.47)            (3.57)   (4.31)            (1.73) (1.91)            (1.07) (1.22)             (0.74) (0.87)            (0.71) (0.81)
      Boy × School                  10.77 15.83               21.99    34.38             8.99 15.38               5.77   8.26               3.86   4.70              2.94   3.08
      Quality                       (1.45) (1.41)             (3.99)   (3.82)           (2.00) (2.10)            (1.34) (1.32)             (0.95) (0.94)            (0.86) (0.84)
      Boy × Neighborhood             4.73 10.85               15.55    30.55             4.59 12.33               3.69   6.71               2.76   3.78              1.78   1.95
      SES                           (1.53) (1.45)             (4.29)   (4.17)           (2.06) (2.20)            (1.32) (1.39)             (1.00) (0.86)            (0.73) (0.81)
      Family SES           106.66 110.12 119.80      192.96 201.39 225.10       150.63 153.66 165.89     95.60 97.72 102.49        57.28 58.76 60.37        35.14 36.19 36.46




29
                            (0.96) (1.02) (0.78)     (2.91) (3.57) (3.23)        (1.59) (1.79) (1.44)    (0.91) (1.03) (0.80)      (0.63) (0.72) (0.57)     (0.54) (0.60) (0.44)
      School Quality        39.83 34.37 31.80        83.47    72.32    66.03    53.37 48.82 45.57        31.07 28.14 26.88         15.84 13.88 13.46         8.46   6.97   6.90
                            (0.74) (0.99) (0.98)     (2.07)   (2.47)   (2.48)   (1.21) (1.41) (1.42)     (0.68) (1.05) (1.01)      (0.52) (0.68) (0.72)     (0.42) (0.62) (0.63)
      Neighborhood SES       2.64   0.20 -2.93        8.01     0.04    -7.63     8.18   5.82   1.87       3.50   1.60   0.06        0.12 -1.29 -1.81        -2.05 -2.96 -3.05
                            (0.78) (1.05) (1.03)     (1.96)   (2.80)   (2.83)   (1.18) (1.54) (1.58)     (0.71) (1.04) (1.01)      (0.49) (0.71) (0.74)     (0.42) (0.60) (0.61)
      Boy                  -50.95 -50.96 -50.98     -111.29 -111.30 -111.35     -62.92 -62.92 -62.94     -32.00 -32.00 -32.01     -17.39 -17.39 -17.39      -10.37 -10.37 -10.37
                            (1.26) (1.26) (1.26)     (3.55) (3.48) (3.76)        (1.84) (1.86) (1.84)     (1.11) (1.09) (1.11)     (0.85) (0.81) (0.76)      (0.71) (0.69) (0.69)
     Note: This table reports estimates from OLS and unconditional quantile regression models, where the dependent variable is the attendance rate, from grades 3 through 8,
     multiplied by 100. Unconditional quantile regression estimates for 10, 25, 50, 75 and 90 percentiles are obtained using the rifreg command in Stata, developed based on Firpo
     et al. (2009). Columns 1 report the coefficients on Boy x SES, from estimation of equation (3), but further controlling for school quality and neighborhood SES. Columns 2
     add Boy x school quality and Boy x neighborhood SES interactions to specification from columns 1. Columns 3 exclude the Boy x Family SES interaction term. For OLS,
     heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses. For unconditional quantile regression, bootstrapped standard errors with 200 replications are in parentheses.
                                       Table A.8: Determinants of the Gender Gap throughout the Distribution: Reading


                                     OLS                       Q10                       Q25                       Q50                       Q75                       Q90
                              (1)     (2)     (3)       (1)    (2)      (3)       (1)    (2)      (3)       (1)    (2)      (3)       (1)    (2)      (3)       (1)    (2)      (3)
      Boy × Family SES        1.74   0.63              13.74 9.30                 4.18   2.61              -0.91 -1.17               -3.79 -3.34               -5.86 -5.05
                             (0.20) (0.24)             (0.46) (0.50)             (0.29) (0.31)             (0.23) (0.27)             (0.26) (0.34)             (0.36) (0.43)
      Boy × School                    1.81   1.98               5.85   8.33               2.06   2.75               1.07   0.76               0.16 -0.73              -0.410 -1.76
      Quality                        (0.24) (0.24)             (0.47) (0.51)             (0.30) (0.29)             (0.30) (0.28)             (0.34) (0.33)             (0.49) (0.44)
      Boy × Neighborhood              0.72   0.92               4.19   7.17               1.50   2.34              -0.44 -0.82               -1.13 -2.21               -1.39 -3.01
      SES                            (0.25) (0.24)             (0.47) (0.53)             (0.35) (0.33)             (0.29) (0.27)             (0.33) (0.32)             (0.42) (0.39)
      Family SES             23.53 24.09 24.41         15.00 17.25 21.97         18.88 19.67 21.00         25.36 25.49 24.90         28.24 28.01 26.32         29.67 29.26 26.70




30
                             (0.16) (0.17) (0.13)      (0.32) (0.35) (0.33)      (0.22) (0.24) (0.19)      (0.23) (0.24) (0.19)      (0.27) (0.29) (0.21)      (0.34) (0.41) (0.28)
      School Quality         11.84 10.92 10.84         11.96 9.00     7.74       11.61 10.57 10.22         11.83 11.30 11.46         11.68 11.61 12.06         12.17 12.38 13.07
                             (0.12) (0.17) (0.16)      (0.25) (0.30) (0.32)      (0.16) (0.20) (0.22)      (0.16) (0.23) (0.21)      (0.20) (0.25) (0.24)      (0.26) (0.35) (0.38)
      Neighborhood SES        3.07   2.70   2.59        3.42   1.28 -0.25         2.66   1.89   1.46        3.06   3.28   3.47        2.99   3.56   4.11        2.90   3.61   4.43
                             (0.13) (0.17) (0.17)      (0.28) (0.34) (0.32)      (0.18) (0.24) (0.23)      (0.16) (0.21) (0.20)      (0.20) (0.24) (0.24)      (0.23) (0.32) (0.32)
      Boy                   -16.30 -16.31 -16.31      -28.84 -28.86 -28.86      -16.93 -16.93 -16.93      -12.37 -12.37 -12.37       -9.90 -9.90 -9.90        -10.03 -10.03 -10.03
                             (0.20) (0.20) (0.20)      (0.51) (0.50) (0.49)      (0.30) (0.30) (0.29)      (0.27) (0.26) (0.25)      (0.28) (0.27) (0.27)      (0.34) (0.37) (0.36)
     Note: This table reports estimates from OLS and unconditional quantile regression models, where the dependent variable is the standardize reading score, from grades 3 through
     8, multiplied by 100. Unconditional quantile regression estimates for 10, 25, 50, 75 and 90 percentiles are obtained using the rifreg command in Stata, developed based on Firpo
     et al. (2009). Columns 1 report the coefficients on Boy x SES, from estimation of equation (3), but further controlling for school quality and neighborhood SES. Columns 2
     add Boy x school quality and Boy x neighborhood SES interactions to specification from columns 1. Columns 3 exclude the Boy x Family SES interaction term. For OLS,
     heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses. For unconditional quantile regression, bootstrapped standard errors with 200 replications are in parentheses.
                                         Table A.9: Determinants of the Gender Gap throughout the Distribution: Math


                                     OLS                       Q10                       Q25                       Q50                       Q75                       Q90
                              (1)     (2)     (3)       (1)    (2)      (3)       (1)    (2)      (3)       (1)    (2)      (3)       (1)    (2)      (3)       (1)    (2)      (3)
      Boy × Family SES       2.33   0.85               3.60   2.18              -1.21 -1.90               -0.57 -1.39                2.27   0.89               6.67   4.30
                            (0.21) (0.25)             (0.52) (0.57)             (0.26) (0.33)             (0.23) (0.32)             (0.27) (0.31)             (0.41) (0.40)
      Boy × School                   1.95   2.17               1.55   2.13               0.25 -0.260                0.87   0.50               2.14   2.37               4.22   5.37
      Quality                       (0.25) (0.24)             (0.53) (0.54)             (0.34) (0.30)              (0.31) (0.28)             (0.34) (0.32)             (0.50) (0.50)
      Boy × Neighborhood             1.41   1.68               1.64   2.34               1.28   0.67                0.99   0.55               1.02   1.30               1.20   2.58
      SES                           (0.26) (0.25)             (0.60) (0.56)             (0.36) (0.36)              (0.30) (0.28)             (0.33) (0.30)             (0.45) (0.50)
      Family SES            22.92 23.67 24.10         20.95 21.67 22.77         22.74 23.09 22.13         24.57 24.99 24.29         24.46 25.16 25.61         22.50 23.70 25.88




31
                            (0.16) (0.17) (0.13)      (0.45) (0.43) (0.35)      (0.25) (0.27) (0.21)      (0.23) (0.24) (0.19)      (0.22) (0.25) (0.21)      (0.32) (0.32) (0.27)
      School Quality        13.07 12.09 11.97         12.51 11.72 11.42         12.11 11.99 12.24         12.74 12.30 12.49         13.74 12.66 12.54         14.80 12.67 12.09
                            (0.13) (0.17) (0.17)      (0.29) (0.40) (0.36)      (0.19) (0.23) (0.23)      (0.16) (0.22) (0.21)      (0.19) (0.26) (0.24)      (0.25) (0.35) (0.36)
      Neighborhood SES       3.39   2.67   2.53        2.45   1.61   1.25        2.36   1.71   2.02        2.97   2.47   2.70        4.03   3.51   3.36        4.93   4.31   3.60
                            (0.13) (0.18) (0.17)      (0.29) (0.39) (0.38)      (0.18) (0.25) (0.27)      (0.15) (0.22) (0.20)      (0.18) (0.23) (0.24)      (0.23) (0.33) (0.34)
      Boy                    2.08   2.07   2.07       -8.81 -8.81 -8.82          0.38 0.381 0.381          4.80   4.80   4.80        6.93   6.92   6.92        9.48   9.47   9.47
                            (0.21) (0.21) (0.21)      (0.52) (0.50) (0.47)      (0.30) (0.31) (0.31)      (0.24) (0.26) (0.23)      (0.28) (0.27) (0.27)      (0.38) (0.36) (0.40)
     Note: This table reports estimates from OLS and unconditional quantile regression models, where the dependent variable is the standardized mathematics score, from grades
     3 through 8, multiplied by 100. Unconditional quantile regression estimates for 10, 25, 50, 75 and 90 percentiles are obtained using the rifreg command in Stata, developed
     based on Firpo et al. (2009). Columns 1 report the coefficients on Boy x SES, from estimation of equation (3), but further controlling for school quality and neighborhood SES.
     Columns 2 add Boy x school quality and Boy x neighborhood SES interactions to specification from columns 1. Columns 3 exclude the Boy x Family SES interaction term. For
     OLS, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses. For unconditional quantile regression, bootstrapped standard errors with 200 replications are in parentheses.
        Table A.10: Distributional Effects of Family SES on the Gender Gap in Neonatal Health


                             OLS                Q10                Q25                Q50                Q75                Q90
                       (1)         (2)    (1)         (2)    (1)         (2)    (1)         (2)    (1)         (2)    (1)         (2)
                                                             A. Ln(Birth Weight) ×100
  Boy×Family                -0.05               -0.98              -0.57              -0.03               0.55               0.90
  SES                       (0.05)              (0.10)             (0.07)             (0.05)             (0.05)             (0.06)
  Family SES                 1.67                2.42               2.07               1.70               1.22               0.87
                            (0.04)              (0.09)             (0.05)             (0.04)             (0.04)             (0.04)
  Boy                 3.70 3.57           3.29 3.13          3.52 3.39          3.72 3.60          3.87 3.76          3.81 3.72
                     (0.05) (0.05)       (0.12) (0.12)      (0.07) (0.06)      (0.05) (0.05)      (0.05) (0.05)      (0.07) (0.07)
  Mean of Y                                                               809.27
  # children                                                              552,819

                                                            B. Health at Birth Index×100
  Boy×Family                -0.68               -2.51              -1.44              -0.29               0.26               0.99
  SES                       (0.26)              (0.81)             (0.31)             (0.20)             (0.18)             (0.23)
  Family SES                 4.83                9.30               6.49               4.07               2.58               1.23
                            (0.20)              (0.60)             (0.24)             (0.14)             (0.13)             (0.16)
  Boy                 2.97 2.56          -3.60 -4.20         1.37 0.97          4.07 3.75          5.28 5.01          6.09 5.83
                     (0.27) (0.26)       (0.74) (0.77)      (0.33) (0.31)      (0.21) (0.23)      (0.20) (0.18)      (0.25) (0.21)
  Mean of Y                                                                0.61
  # children                                                              552,025
Note: This table reports estimates from OLS and unconditional quantile regression models, where the dependent variables are
log birthweight (in grams) and a neonatal health index at birth based on a principal component analysis of all birth outcomes,
including birthweight in grams, gestational age in weeks, one and five minutes Apgar scores, indicator for adequate prenatal
care, indicator for maternal health problems in pregnancy, indicator for congenital disorders, indicator of labor and delivery
complications, and indicator for abnormal conditions at birth. Unconditional quantile regression estimates for 10, 25, 50, 75
and 90 percentiles are obtained using the rifreg command in Stata, developed based on Firpo et al. (2009). Columns 1 report
the raw gender gap in either log birth weight or health index at birth; columns 2 include the following additional control
variables: Boy x SES interaction, family SES index, dummies for maternal race and ethnicity, child's month and year of birth
dummies, and birth order dummies. Abnormal conditions is a dummy variable equal to one if any of the following conditions
is observed: anemia; birth injury; fetal alcohol syndrome; hyaline membrane disease; meconium aspiration syndrome; assisted
ventilation <30 minutes; assisted ventilation>30 minutes; seizure; or other specified abnormal conditions. Mother health issues
during pregnancy is equal to one if the mother suffered from any of a large set of chronic or pregnancy-related disorders (anemia;
cardiac disease; acute or chronic lung disease; diabetes; genital herpes, hydramnios/oligohydramnios; hemoglobinopathy; chronic
hypertension; pregnancy associated hypertension; eclampsia; incompetent cervix; previous infant 4000+ grams; previous preterm
or small for gestational age infant; renal disease; RH sensitization; uterine bleeding; other specified health problem) during
pregnancy or delivery. Congenital anomaly indicator is equal to one if a child has been diagnosed with any of a large set of
congenital conditions :anencephalus, spina bifida, hydrocephalus, microcephalus, other central nervous system anomalies, head
malformations, other circulatory/respiratory anomalies, rectal atresia, esophageal fistula, gastroschisis, other gastrointestinal
anomalies, malformed genitalia, renal agenisis, other urogenital anomalies, cleft lip, dactyly issues, club foot, diaphragmatic
hernia, other musculoskeletal anomalies, Downs Syndrome, or other chromosomal anomalies. Complications of labor and
delivery indicator is equal to one if the birth suffered from any of the following conditions: fever, heavy meconium, premature
rupture of membranes, abruptio placenta, placenta previa, other excessive bleeding, seizures during labor, precipitous labor,
prolonged labor, dysfunctional labor, breech, cephalopelvic disproportion, cord prolapse, anesthetic complications, or fetal
distress. Prenatal care adequacy is defined according to the Kessner Adequacy of Prenatal Care Utilization index (APCU),
which is equal to one if the mother received standard prenatal care services during pregnancy. For OLS, heteroskedasticity robust
standard errors are in parentheses. For unconditional quantile regression, bootstrapped standard errors with 200 replications
are in parentheses.




                                                                32
                                          Table A.11: Exogeneity of Gender

                                              (1)             (2)           (3)              (4)
                                                              Outcome: Boy*100
                                               Full population                Empirical sample
               SES index                    0.045           -0.004         0.694            0.503
                                           (0.033)          (0.036)       (0.067)          (0.075)
               Mean of Y                            51.268                        50.532
               Observations                939,810         939,810        552,819         552,819
               Controls                      No               Yes           No               Yes
Note: This table reports estimates from an OLS specification that regresses an indicator variable, multiplied by 100, for whether
a child is a boy on family SES. Columns 1 and 2 use the full sample of births in the state of Florida. Columns 3 and 4 use
the sample of births matched to public schooling records. Columns 1 and 3 do not include any additional controls. Columns 2
and 4 include controls for birth month, birth year, birth order, and maternal race/ethnicity dummies. Heteroskedasticity robust
standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                               33
                                      Table A.12: Relationship between Intermediate Outcomes and High School Outcomes

                                               Attendance Attendance Attendance                  Math         Math        Math               Reading        Reading       Reading
                                                           squared     cubed                                squared       cubed                             squared        cubed
                                                                                                  Panel A. High school dropout
       Outcome: High school dropout              -11.980        -0.265          0.050           -5.234        0.206       0.422               -1.798          0.331         0.228
       Mean of Y = 16.5; N = 144,945              (0.164)       (0.139)        (0.018)          (0.224)      (0.083)     (0.030)              (0.225)        (0.078)       (0.035)
       Marginal effect at 10th percentile                       -11.121                                        -3.900                                        -1.556
       Marginal effect at 25th percentile                       -11.775                                        -5.108                                        -1.953
       Marginal effect at 50th percentile                       -12.115                                        -5.190                                        -1.757
       Marginal effect at 75th percentile                       -12.266                                        -4.404                                        -1.063
       Marginal effect at 90th percentile                       -12.335                                        -3.096                                        -0.054




34
                                                                                                 Panel B: High school graduation
       Outcome: High school graduation            16.820         1.515          0.018            9.541       -0.715       -0.673               3.977         -0.656        -0.460
       Mean of Y = 70.7; N = 144,945              (0.172)       (0.082)        (0.009)          (0.259)      (0.095)     (0.035)              (0.260)        (0.088)       (0.039)
       Marginal effect at 10th percentile                       13.244                                         8.340                                         3.459
       Marginal effect at 25th percentile                       15.759                                         9.739                                         4.276
       Marginal effect at 50th percentile                       17.659                                         9.407                                         3.895
       Marginal effect at 75th percentile                       18.852                                         7.706                                         2.510
       Marginal effect at 90th percentile                       19.569                                         5.247                                         0.486
     Note: This table reports coefficients and marginal effects from OLS estimation of equation 6. We regress an indicator for high school dropout (Panel A) or high school graduation
     (Panel B) on cubic polynomials of standardized attendance, mathematics test scores, and reading test scores. Each panel reports estimates from a separate regression with
     9 displayed variables and additional controls. Outcome variables are multiplied by 100. Each row reports marginal effects for the three intermediate inputs (attendance,
     mathematics, reading) at the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles. Additional controls include: SES index, and indicators for gender, race/ethnicity, month and year of
     birth, and birth order. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are in parentheses.
B    Details of Bounding Procedure
Here we provide details regarding the procedure to bound the effects of differential sex selection
into the analytical sample. In the full sample of births and in our analytical sample, we divide each
sample into quintiles. For each of those quintiles we compute the difference in fraction of boys across
the two samples. These five values are (starting from the first quintile) 1.4 percentage points, 1.3
percentage points, 1.2 percentage points, 0.4 percentage points, and -0.2 percentage points, implying
excess boys in the bottom four quintiles and excess girls in the top quintile. Using our analytical
sample we compute outcomes of girls at given percentiles for the bottom four quintiles and for boys in
the top quintile. For example, since in the bottom quintile we observe 1.4 percentage points excess
of girls we compute their outcomes at 1.4th and 98.6th percentile. We next define upper bound
samples as females from the bottom four quintiles and males from the top quintile with outcomes
greater than the upper percentile values defined in the prior step. Conversely, we define lower bound
samples as females from the bottom four quintiles and males from the top quintile with outcomes
less than the lower percentile values defined in the prior step. Finally, we run two regressions: (1)
equation (3) using a sample excluding the upper bound as defined above; (2) equation (3) using a
sample excluding the lower bound as defined above. The bounds in Figure A.2 report 95 percent
confidence intervals for the coefficient (Boyi × SESi ) from these regressions.




                                                  35
