                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




INNOVATION, GROWTH AND STRUCTURAL CHANGE IN AMERICAN AGRICULTURE

                                       Julian M. Alston
                                       Philip G. Pardey

                                      Working Paper 27206
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27206


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




The authors are grateful for the excellent research assistance provided by Connie Chan-Kang,
Xudong Rao and Shanchao Wang, for helpful advice provided by James (Jess) Lowenberg-
DeBoer, Abigail Okrent, J.B. Penn, and David Schimmelpfennig, and for helpful comments
provided Brian Wright, other participants in the Symposium, and the organizers. The work for
this project was partly supported by the California Agricultural Experiment Station; the
Minnesota Agricultural Experiment Station (MIN-14-161); the USDA National Research
Initiative; and the Giannini Foundation of Agricultural Economics. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Julian M. Alston and Philip G. Pardey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Innovation, Growth and Structural Change in American Agriculture
Julian M. Alston and Philip G. Pardey
NBER Working Paper No. 27206
May 2020
JEL No. O13,O3,O4,O51,Q16,Q28,Q52

                                          ABSTRACT

U.S. agriculture was transformed during the 20th century by waves of innovation with
mechanical, biological, chemical, and information technologies. Compared with a few decades
ago, today's agriculture is much less labor intensive and farms are much larger and more
specialized, supplying a much-evolved market for farm products. Over recent decades, the global
landscape for agricultural R&D has shifted away from farms, away from the public sector toward
the private sector, and away from the United States towards agriculturally important middle-
income countries, especially China, India and Brazil. U.S. investments in agricultural R&D are
stalling even though meta-evidence shows that past U.S. investments in agricultural R&D have
yielded very favorable returns: median reported benefit-cost ratios in the range of 12:1. Sustained
U.S. investment and innovation will be required to preserve past productivity gains in the face of
climate change, coevolving pests and diseases, and changing technological regulations--let alone
increase productivity. Great potential exists for innovation in crop and livestock genetics and
digital farming technologies to generate new products and production processes, but innovators
are facing increasingly strong headwinds from social and political forces that seek to dictate
technology choices.


Julian M. Alston
University of California, Davis
julian@primal.ucdavis.edu

Philip G. Pardey
University of Minnesota
ppardey@umn.edu
          Innovation, Growth and Structural Change in American Agriculture
                            Julian M. Alston and Philip G. Pardey



ABSTRACT. U.S. agriculture was transformed during the 20th century by waves of

innovation with mechanical, biological, chemical, and information technologies.

Compared with a few decades ago, today's agriculture is much less labor intensive and

farms are much larger and more specialized, supplying a much-evolved market for farm

products. Over recent decades, the global landscape for agricultural R&D has shifted

away from farms, away from the public sector toward the private sector, and away from

the United States towards agriculturally important middle-income countries, especially

China, India and Brazil. U.S. investments in agricultural R&D are stalling even though

meta-evidence shows that past U.S. investments in agricultural R&D have yielded very

favorable returns: median reported benefit-cost ratios in the range of 12:1. Sustained U.S.

investment and innovation will be required to preserve past productivity gains in the face

of climate change, coevolving pests and diseases, and changing technological

regulations--let alone increase productivity. Great potential exists for innovation in crop

and livestock genetics and digital farming technologies to generate new products and

production processes, but innovators are facing increasingly strong headwinds from social

and political forces that seek to dictate technology choices.


Keywords: U.S. agriculture, R&D and productivity, biotechnology; digital technology;

precision agriculture; technological regulation
1. Introduction

        During the 20th century American agriculture was dramatically transformed and its role in

the economy changed markedly. The progressive introduction and adoption of a host of

technological innovations and other farming improvements enabled much more to be produced

with less land and a lot less labor; farms became many fewer, much larger, and more specialized.

However, while agriculture continued to grow, it shrank in relative importance. The U.S. farm

population peaked at 32.5 million, 31.9% of the total U.S. population in 1916; since then it

declined to an estimated 4.5 million in 2019, just 1.4% of the total. And, while agriculture's

contribution to GDP increased (somewhat erratically) from 12% in 1889 to 17% in 1917, it

declined steadily thereafter to just 0.81% in 2018. Innovation on and off farms played a central

role.

        This paper provides detailed documentation, evidence, and analysis of the past and

ongoing sources of innovation and structural change in American agriculture. To begin, we

describe the profound structural transformation of American agriculture over the course of the

past century, and the implications for changing patterns of inputs, outputs, and productivity.

Then we turn to a consideration of the sources of change. We pay particular attention to the

impact of innovation as a driver of productivity and employment in the agricultural sector; to the

role of private entrepreneurship in the process; and to the distinctive features of the agricultural

sector--still largely atomistic and heavily dependent on a host of natural, often location-specific,

inputs, changes in which can undercut past productivity gains--and its evolution (shrinking as a

share of the economy). Digging deeper, we present evidence on inputs to and outputs from

innovation, on the resulting gains in productivity, what those gains are worth, prospects for the

coming decades, hurdles to be overcome, and roles played by government policies.

                                                      1
         Before getting into the meat of this chapter, we briefly broach some conceptual,

measurement and other data issues that are integral to the structural changes we are studying.

Over time farms became increasingly specialized in a narrower range of market goods. Many

productive activities progressively shifted off farms--to be undertaken by specialized (pre-farm)

agribusiness firms that nowadays produce farm machinery, seed, chemicals, energy, and other

inputs­including contract services--that were once largely (and in some instances entirely)

produced on-farm; likewise farm households once made many food and fiber products that are

now produced entirely off-farm by agribusiness firms in other (post-farm) sectors of the

economy.1 These shifts have implications for where the lines are drawn in distinguishing

between farms and other firms and thus between agriculture and the rest of the economy.

         In industrial organization parlance, farms and farmers are now less vertically integrated

and more specialized, the nature of the farm firm has changed (Coase 1937). So, too has the

statistical definition of a farm--whether specified in terms of acres farmed, the value of sales, or

some combination of the two.2 The large changes over the decades in the actual and recorded

nature of farms and farming pose challenges for economists who measure inputs and outputs and

seek to make intertemporal comparisons. Moreover, the data are not always collected and

presented in the preferred ways that make it possible to develop consistent measures that match

the conceptual constructs. Nonetheless, the available measures are informative.



1
 These include a shift from a world in which farmers would themselves produce energy and traction for farm
operations and fertilizer for crops (using horses and mules), seed and other inputs, as well most if not all of their
own food, to a world in which most of those inputs and outputs are now purchased off farm.
2
  As discussed by Sumner (2014), concepts of farm firm size based on land area, that might work well for cropping
farms in the U.S. Midwest, are less useful for intensive livestock producers or horticulture where gross value of
sales, total employment of labor, or total value of the capital stock--as sometimes used to measure size of non-farm
firms--might be more useful. Issues surrounding the statistical definition of what is a farm are linked with issues
about how to measure farm size since many of the USDA definitions, which themselves have changed from time to
time, are based on a farm size criterion involving area or value-of-sales attributes.


                                                                 2
           The data issues associated with the changing structure of agriculture and the distinction

between agriculture and other sectors of the economy extend to the corresponding concepts and

measures of public and private investments in agricultural and food R&D. In our discussion of

these issues we take pains to place agricultural R&D spending in the context of broader measures

of public and private R&D, maintaining a consistent set of definitions of agricultural versus non-

agricultural, and private versus public as used by other publications dealing with these concepts

applied to R&D. A perennial challenge in this context is how to treat more fundamental

scientific inquiries, the ultimate application of which by definition remains to be seen.

Discussions of spillovers and attribution often entail assumptions that are hard to validate.

Where possible we address these aspects.


2. Special Features of Agriculture3

Innovation in agriculture has many features in common with innovation more generally, but

agriculture differs in terms of its industrial structure and the nature of market failures in

innovation; the spatial dimensions of production and the site-specific nature of the technology;

the biological nature of the production process; and the nature of food and farming as perceived

by the broader public and groups that define technological regulations and requirements. It is

helpful to have those differences in mind as we review the past and prospective changes in

agriculture and the roles of entrepreneurship and innovation in shaping them.

           Like other parts of the economy, agriculture is characterized by market failures

associated with incomplete property rights over inventions. The atomistic structure of much of

agriculture means that the attenuation of incentives to innovate is more pronounced than in other


3
    Parts of this section draw from Pardey et al. (2010).


                                                            3
industries that are more concentrated in their industrial structure. On the other hand, unlike most

innovations in manufacturing, food processing, or transportation, agricultural technology has a

degree of site specificity because of the biological nature of agricultural production, in which

appropriate technologies vary with changes in climate, soil types, topography, latitude, altitude,

and distance from markets. The site-specific aspect circumscribes the potential for knowledge

spillovers and the associated market failures that are exacerbated by the small-scale, competitive,

atomistic industrial structure of much of production agriculture.

        Agriculture is further distinguished by the biological and spatial nature of its production

technology (Joglekar et al. 2016). Agricultural production takes up a lot of space--indeed, about

40% of the world's land area is occupied by agriculture (including 12% used for crops) and 44%

of U.S. land is in agriculture--and the nature of the space varies in ways that are relevant for the

choice of technology and the returns to innovations that are often very site-specific. The

biological nature of agricultural production means that production processes take time, during

which outcomes are susceptible to the influence of factors such as weather and pests that are

difficult or costly to control. Moreover, the agricultural production consequences of pests and

weather vary in ways that are often uncontrolled and difficult to predict with present knowledge

and technology, not only within a season but systematically over time and space. Climate

change and the co-evolution and adaptation of pests and diseases mean maintenance research is

required to prevent yields from declining--the "Red Queen" effect as discussed by Olmstead and

Rhode (2002) for instance.4 These features of agriculture give rise to a demand for innovations

that reduce the susceptibility of production to uncontrolled biotic and abiotic stresses and allow



4
 For example, a 1986 survey of 744 U.S agricultural scientists suggested that "maintenance research" accounted for
around one-third of production-oriented agricultural research at that time (Adusei and Norton 1990).


                                                             4
technology to adapt to changes in the farming environment or changes in technological

regulations.

       Agriculture is also subject to different kinds of public and policy scrutiny because,

compared with most other industrial outputs, people care differently about food and the way it is

produced, and increasingly so as they become richer. U.S. consumers are increasingly

demanding foods that have "credence" attributes associated with the products and the processes

used to produce them--such as organic, locally produced, and raised using humane livestock and

poultry practices (see, e.g., Rausser et al. 2015, 2019). Alston (2019) discusses this demand and

the related demand for technological regulation coming from what he terms the "woke farm and

food policy reform movement," which blames the agricultural and food industry for various

societal ills (see, e.g., Willet et al. 2019). Some food processors, manufacturers, and retailers are

requiring foods to be produced in ways that accommodate these demands (see, e.g., Saitone et al.

2015). All these forces have implications for the types of innovations that will be relevant for

American farms in the coming decades--as they or forces like them were in the past.


3. Structure of American Agriculture

       Land-saving and especially labor-saving innovations were central to the structural

transformation of American agriculture in the 20th Century. The number of U.S. farms grew

from 1.4 million in 1850 to a peak of 6.8 million in 1936 before falling to 2.9 million in 1970

and 2.1 million in 2017; land in farms peaked in 1954 (Figure 1; Pardey and Alston 2019).

Farms became much larger and more-specialized in terms of their output mix, and the input mix




                                                      5
shifted to use much less labor and a little less land, combined with more capital and purchased

material inputs.5

                      [Figure 1: U.S. Farm Area and Farm Numbers, 1850­2017]


         Farm Labor

         These changes in the structure of agriculture entailed changes in the structure of the farm

labor force, reflecting both the pull from growth in non-farm demand for labor, driving up the

opportunity cost of farmers' time as well as the cost of hired farm labor, and the push from

technological changes on farms that permitted more to be produced with much less labor and

more land per farm. Farmers responded to these incentives and opportunities by consolidating

farms and substituting other inputs for labor, in part by developing and adopting labor-saving

innovations that favored higher land-labor ratios and larger optimal farm sizes.6 Figure 2

captures the main elements of the post-WWII changes in farm labor use. In panel a, total labor

use--measured in hours per year, and taking account of the major shift to part-time farming--in




5
  These aggregate figures encompass highly diverse farm sizes and types. In 1920, the United States had 735
million acres on 6.4 million farms, at an average of 8.7 acres per farm. None of those farms had more than 1,000
acres. By 2012, the total number of farms had fallen by more than two-thirds compared with 1920. Now 9.2% of a
total 2.1 million farms had more than 1,000 acres. Notably, more than 10% of today's "farms" have less than 10
acres, but many of today's small farms are "hobby farms," and many are part-time occupations for people for whom
living on a farm is a life-style choice more than a way of making a living.
6
 MacDonald et al. (2018) report that "By 2015, 51 percent of the value of U.S. farm production came from farms
with at least $1 million in sales, compared to 31 percent in 1991 (adjusted for price changes) ... . [Now] few farms
specialize in a single crop, field crop operations increasingly grow just 2 or 3 crops, versus 4-6 crops previously.
Livestock production continues to shift toward farms that produce no crops, and instead rely on purchased feed. ...
Despite increased consolidation, most production continues to be carried out on family farms, which are owned and
operated by people related to one another by blood or marriage. Family farms accounted for 90 percent of farms
with at least $1 million in sales in 2015."


                                                              6
agriculture fell by two-thirds, from 1949 to 2007. Within this total, operator labor fell by more

than three-quarters and the hired labor share increased from 20% to 32%.7

                          [Figure 2: Labor Use in U.S. Agriculture, 1949­2007]

         As farmers substituted other inputs for more-expensive labor the cost share of labor fell

from more than 42% in 1949 to less than 30% in 2007. Mainly, farmers increased their use of

materials inputs purchased off farm (such as seed, fuel, electricity, fertilizer and other

agricultural chemicals, and hired machines); the total use of land and capital (measured with

appropriate indexes) remained relatively constant--albeit with considerable variation in these

details over time and among states.8 The mix of agricultural output has also changed over time,

reflecting the effects of changes in U.S. and foreign demand for U.S. farm products, as well as

the effects of changing production possibilities enabled by new technologies.9 The category of

nursery and greenhouse marketing in particular has grown rapidly, and constituted the fastest

growing category of output for all but five of the 48 contiguous U.S. states during the second

half of the 20th century (Alston et al. 2010, p. 69).10



7
 Growth of the rural non-farm economy has facilitated growth in off-farm employment for farm household
members. Between 1930 and 2012, the share of full-time farm operators fell from 70% to 40% and their average
number of days per year worked off-farm increased from 86.5 to 143.2.
8
 Alston et al. (2010) provide detailed state-level and national data on inputs, outputs, and productivity in U.S.
agriculture during the period 1949­2002 in a book-length treatment. State- and national-level data for the period
1949­2007 are available on the InSTePP website (see Pardey et al. 2006 for data documentation), and discussed by
Pardey and Alston (2019).
9
 Among other changes, improved communications, electrification, transportation, and logistical infrastructure,
meant that perishables and pre-prepared foods could be moved efficiently over much longer distances. This
contributed to the changing spatial patterns of production.
10
  "Nursery and greenhouse marketing" produces ornamental and diverse other plants and has grown in comparative
importance as Americans have become more affluent. Much of it is highly intensive horticulture, often located in
the urban fringe, and probably lies outside common and traditional perceptions of "agriculture." But it counts as
part of agriculture in official agricultural statistics and other manifestations of agricultural policy--whereas golf
courses and forestry, for example, do not--and in many instances this is as good a basis as any we may have for
drawing the distinction between what we reasonably should or should not count as part of the sector. The essential
idea is "agriculture" is economic activity that happens on farms. As the balance of that activity has changed,

                                                              7
         Agricultural Productivity

         Reflecting these and other changes, over the past 100 years and more U.S. agricultural

productivity grew rapidly--albeit unevenly over time and across states. Over the period 1910­

2007, multifactor productivity (MFP) in U.S. agriculture grew at an average annual rate of

1.42%, reflecting average annual growth of 1.58% in the index of aggregate output and 0.16% in

the index of inputs. These averages reflect shrinking total inputs (and even total output) in some

states as they shifted out of agriculture, contrasted by comparatively rapid expansion in inputs

and output in some other states. And they also reflect changes in the composition of inputs and

outputs, as already discussed. Since WWII, MFP has grown generally rapidly in U.S.

agriculture, but this reflects a surge (during the 1950s­1980s) followed by a slowdown such that

MFP has been growing at about 1% per year since 1990, compared with about 2% per year

during 1950­1990 (see Andersen et al. 2018, and Pardey and Alston 2019).11

     [Table 1: Growth Rates in U.S. Agricultural Input, Output, and Productivity 1910­2007]


         Off-farm Changes

         The pre-and post-farm elements of the farm-based food and fiber supply chain have also

been transformed, especially during the past half century. The pre-farm agribusiness industries

that supply inputs used by farmers, many of which embody technological innovations--whether

genetic, chemical, mechanical, or digital--have become more concentrated, more global, and



implicitly the concept and measures of agriculture have evolved in ways that make consistent intertemporal
comparisons harder.
11
  This raises questions about the relative productivity performance of agriculture compared with other sectors of the
U.S. economy. Following Jorgenson and Gollop (1992) it has become a stylized fact among agricultural and other
economists to say productivity has grown comparatively quickly in agriculture. That may well have been true
during the surge, but is less likely to be so since the slowdown. Consistent, comparable measures in suitably long
time series are not readily available to permit definite answers to these questions, which are the subject of continuing
study.


                                                               8
more vertically integrated, while accounting for an increasing share of total value added by the

sector (Figure 3). The post-farm sector, likewise has become more concentrated and more

economically important, such that the farming sector represents an ever-shrinking share of the

total food value chain. In 2017, the average farm share was down to 14.6 cents per dollar of food

expenditure by consumers (USDA-ERS, 2019).

                     [Figure 3: Concentration in the Food Retailing Sector]

       The income elasticity of demand for food per se is quite low for most Americans (see,

e.g., Okrent and Alston 2011), but the demand for services associated with food and other

"quality" attributes of food is much more income elastic. With rises in per capita incomes and

the opportunity cost of time--especially for women as they have progressively entered the

workforce--Americans have increasingly demanded more food away from home (accounting for

more than half of food expenditure and more than one-third of calories since 2010) and more

prepared foods and ready-to-eat foods for consumption at home (Okrent et al. 2018, Saksena et

al. 2018) (Figure 4). In addition, they are demanding food differentiated in various ways

according to both product attributes (related to nutrients, food safety, and so on) and process

attributes (related to technologies used on farms such as genetically engineered varieties, organic

practices, pesticide use, animal husbandry practices, and so on).

                  [Figure 4: Food Expenditures at Home and Away from Home]

       The choices of technologies available to farmers and the types of food products available

to consumers are increasingly being mediated by the food processing, manufacturing, and

retailing sector (e.g., Saitone et al. 2015), cognizant of the evolving consumer marketplace and

the influence of activist organizations (Rausser et al. 2015, 2019; Alston 2019). Indeed, private

regulation of farm technologies imposed by food manufacturers and retailers might come to

                                                     9
supplant government regulation in this domain. In turn, these shifts have implications for the

demand for technologies expressed by farmers and the derived demand for investment in R&D

and innovation, and ultimately these processes will shape the future path of demand for farm

inputs, supply of farm outputs, productivity, and prices.


4. Investments in Innovation

       Farmers are tinkerers. The 10,000 year history of agriculture and agricultural innovation

includes only a century or two of organized science and other institutions that foster innovation

(Ruttan 1982; Pardey et al. 1991). In the United States, since 1862--which marked both the

establishment of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the passage of the Morrill

Land Grant College Act--state and federal governments have become progressively more

involved through both public investments in and the public performance of food and agricultural

R&D. So too has the private sector, especially in more recent decades as the incentives for

investing in food and agricultural innovation have strengthened. In particular, changes in

intellectual property (IP) protection enhanced the appropriability of the returns to biological

innovations as more fundamental discoveries in the basic biological sciences opened up new

(applied) R&D possibilities.

       Food and agricultural innovation investments also evolved in conjunction with, benefited

from, and contributed to R&D spending directed to other sectors of the economy. During the

past half century, the patterns of R&D spending overall (or gross domestic expenditures on

R&D, GERD) and R&D spending directed to the food and agricultural sector (or agGERD) have

continued to change in ways that we quantify and discuss in this section.




                                                     10
       GERD versus agGERD

       In 1953 the United States economy invested $34.4 billion (2011 prices, and likewise

below unless otherwise stated) in total (public and private) research and development (R&D).

Over the subsequent six decades, GERD in deflated terms grew 13.5-fold (or 4.2% per year on

average) to total $465 billion in 2015 (Figure 5, Panel a). Over this same period, public and

private investments in food and agricultural R&D carried out in the United States also grew

markedly--albeit at a slightly slower average annual rate of 3.7% per year, again in constant

prices--from $1.27 billion in 1953 to $12.6 billion in 2015 (Figure 5, Panel b).

                [Figure 5: GERD versus agGERD spending trends, 1950 - 2015]

       As a consequence of these differential rates of R&D spending growth, the share of food

and agricultural R&D (agGERD) in total GERD gradually trended down from 3.7% in 1953 to

2.7% in 2015, in tandem with the secular decline in the agricultural share of overall economic

activity. However, while the agGDP/GDP ratio shrank in a reasonably steady fashion, the

reduction in the agricultural share of total R&D was less regular. Overall U.S. spending on R&D

grew faster than spending on agricultural R&D during the 1950s. During the agricultural

productivity surge of the 1960s and 1970s, spending on agGERD grew substantially faster than

spending on GERD such that the food and agricultural share of total R&D spending peaked in

1977 at 4.2% (versus 2.5% in 1961). Thereafter, GERD grew faster than agGERD, such that by

2015 the food and agricultural share of GERD had reverted to the low point of the early 1960s.

       Although the food and agricultural share of GERD has gradually declined over recent

decades, the food and agricultural sector continues to invest more intensively in R&D than does

the U.S. economy as a whole. Investments in food and agricultural R&D when expressed

relative to agGDP grew steadily from just 0.7% in 1950 to a peak of 9.2% in 2002, shrinking

                                                   11
thereafter to 7.7% in 2015 (Figure 6). At 2.75% in 2015, the economy-wide intensity of R&D

investments in the United States was half the corresponding food and agricultural research

intensity, and roughly equivalent to the intensity of GERD investment that prevailed half a

century earlier (i.e., 2.79% in 1964).

         [Figure 6: The Intensity of Investment in GERD versus agGERD, 1950 ­ 2015]


       Private versus Public Research

       The private sector has long accounted for a significant share of U.S. GERD, averaging

70.2% of the total since 1953, albeit with a period during the 1960s and 1970s when the share of

private R&D investments fell well below the long run average, bottoming out at 65.7% in 1975

(Figure 5, Panel a). While the private share of food and agricultural R&D (70.0% in 2015) is

now roughly in line with the private share of research overall, this is a relatively recent

development, with the private sector accounting for just over one-third of U.S. food and

agricultural R&D in the early 1950s (Figure 5, Panel b).

       Changes in the scope of U.S. IP protection were associated with a rise in agricultural

innovations coming from the corporate sector. Mechanical, chemical, storage, transport and

processing inventions pertinent to food and agriculture have long been subject to patent

protection (as well as copyright, trademark, trade secrecy and eventually other legal means)

enabled by Article 1, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution that became operational on March 4,

1789. However, little protection was afforded biological inventions such as new crop varieties

(likewise for genetics-related innovations in the health sector). Trademarks and trade secrecy

laws were applicable, but these did not protect against reverse engineering or self-replication,




                                                     12
and so the common practice of saving seeds for own reuse--or for sharing with other farmers or

selling to them--did not constitute legal infringement of new seed varieties.

        It was not until 1930 that legal forms of plant varietal rights were on offer in the United

States, and the corporate share of such rights issued rose from 55% in the 1930s and 1940s to

82% by 2008 (Pardey et al. 2013). The 1930 Plant Patent Act covers asexually reproduced

plants, a category that largely encompasses ornamental plants and fruits. Sexually reproduced

crops, a category that includes grains, oilseed crops and grasses, gained IP protection in 1970 by

way of the Plant Variety Protection Act (PVPA). A third form of protection became possible in

1980 with Diamond v. Chakrabarty, in which the U.S. Supreme Court narrowly found that

"anything under the sun that is made by man" is patentable subject matter (Wright et al. 2007).

In practice, this case and subsequent legal rulings clarified that plant varieties, parts of plants,

genetically engineered organisms and gene products themselves were eligible for the same U.S.

utility patents that cover most other inventions.

        This IP landscape evolved hand-in-hand with important changes in the genetics and

genomics sciences that support crop varietal development, notably mechanical (Taylor and

Fauquet 2002) and bacterial (Gelvin 2003) means of manipulating genes to produce genetically

engineered crops, or more recent, more precise, and more cost-effective means to edit genes such

as TALEN and Crisper-Cas9 technologies (Balten et al. 2017). The legislative and legal changes

that gathered momentum in the 1970s and 1980s (Pardey et al. 2013) preceded a substantial rise

in the amount of private research oriented towards biological innovations during the subsequent

decades by firms such as Monsanto (acquired by Bayer in June 2018) and Pioneer-Dupont (now

Corteva Agrisciences).




                                                      13
        In addition, over the past 50 years food, beverage, and tobacco processing and

manufacturing R&D has continued to be a big part of total U.S. private spending on food and

agricultural R&D (averaging 42.2% over the past two decades) as industry has sought to respond

to changing consumer demands, including an increase in the share of food and beverages

consumed away from home and the desire for prepared foods and those packaged in more

convenient forms (Figure 4).

        Notably, the more expansive IP protection afforded the food and agricultural sector in the

past few decades was associated with a continuing increase (albeit at a slower rate) in the

intensity of private food and agricultural R&D, while the intensity of public agGERD has

trended down over the past 15 years (Figure 6, Panel b). In contrast, the intensity of public

GERD has changed little since the mid-1960s, such that most of the increase in overall GERD

intensity since the late 1970s is attributable to an upward trend in the intensity of private

investments in R&D (Figure 6, Panel a).

        These overall intensities mask considerable differences among sectors in the intensity of

R&D investment by private firms. Table 2 reports aggregate firm sales and R&D spending data

grouped into sectors, along with their corresponding intensity of investments (here measured

relative to their net domestic sales). Pharmaceutical and medical firms, on average, spent $12.9

on R&D for every $100 of sales in 2015, while chemical companies averaged $6.7 and

information-related companies $5.9, making them the three most R&D-intensive sectors in the

NSF compilation. The InSTePP compilation of data on 132 firms undertaking research related to

food and agriculture had an R&D intensity that averaged 1.2% in 2014 (Lee et al. 2020).12 But



12
  InSTePP is the International Science and Technology Practice and Policy center at the University of Minnesota,
details of which are at www.instepp.umn.edu.


                                                            14
the intensity of research varied markedly among categories of firms within that sector. Although

total sales for food companies were more than double those of agricultural companies in 2014,

food companies invested less in R&D such that their intensity ratios averaged just 0.7%, versus

2.6% for agriculture-related companies. Nonetheless, these data place food companies on par

with "other non-manufacturing companies" in terms of their R&D intensities, while the intensity

of research investments by agricultural companies exceeds those of the automobile, other

manufacturing, other chemical, and finance sectors.

                        [Table 2: Company sales and R&D intensity, 2014/15]

        While the increasing investments in innovation by private (food and agricultural) firms

have obviated the need for some public research, much of the private research stands firmly on

the shoulders of publicly performed research.13 The different roles played by public and private

research are revealed to some extent by the substantial differences in the composition of the

research performed by the two sectors. Around 40% of the food and agricultural research

performed by the public sector in the period 2007­2009 was considered "basic" research

(USDA-CRIS 2020), where the notional objective is the pursuit of new knowledge or ideas

without specific applications in mind (OECD 2015, p. 29). Another 48% of public research was

classified as "applied," or research done to meet a specific need. Only 12% was deemed

"developmental" and directed towards the production of specific products and processes with

nearer-term commercial potential. This squares with the "basic" research share (44% in 2015) of

public GERD (NSB 2018, Table 4-3). In contrast, 78% of private GERD, was "developmental"




13
  See Fuglie and Schimmelpfennig (2000) and Pardey and Beddow (2013) for examples of public-private research
complementarities in the food and agricultural sector.


                                                         15
in nature intended to develop prototypes, new processes, or products for commercialization, with

only 16% of private research considered applied, and 6% basic.

       While clear statistical guidelines for collecting and compiling R&D statistics (see, e.g.,

OECD 2015) are widely accepted, the practical application of those guidelines is tricky and

involves choices that have implications for the resulting measures and their interpretation.

Pardey et al. (2016) provide a detailed description of the conceptual and practical methods they

used to identify the "food and agricultural R&D" series reported here, as distinct from R&D (or

other related activities) performed for other purposes; the sector (e.g., business enterprise,

government, higher-education and private non-profit) associated with the performance of the

research; and the geographical jurisdiction of the research.

       Thus, for example, the private U.S. food and agricultural R&D series reported here

represents R&D purposely targeting food and agriculture, where the research is performed by

business enterprises in the United States, whether by domestic or foreign-owned firms. (An

alternative measure could include all private food and agricultural R&D performed by firms

headquartered or operating in the United States, irrespective of where in the world the research

occurred.) Creating this series often requires parsing research spending totals into U.S. versus

rest-of-world components, a distinction that is increasingly difficult to make as many large

multinational companies (U.S.-based and foreign) continue to diversify their R&D activities

globally, but only report total company-wide spending. Moreover, business activities of some

firms are only partially associated with the agricultural and food sectors, or span multiple sub-

sectors within the general scope of food and agricultural research. For example, a single firm

may undertake chemical research (only some of which is related to food and agriculture) and

also undertake biological or varietal development research related to agriculture, and the mix of


                                                     16
that research may change over time. For this subset of firms, absent any other information the

U.S. private-sector series reported here was developed from firm specific data, where, if

required, each firm's total R&D spending was parsed in line with the share of that firm's sales

associated with its agricultural or food-related business segments.

       International Dimensions of U.S. Research

       In 1960, the United States accounted for 18.6% of the entire world's expenditures on

publicly performed food and agricultural R&D, but by 2015 that share had shrunk to 9.4% and

the United States was eclipsed by China, which by 2013 had begun outspending the U.S. on both

public and private food and agricultural research (Chai et al. 2019). Part of this shifting research

geography reflects policy choices in the United States versus China and other countries--

especially other large agricultural economies such as Brazil and India--regarding public

spending and other forms of legislative support for agricultural R&D. These changing

international R&D relativities also reflect more fundamental economic forces shaped by major

changes in the economic geography of agriculture itself (Pardey et al. 2016).

       In 1961, the United States accounted for 14.8% by value of the world's agricultural

output, compared with China's 8.5%. Less than six decades later the tables had turned. The

U.S. share of global agricultural production had declined to 10.0% in 2016, while China now

accounted for almost one-quarter (23.7%) of the total, propelled by historically unprecedented

and sustained rates of growth in Chinese agricultural production and productivity. These

Chinese agricultural developments were enabled by several radical institutional reforms

beginning in the late 1970s; notably the introduction of the household responsibility system for

farming that incentivized farmers to increase output and spurred the off-farm migration of labor

(Lin 1992), and the doubling down on investments in agricultural R&D (Chai et al. 2019).

                                                     17
Meanwhile, the U.S. government first slowed and then of late scaled back public support for

agricultural R&D.

         These shifts in the global landscape for food and agricultural R&D also paralleled

broader changes in the world's economic geography and the country composition of global

GERD. In 1980, the United States accounted for 19.8% of the world's $6.4 trillion (2009 PPP

prices) GDP, compared with 2.1% for China. By 2014, while global GDP had grown to $99.3

trillion the U.S. share had shrunk to 16.2% and China's had grown to 16.9%. Dehmer et al.

(2019) estimated that over this same period, global GERD had grown from $0.48 trillion in 1980

to $1.67 trillion in 2014 (2009 PPP prices), the U.S. share of global GERD had declined a little

from 31.2 to 27.0%, while China's share had increased dramatically from 1.2 to 20.0%.

         Where in the rest-of-the-world agricultural R&D takes place matters as much as the

amount and types of research conducted in the United States for the innovative future of U.S.

agriculture. Just as genetic innovations conceived in the health sector have benefited agriculture

(and vice versa), rest-of-world agricultural knowledge stocks have spatial spillover consequences

for U.S. agriculture (see, e.g., Clancy et al. 2020). However, space matters more for agriculture,

and many agricultural innovations are site-specific. Consequently, taking wheat as an example,

research targeted for agroecologies (or production systems) that are agroecologically distant

from current or prospective wheat areas in the United States, are likely to be less consequential

for wheat innovation in the United States than if they were targeted to U.S. agroecologies.14

Thus, with an increasing share of the world's agricultural research taking place outside the




14
  At any given point in time hundreds of different wheat varieties are being grown or bred that are adapted to
specific agroecologies, and the productive potential of any particular variety of wheat varies greatly depending on
where in the world, precisely, that variety is to be grown.


                                                              18
United States, the global stock of scientific knowledge can be expected to have less relevance for

innovations within U.S. production agriculture in the decades ahead relative to decades past.15


5. Payoffs to Investments in Agricultural Innovation

         In the economic evidence on the payoffs to investment in R&D various summary

statistics have been used to summarize the streams of costs and benefits associated with R&D

activities that typically take (sometimes considerable) time for the research to be conducted, and

years if not decades for the resulting innovations to diffuse and realize economic consequences.

For the most part, however, the internal rate of return (IRR) has been used as the statistic of

choice. This is true, for example, for researchers summarizing the economic consequences of

manufacturing R&D (see the tabulation in Hall et al. 2010, Table 2) and health-related research

(e.g., HERG et al. 2008; Deloitte 2014; Glover et al. 2014). Notwithstanding Griliches' (1958)

objection to the use of IRRs in this context, it is also the preferred summary statistic for the now

extensive literature on the returns to agricultural R&D, which he initiated.16

         The InSTePP agricultural returns-to-research database (version 3) includes 3,426 rate-of-

return estimates gleaned from 492 studies worldwide, of which 1,298 (37.9%) of the estimates

evaluate research conducted in the United States (Rao et al. 2019a). Among the U.S estimates,



15
  As discussed by Alston (2002) and emphasized by Alston et al. (2010), agricultural technology spillovers are
significant, and run in both directions, though not always symmetrically or spontaneously. Cognizant of this fact,
private foundations based in the United States together with the U.S. government led the funding (as well as the
founding) of the system of international agricultural research centers now known as the CGIAR. This institutional
innovation was conceived for essentially humanitarian purposes to address the global food crisis of the 1960s, and
was a primary source of the so-called "Green Revolution" technologies (see, e.g., Alston et al. 2006 and Wright
2012). It reduced but did not eliminate a global market failure in agricultural R&D that persists today. The donor
countries also benefited by adopting the resulting technologies, as quantified, for example, by Pardey et al. (1996) in
relation to the spillins of CGIAR crop varietal technologies into the United States. See, also Alston et al. (2020).
16
  With reference to using the IRR as a summary returns-to-research measure, Griliches (1958, p. 425) wrote "My
objection to this procedure is that it values a dollar spent in 1910 at $2,300 in 1933. This does not seem very
sensible to me. I prefer to value a 1910 dollar at a reasonable rate of return on some alternative social investment."


                                                               19
76% (986 estimates) report IRRs, while 312 report benefit-cost ratios (BCRs) (Table 3, upper

half). Given the wide dispersion and positive skewness in the distribution of the reported rates of

return, the median is a more informative measure of the central tendency than the mean. The

median of the reported IRRs for U.S. agricultural R&D is 31.9% per year and the median of the

reported BCRs is 12.0, roughly in line with the corresponding medians for the reported rest-of-

world evidence.17

                                  [Table 3: Returns to Agricultural R&D]

         Although the IRR is merely a breakeven interest rate, equating the present values of costs

and benefits, many policymakers (and even some economists!) treat IRRs as compounding rates

of interest, analogous and comparable to the returns reported for financial products (e.g.,

mortgages, mutual funds and certificates of deposit). However, Hurley et al. (2014) showed that

such an annualized percentage rate of return interpretation is generally incorrect and often leads

to incredible implications.18 They also pointed out how the modified internal rate of return,

MIRR (Lin 1976), offers an alternative to the IRR that can be reasonably interpreted as an annual

percentage rate of return.

         Hurley et al. (2014 and 2017) provide a detailed account of the properties of MIRRs, and

the implicit, often undesirable assumptions (not least in the returns-to-research context) made in

the calculation of IRRs. One of the desirable properties of an MIRR is its one-to-one




17
  However, such direct comparisons of broad aggregates are of limited value given differences in the nature of the
evidence across countries and over time in terms of what commodities and types of research are being evaluated,
and the details of the evaluation methods themselves (Rao et al. 2019a).
18
  As Alston et al. (2011, pp. 1271-2) showed, "... if the roughly $4 billion invested in public agricultural R&D in
2005 earned a return of 50% per annum compounding over 35 years, by 2040 the accumulated benefits would be
worth $5,824,000 billion (2000 prices)--more than 100 times the projected U.S. GDP in 2040 and more than 10
times the projected global GDP in 2040."


                                                              20
correspondence with a BCR if a common discount rate and research timeline are used to

calculate the rates of return for different projects. Using the BCR-IRR relationship elucidated by

Hurley et al. (2014), Rao et al. (2019b) developed and deployed a procedure to recalibrate the

reported IRRs into a standardized set of imputed BCRs and MIRRs, where the discount rates and

research timelines are held constant, thus improving comparability among the estimates. The

bottom half of Table 3 presents these imputed BCRs and MIRRs for the United States and the

rest-of-the world using a common discount rate of 5% and a research evaluation timeline (from

the initiation of costs to the cessation of benefits) of 30 years, roughly the average timeline of the

reported evidence. These results indicate a median BCR of 7.5 for investments in U.S.

agricultural R&D, corresponding to a MIRR of 12.3% per year. The comparable median rest-of-

world estimates are a BCR of 9.0 and a MIRR of 13.0% per year. These estimates are indicative

of a sustained and substantial underinvestment in agricultural science both in the United States

and globally. In spite of this government failure on top of market failure, innovation in

American agriculture has accomplished a great deal and has contributed positively to global

agricultural growth and change.


6. Clusters of Innovation in American Agriculture

         Pardey and Alston (2019) discuss and document a century of transformative change in

U.S. agriculture (1910­2007) in which they pay particular attention to the potential sources of a

mid-century (1950s­1980s) surge and subsequent slowdown in farm productivity growth. They

liken this farm productivity pattern to the earlier surge and slowdown in the broader economy

identified by Gordon (2000, 2016), which he associated with great "clusters of inventions."19



19
  Rasmussen (1962) had a similar notion of technological clusters or sequential technological revolutions driving
the arc of history regarding U.S. agriculture, noting that up to the time of his writing: "Two revolutions in American

                                                              21
Borrowing those ideas and in a similar spirit, Pardey and Alston (2019) suggest that much of the

past time path of U.S. agricultural input use, production, productivity, and prices can be

understood in terms of clusters of agricultural inventions and the structural changes in the farm

economy they enabled, including (1) "mechanical" (mostly labor-saving) technologies; (2)

improved animal breeds and crop varieties and other "biological" innovations; (3) synthetic

fertilizers, pesticides, and other "chemical" technologies; and (4) more recently, "information"

technologies; all employed in conjunction with ever-evolving knowledge and improved

understanding of and changes in agricultural production and practices. This section builds on the

discussion of innovation clusters by Pardey and Alston (2019) paying greater attention to the

more-recent period while placing the newer innovations in a longer-run historical context.

         Mechanization played a large early role in the 20th Century transformation of U.S.

agriculture. As well as much human labor, machines saved considerable amounts of land from

having to be used to produce feed for horses and mules, and facilitated the consolidation of farms

into many fewer and larger units. The tractor, in particular, saved millions of acres of land and

the work of many men and women. In 1910, the United States had a total of 6.4 million farmers,

farming 881 million acres using a total of 24 million horses and mules and just 1,000 tractors.

After its peak in 1917 at 27 million animals, the stock of work horses and mules on U.S. farms

dropped eventually to a low of 1.4 million in 1974 (Figure 7). Meanwhile, from just 50,000

tractors in 1917, the total grew to 4.5 million tractors in 1957.




agriculture reflect the impact of technological change on farming during the past century. The first revolution saw
the change from manpower to animal power, and centered about the Civil War. The second revolution saw the
change from animal power to mechanical power and the adaptation of chemistry to agricultural production. It
centered around the post-World War II period. The transition from animal power to mechanical power is virtually
complete (Rasmussen, 1962, p. 578)."


                                                              22
                  [Figure 7: American Agricultural Mechanization, 1867­2012]

       Along with tractors, farmers also adopted automobiles and motor trucks that were not

developed specifically or exclusively for agriculture, as well as other machines that were useful

only in agriculture, such as reapers, mowers, binders, and combines (Figure 8, Panel a). To a

great extent this was a private-sector process, in which many of the innovations were patented

technologies embodied in tractors and related machines produced privately and sold to farmers.

Public agricultural (and other) R&D was complementary but played a minor role here compared

with its role in other types of innovations such as new crop varieties, and farming systems.

      [Figure 8: Adoption Paths for Selected Major U.S. Farming Innovations, 1920­2018]

       As can be seen in Panel a of Figure 8, biological innovations, in particular improved crop

varieties that were responsive to chemical fertilizers, took center stage a little later--although

they were clearly part of the story all along (Olmstead and Rhode 2008). For example, hybrid

corn varieties were adopted rapidly in Iowa in the early 1930s, but it took until the 1960s for

vastly improved hybrids to achieve 100 percent adoption throughout the United States (Griliches

1957, Dixon 1980, Hallauer and Miranda 1981). Varietal improvement has continued for corn

and other crops, including food crops such as wheat and rice for which public investments have

been more important. These innovations, with others, laid the foundation for genetically

engineered (GE) hybrid corn varieties to be developed and adopted, beginning in 1996

(Fernandez-Cornejo et al. 2014). Similar, though typically less dramatic genetic innovations

were common to many agricultural crop and livestock species, and contributed to the rapid rise

of yields and aggregate productivity during the second half of the 20th century (Olmstead and

Rhode 2008).




                                                     23
       Chemical technologies for agriculture assumed importance beginning in the 1960s. The

early 20th century invention of the Haber-Bosch process for the economical manufacturing of

synthetic nitrogen fertilizer in particular was profoundly important for enhanced crop yields,

especially when combined with complementary genetics and crop management practices. The

U.S. on-farm adoption process for these fertilizers and associated varieties was notable in the

1960s and 1970s. Partly as a post-war dividend, synthetic pesticide technologies took off around

the same time, soon to become subject to environmental regulation following the publication of

Rachel Carson's "Silent Spring" in 1962. A great many forms of agricultural chemical

technologies have been developed, registered and approved for commercial use, and adopted by

farmers (and in many cases subsequently deregistered or heavily regulated and disadopted)--

including fertilizers, growth promotants, herbicides, fungicides, insecticides, antibiotics and

other veterinary medicines.

       More recently, genetically engineered (GE) crop varieties have been developed that could

serve as better complements to or substitutes for these chemical technologies. Predominant

among these are herbicide tolerant (HT) varieties of cotton, corn, soybeans, and canola, which

permit herbicides to replace mechanical tillage for weed control, and pesticide inherent (PI)

varieties (e.g, Bt cotton and corn) that reduce (or eliminate) the requirement for chemical

pesticides for controlling specific pests. These technologies tend to predominate where they are

available for adoption and confer significant benefits to farmers, consumers, and technology

firms (see, e.g., Fernandez-Cornejo et al. 2014; Qaim 2016). Furthermore, HT technologies are

complementary to conservation tillage practices (Perry et al. 2016), such that minimum-till and

no-till systems are now used on a majority of acres of U.S. wheat (67% in 2017), corn (65%,

2016), and soybeans (70%, 2012) (Classen et al. 2018). Conservation tillage practices reap their


                                                     24
own rewards in terms of reduced soil compaction, improved water infiltration (and so reduced

runoff), promotion of soil fauna and biological processes, and increased soil organic matter, most

of which have beneficial agricultural production and environmental outcomes.20

         To date, however, GE varieties have been developed and adopted widely for only a few

crops (in particular soybeans, cotton, corn, canola, and papaya) and only in a few countries

(Qaim 2016). This reflects a combination of regulatory and market resistance, which has

discouraged the development of technologies for these and other applications in the countries

that are open to GE technologies; more so in those that are opposed. The United States is

predominant both as a developer and adopter, but even in the United States the regulatory

barriers are substantial, adding years of delay and hundreds of millions of dollars in costs (see,

e.g., Kalaitzandonakes et al. 2006).21 Panel b of Figure 8 displays the U.S. adoption paths for

GE varieties of corn and soybeans on an expanded shorter time scale, where they can be

juxtaposed with adoption paths for digital (and related information) technologies used in U.S.

crop production in the modern era. This Panel captures key elements of the current innovative

landscape for agriculture, emphasizing genetic innovation and other data-intensive technologies.

         Digital farming technologies (including "precision agriculture" or "variable rate"

technologies), which help farmers gather information and adjust production practices according



20
  Changes in the emphasis of agricultural innovation might have changed the requirements for maintenance
research as a share of total research, since the Red Queen effect applies particularly to genetic and chemical pest-
and disease-management technologies, less so to mechanical or digital innovations. This might help account for the
mid-20th-century surge (associated with adoption of mechanical innovations) in U.S. farm productivity and the
subsequent slowdown (during the decades emphasizing chemical and biological innovation). In this respect, digital
technologies may be more like mechanical technologies, although rapid (planned) obsolescence is a predominant
feature in much digital technology.
21
  Compared with the earlier path for hybrid corn, these ones are shorter reflecting the advantages of modern science
and communications technologies, but once we allow for an additional decade of regulatory lags, the overall post-
research development and adoption process is still on the order of 20 years for these technologies--like hybrid corn
within Iowa, six decades previously.


                                                             25
to changes in field conditions over space and time, are beginning to gain ground in U.S. farm

production. Major examples include GPS (global positioning system)-based remote-sensing and

guidance systems, soil and yield mapping based on GPS (perhaps in conjunction with satellite

and aerial photography), and variable-rate technology (VRT) (Lowenberg-DeBoer and Erickson

2019; Jia et al. 2019).

       Field operators can use GPS guidance systems to auto-steer tractors, combines, and other

machines, which helps pinpoint precise field locations and reduce operator fatigue

(Schimmelpfennig 2016). Precision technologies can also help farm operators map their fields

better. Yield monitors mounted on harvesters can be used to record data on yields with GPS

coordinates that the operator can use to monitor changes in crop yield across the field and from

year to year. These data can be combined with data from soil maps using related technology--

based on core samples or soil sensors that use electrical conductivity to test soil--to better

understand the sources of yield variation and act on the information. Lastly, variable-rate

technology (VRT) allows farmers to customize the application of irrigation water, fertilizer,

chemicals, and pesticides spatially and over time using data from remote sensors or GPS data--

often from yield and soil maps or guidance systems. Farmers can even use VRT to plant

different types of seeds or to apply different agricultural chemicals at different rates at different

locations with a single pass of the tractor. And, looking forward, these technologies will be used

to allow precise mechanical or chemical weeding and cultivation around individual plants,

among other things.

       Panel b of Figure 8 includes adoption curves for six types of technology in this context,

as well as two types of GE crops (corn and soybeans). The plots for the GE crops start earlier,

and rise more rapidly. By 2006, only 10 years after initial release, GE varieties had already been


                                                      26
adopted on 60 percent of corn and 90 percent of soybean acres. In contrast, the adoption curves

for most of the digital and related precision farming technologies are much flatter. Autosteer

technology, which was first introduced around the same time as the GE crop varieties was used

on 60 percent of acres in 2015, while the other digital technologies were less widely adopted.

        As discussed by Schimmelpfennig (2016), some of these technologies are simple to adopt

and easy to use while others may come at a relatively high cost in terms of requiring specialized

equipment or specific skills. These factors, along with functionality, have contributed to the

differences observed in the rate of development and adoption of these technologies. Many of

these tools are knowledge-and skill-intensive, and their profitable use requires location-,

application-, and site-specific adaptation, all of which takes time to work out. Primarily, their

limited use to date reflects the fact that it is still early days for many of these technologies in

terms of matching data to models and real-time processing of very large data sets, engineering

the machinery to go with the data and knowledge, and software development. The technologies

themselves have been changing rapidly and the prospects are very bright.

        In some cases we can understand the differences in adoption rates in terms of the nature

of the technology as it relates to the factors mentioned by Schimmelpfennig (2016). For

example, adoption of GE seeds did not require any significant investment in new knowledge

(rather in some ways the technology replaced a requirement for knowledge about pest

management with pest-management inherent seeds), and nor did it require any new equipment or

new business relationships; it was a routine transition in an environment where farmers were

used to adopting new hybrids reasonably often. The benefits were reasonably clear, the costs of

change were small, and the benefit-cost calculus was straightforward--facilitated by much

opportunity to begin small and observe neighbors and learn from their experience. However, the


                                                       27
subsequent (implied) transition from conventional cropping to lo-till and no-till enabled by GE

varieties took considerably longer because it required sometimes considerable own-farm-specific

learning by doing about what works and what does not, which can be a time-intensive process.

       Likewise, autosteer is a relatively simple technology and easy to learn to use (like GE

seed it replaces a more difficult technology with a simpler one), and the benefit-cost calculus is

reasonably straightforward. However, the same is not true for many other digital technologies.

Some may require a very significant up-front investment in physical capital and acquisition of

technical know-how (and thus implying large economies of size) to make use of a technology for

which the benefits might be quite uncertain or where the landscape is changing rapidly such that

even better options may become available soon. It is also pertinent to note that in 2017 the

average age of farmers was 57.5 years (USDA-NASS 2019), other things equal older farmers are

less likely to adopt innovations generally (Feder and Umali 1993) and perhaps more-so digital

versus more traditional technologies with which they may be more comfortable.

       Schimmelpfennig and Ebel (2016, p. 97) propose an additional possible explanation for

sluggish adoption, if potentially complementary technologies are adopted and worked into

production practices sequentially: "The one-technology-at-a-time approach to adoption may

seem inefficient and time-consuming compared to adoption of complete, possibly

complementary, packages of technologies, but this scheme has been shown to occur in other

settings." If one part of the package is seen as costly or risky to adopt, this might have

implications for the rates of adoption of other elements that are less useful alone.

       In addition to these types of technologies, which are most visibly apparent in the context

of major field crops, other types of digital technologies are being developed and used in the

context of specialty crops or livestock production, as well as field crops. For example, in crop

                                                     28
production, automated irrigation systems based on sensors that measure precipitation,

evapotranspiration, and soil moisture in the root zone are used to improve the efficiency of water

use and save labor; these are in their early stages of adoption. USDA, ERS (2020) report that

"... fewer than 10 percent of irrigators make use of soil- or plant-moisture sensing devices or

commercial irrigation scheduling services [and less than] 2 percent make use of computer-based

simulation models to determine irrigation requirements based on consumptive-use needs by

crop-growth stage under local weather conditions."

       Autonomous or articulated weeding machines are under development, and some are

already being used in farmers' fields (see, e.g., BlueRiver 2020). These include machines that

can selectively spray or physically cut out weeds based on GPS references or computer vision (or

image identification) technologies, thereby saving labor and reducing the environmental burden

of herbicide (see, e.g., Fennimore and Cutulle, 2019; Filmer 2019). Drones and other self-

driving machines fitted with cameras, sniffers and other types of sensors are being developed and

deployed to monitor the crop for drought and other stresses and check for pests and diseases.

Analogous sensing technologies are being developed for monitoring soil nutrient (see, e.g.,

Teralytic 2020) and health status, including soil microbiome activity. Robotic and other devices

fitted with sensors are also being developed and deployed to selectively harvest crops (e.g.,

apples, strawberries) with variable maturation dates.

       In livestock production, digital technologies are already widely used and their use is

progressing: for example, companies such as Lely (2020) have already commercialized robotic

milking machines and digital cow tag systems that can be used to monitor and help manage




                                                     29
animal health and feeding status for dairy cows.22 As with crop production, "smart" livestock

production technologies involve precision technologies and variable rate technologies, where the

unit of observation now becomes the individual animal. Using modern information technology,

farmers now can monitor and record details on numerous attributes of each animal, including its

health status, its consumption of feed and other inputs, its productivity and reproductive

performance. These data can be collected, and interpreted using machine learning and other

processes in ways that make the information economically useful and permit better livestock

management and more profitable decisions both with respect to individual animals and the entire

herd or flock. Decisions regarding optimal culling age and feeding regimes can now be

individualized based on individualized performance measures such as fertility, yield of meat (or

milk), quality of meat (or milk), feed-conversion efficiency, and their implications for

profitability. Some other precision livestock technologies serve to save labor and perform tasks

more precisely, such as robotic milkers and automated feeders, and climate control technologies

for housed livestock.

         Growing from "just" $2.6 billion in 2012 new agrifood startup companies attracted $16.6

billion of investments worldwide in 2018 (AgFunder 2018, p. 15).23 The United States

accounted for $7.9 billion (48%) of the total, China $3.5 billion (21%), and India $2.4 billion

(14%). Startups based in California accounted for almost one-third of global investment and


22
  For example, an active smart ear tag can get data from individual animals such as temperature and activity
patterns, which can be utilized in identification of illness, heat stress, estrous, and so on, and enable livestock
producers to identify sick animals sooner and more accurately. This early detection leads to reduction in costs by
lowering re-treatment rate and death loss, and getting animals back to peak performance faster.
23
  Other studies, such as Graff et al. (2020) and others, provide alternative quantification and discussion of venture
capital investments in (R&D intensive) agriculture startups, developed for different purposes. Not all the venture
capital being invested in these (technology-oriented) companies is necessarily directed to activities that are
consistent with R&D measures reported in this chapter. Some of the funds are also invested in market development,
promotion and related business activities such that only some (and often an unknown) fraction of the venture capital
total is spent on R&D per se.


                                                              30
two-thirds of all U.S. investment; 92% of the U.S. total if funding to firms located in

Massachusetts, New York, North Carolina, Colorado and Minnesota are also included.

Investments in startups closer to the farmer--spanning areas such as soil testing, pest detection,

precision agriculture, digital agricultural management, agronomic data, and predictive

analytics--totaled $6.9 billion (41.5% of the global total), with firms focused on the off- (or

vertical-) farm segments--including food processing and production companies (such as

Impossible Foods, Zymergen and Bowery Farming Inc.) and, especially, food delivery

companies (such as Instacart and DoorDash) attracting $10 billion in risk capital.


7. The Next Wave of Agricultural Innovation: Ripple or Tsunami?

       Looking forward, we can see great potential for new product and process innovations--in

particular digital and other data- and knowledge-intensive technologies, including genetic

innovations--that will enable more and better food, fiber, and industrial raw materials to be

produced on farms at much lower cost and with a smaller environmental footprint, worldwide.

Realizing this potential will matter for the future trajectory of global public goods including

climate change, other natural resource stocks, the world food equation, poverty and related civil

or military strife. The extent to which these opportunities will be captured, and when, will be

determined to a great extent by forces outside agriculture and outside the R&D and technology

sector. These forces will determine the availability and direction of resources available for

public-sector agricultural R&D, the regulations and rules governing the development,

deployment, and adoption of new farm and food technologies, and the demand for products

depending on the technologies used to produce them.




                                                     31
        Induced Innovation

        As noted above, agriculture is unusual in that it faces knowledge depreciation arising

from climate change and, in particular, the coevolution of pests and diseases. This gives rise to a

demand for maintenance R&D--simply to preserve past productivity gains. Much of the past

work on crop varietal innovations can be seen in this light. The demand for innovation on farms

is also driven by changing factor supply conditions, evolving demand for farm products (now

including feedstock for biofuels and other industrial raw materials as well as traditional feed,

food and fiber), and the peculiar regulatory environment for agriculture related to issues

including varietal technologies, animal welfare in livestock production, and landscape amenities

(and dis-amenities) from agricultural production. Farmers also face a changing market

environment with demands for food products and food production processes mediated through

private standards and mass media messages.

        Over the long history, a major element of change was labor-saving innovation induced by

farm labor scarcity. Past labor savings notwithstanding, reliable and timely availability of

suitably skilled labor is a major concern of farmers today--especially in California's labor

demanding specialty crops--and they are actively seeking technological alternatives for

harvesting, weeding, irrigating, and a host of other farm operations as well as post-farm packing

and handling.24 Farmers are also increasingly concerned over the reliability of natural rainfall

and irrigation water, with variability and uncertainty in these dimensions exacerbated by climate

change. Drought- and heat-tolerant varieties are being developed to mitigate these consequences




24
  Today's farm labor environment with its implications for the demand for labor-saving innovations is reminiscent
of the period when the Bracero Program was terminated in 1964, stimulating the rapid deployment and adoption of
the mechanical tomato harvester. Olmstead and Martin (1985) analyze the resulting controversy.


                                                            32
(see, e.g., Cooper et al. 2014 and McFadden et al. 2019 in the case of drought-tolerant corn).

Information technologies combined with more precise and selective water delivery systems can

reduce total water usage and vulnerability to drought.

         Changing technological regulations generate a demand for replacement technologies. In

recent years significant agricultural pesticides have been banned in some jurisdictions and are

threatened in others owing to concern about their risks to the environment or human health.25

These include soil fumigants (e.g., methyl bromide), insecticides (e.g., neonicotinoids) and

herbicides (e.g., glypohosate aka Roundup®). When significant pesticides are deregistered,

farmers demand new solutions. In some cases, the alternative to a banned chemical is another

chemical or new genetics, but sometimes it simply means technological regression. For

example, Roundup-resistant® varieties of corn, soybeans, and canola, combined with the

herbicide glyphosate, permitted the widespread adoption of lo-till or no-till production systems

that resulted in significant improvements in soil structure and reduced greenhouse gas emissions.

If glyphosate were to be banned in the United States and Canada--as it has been (either totally or

for selected uses) in some other countries recently--we could expect to see a reversion to older

production systems using mechanical tillage for weed control and environmentally less benign

herbicides. The pressure will be on to come up with an alternative to glyphosate that will be as

effective for farmers and more acceptable to the regulators. This is a serious challenge.

         Agriculture has generated various other environmental concerns related to air pollution

(including greenhouse gases, particulate matter, and odors from livestock production) and water


25
   Donley (2019, p. 1) reports: "There are 72, 17, and 11 pesticides approved for outdoor agricultural applications in
the USA that are banned or in the process of complete phase out in the EU, Brazil, and China, respectively. Of the
pesticides used in USA agriculture in 2016, 322 million pounds were of pesticides banned in the EU, 26 million
pounds were of pesticides banned in Brazil and 40 million pounds were of pesticides banned in China. Pesticides
banned in the EU account for more than a quarter of all agricultural pesticide use in the USA."

                                                              33
pollution (including nitrates in groundwater and surface water giving rise to human health and

environmental issues). With increasing awareness of these issues, and the likelihood of

government intervention in one form or another, demand is growing for alternative technologies

that will enable more precise use of inputs and better control of unwanted outputs. Likewise,

whether motivated by animal welfare concerns or other issues, new regulations over livestock

production practices--such as castration; dehorning; pens for calves, sows, and egg-laying hens;

use of antibiotics and other veterinary medicines--give rise to demand for new technologies.

         In many instances, genetic innovations offer promising solutions to the problems created

by the changing regulatory environment. However, genetic technologies also are subject to

considerable regulatory weight. The science of genetic innovation has improved by leaps and

bounds over recent decades, but society has placed arbitrary strictures (unsupported by scientific

evidence) over some of the most powerful tools in the tool-kit available to the modern-day

geneticist. In the United States, genetically engineered crop varieties are subject to much greater

regulatory control than their conventionally bred counterparts, even though they pose no greater

risk to human health or the environment (see, e.g., Qaim 2018). In many other countries, GE

crops are effectively banned. More recent innovations, such as gene-editing techniques, promise

much greater possibilities for targeted genetic changes in commercial species, but they too might

face serious regulatory barriers that could stifle that potential.26 Some countries have already

opted to treat gene-edited varieties as GMOs, subject to severe restrictions (see, e.g., Wight




26
   Van Eenennaam (2019) provides a review of the gene-editing targets for cattle, while Baltes et al. (2017) provide
an overview of the gene editing opportunities and technical challenges for plant transformations. Qaim (2020)
discusses the risk of over-regulation of new plant breeding technologies (NPBTs). He suggests: "While the science
is exciting and some clear benefits are already observable, overregulation and public misperceptions may obstruct
efficient development and use of NPBTs. Overregulation is particularly observed in Europe, but also affects
developing countries in Africa and Asia, which could benefit the most from NPBTs" (Qaim 2020, p.1)

                                                             34
2018, regarding the European Court of Justice ruling regarding the use of gene editing in the

EU).

            It is not easy to get a good handle on the innovations in the pipeline or on the drawing

board, especially since so much of what is going on is being undertaken privately, and in

private--in particular when we talk about digital agriculture but also for some aspects of genetic

innovations.27 As we have discussed, genetic innovation in plants and animals includes the

results from conventional breeding (albeit supported by the tools of modern biotechnology such

as marker-assisted breeding), genetic engineering, and gene-editing. Much of the emphasis of

this work tends to be focused on the main agricultural species and the main production systems,

for sound economic reasons. Apart from yield potential, tolerance of abiotic stresses (drought,

frost, and heat), and resistance to pests and diseases, crop geneticists are looking for various

other agronomic advantages and product quality attributes. In the case of apples and table

grapes, for example, fruit quality attributes are an important focus of private and public breeding

efforts and varieties in use are changing rapidly.28

            As noted, digital farming innovations (including precision technologies and variable rate

technologies) have the potential to save (and also reduce dependence on uncertain supplies of)

labor and irrigation water; they also have the potential to save on materials and reduce

environmental spillovers associated with fertilizers and pesticides (see, e.g., Schimmelpfennig

2018). Some of these technologies also have the potential to reduce the requirement for farm

labor to perform dangerous and arduous tasks that can be done better by machines. Some of



27
     The public sector also is active in these areas and public-sector science is less secretive.
28
  Alston and Sambucci (2019) discuss and document the rapid rate of innovation in table grape varieties in
California, reflecting both public and increasingly private innovative activity. A total of 85 varieties are currently in
production, and the mixture in vineyards is changing.


                                                                   35
these prospects will be enhanced by government policies and the political action of various

interest groups, including the woke food policy movement, and others will be hampered. Issues

have begun to arise over the IP rights to the data generated by farmers about their business, using

machines embodying technology owned by others (AFBF 2018; Janzen 2019). A related issue is

the changing scope for farmers as "tinkerers" to economically modify increasingly complex and

sophisticated technologies. There can be no doubt farmers will be continue to be busy tinkering,

modifying machines and using them in ways that were not imagined by the engineers that built

them in the first instance, but it seems likely that an increasing share of the total innovation in

American agriculture will be based on patented technologies developed in the per profit sector,

continuing recent trends--whether we are talking about mechanical, genetic, chemical or digital

technologies.


       Policy Perspectives

       Government policy has been a central theme in our discussion of agricultural innovation

because the government plays a central role both in contributing directly to the innovation

process, as a major provider of agricultural R&D, and in setting the rules of the game that

determine the supply of and demand for agricultural innovations. In the current environment for

agriculture, demands for private innovation investments are being influenced by government

through the prospect of new regulations (or taxes) applied to agricultural production, including

technological regulations and environmental regulations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and

other spillovers from agriculture; and through the influence of policy on the supply of inputs

(especially labor and water) to agriculture, and on the markets for farm products. A more subtle

influence of government is through changing support for public sector R&D (in terms of both the

total investment and the balance of investments) influenced by a changing role of scientific

                                                      36
evidence in policy and shifting public preferences.29 These shifts create some opportunities for

the private sector and foreclose others.

        The National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine (2019) recently

published a new agricultural research agenda for the United States entitled Science

Breakthroughs to Advance Food and Agricultural Research by 2030. This report identifies

innovative, emerging scientific advances for making the U.S. agricultural and food system more

efficient, resilient, and sustainable. The report presents five priorities:

     1. Increasing understanding of the animal, soil, and plant microbiomes and their broader
        applications across the food system.

     2. Harnessing the potential of genomics and precision breeding to improve plant and animal
        traits.

     3. Capitalizing on agri-food informatics to enable advanced analytics using data sciences,
        information technology, and artificial intelligence

     4. Employing existing sensors and developing new sensing technologies to enable rapid
        detection and monitoring

     5. Prioritizing transdisciplinary science and systems approaches.

A fundamental motivation for this effort was a concern over the shrinking total support for

public agricultural R&D in the United States and the loss of direction in terms of the focus of the

shrinking public funds. Among these five priorities, most of the topics entail significant

opportunities for private entrepreneurial activity to generate proprietary research products.

Notably, three of the five are predominantly digital, data-intensive systems.




29
  For example, Pardey et al. (2013) show that the share of SAES (state agricultural experiment station) research
oriented to farm productivity fell steadily from 69% in 1985 to 56% in 2009.


                                                             37
8. Conclusion

       U.S. agriculture was transformed during the 20th century by waves of innovation with

mechanical, biological, chemical, and information technologies. Compared with a few decades

ago, today's agriculture is much less labor intensive and farms are much larger and more

specialized, supplying a much-evolved market for farm products. Over recent decades, the

global landscape for agricultural R&D has shifted away from farms, away from the public sector

towards the private sector, and away from the United States towards agriculturally important

middle-income countries, especially China, India and Brazil. Investments are stalling even

though meta-evidence shows that past U.S. investments in R&D have yielded very favorable

returns: median reported benefit cost-ratios in the range of 12:1. Sustained U.S. investment and

innovation will be required to preserve past productivity gains in the face of climate change,

coevolving pests and diseases, and changing technological regulations--let alone increase

productivity. Great potential exists for innovation in crop and livestock genetics and digital

farming technologies to generate new products and production processes, but innovators have to

overcome increasingly strong headwinds from social and political forces that seek to dictate

technology choices.




                                                    38
References

Adusei, E.O. and G.W. Norton, "The Magnitude of Agricultural Maintenance Research in the
    USA," Journal of Production Agriculture 3 (1990): 1-6.
AFBF (American Farm Bureau Federation). "Privacy and Security Principles for Farm Data,"
    2016. Available on line at www.fb.org/issues/technology/data-privacy/privacy-and-
    security-principles-for-farm-data.
AgFunder. AgriFood Tech Investing Report 18-Year in Review, 2018. Available at
    https://agfunder.com/research/agrifood-tech-investing-report-2018/.
Alston, J.M. "Spillovers." Australian Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics
     46(3)(September 2002): 315­346.
Alston, J.M. "Reflections on Agricultural R&D, Productivity, and the Data Constraint:
     Unfinished Business, Unsettled Issues." American Journal of Agricultural Economics
     100(2)(2018): 392­413. doi:10.1093/ajae/aax094
Alston, J.M. "Woke Farm and Food Policies in the Post-Truth Era: Calamitous Consequences for
     People and the Planet." Unpublished paper prepared for the Festshrift conference in honor
     of Gordon Rausser. University of California, Davis, October 2019.
Alston, J.M., M.A. Andersen, J.S. James and P.G. Pardey. "The Economic Returns to U.S.
     Public Agricultural Research." American Journal of Agricultural Economics 93(5)(2011):
     1257­1277.
Alston, J.M., M.A. Andersen, J.S. James and P.G. Pardey. Persistence Pays: U.S. Agricultural
     Productivity Growth and the Benefits from Public R&D Spending. New York: Springer,
     2010.
Alston, J.M., S. Dehmer and P.G. Pardey. "International Initiatives in Agricultural R&D: The
     Changing Fortunes of the CGIAR." Chapter 12 in P.G. Pardey, J.M. Alston and R.R.
     Piggott, eds. Agricultural R&D in the Developing World: Too Little, Too Late?
     Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute, 2006.
Alston, J.M. and P.G. Pardey. "Agriculture in the Global Economy." Journal of Economic
     Perspectives 28,1(2014): 121­146.
Alston, J.M. and P.G. Pardey. "Transforming Traditional Agriculture Redux." Chapter in C.
     Monga and J. Lin, eds. The Oxford Handbook of Structural Transformation. Oxford:
     Oxford University Press, 2019.
Alston, J.M., P.G. Pardey and X. Rao. The Payoff to Investing in CGIAR Research. Research
     Report. Washington DC: SoAR Foundation, 2020 (forthcoming).
Alston, J.M. and O. Sambucci. "Grapes in the World Economy." Chapter 1 of Dario Cantu and
     Andrew M. Walker, eds, The Grape Genome, for the Springer Publishers Compendium of
     Plant Genomes, 2019.
Andersen, M.A., J.M. Alston, P.G. Pardey, and A. Smith. "A Century of U.S. Farm Productivity
    Growth: A Surge Then a Slowdown." American Journal of Agricultural Economics
    100(4)(2018): 1072­90. doi.org/10.1093/ajae/aay023

                                                  39
Baltes, N.J., J. Gil-Humanes and D.F. Voytas. "Genome Engineering and Agriculture:
     Opportunities and Challenges." Chapter 1 in D.P Weeks and B. Yang eds. Gene Editing in
     Plants. Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science, Volume 149 Amsterdam:
     Elsevier, 2017. Available at https://www.sciencedirect.com/bookseries/progress-in-
     molecular-biology-and-translational-science
BlueRiver Technology. "Our See and Spray Machines," 2020. Available at
     http://smartmachines.bluerivertechnology.com/.
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). National Income and Product Accounts Tables. Table
     1.3.5. Gross Value Added by Sector. Downloaded February 14, 2017.
     https://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?ReqID=9&step=1#reqid=9&step=3&isuri=1&904
     =1929&903=24&906=a&905=1000&910=x&911=0
Carson, R. Silent Spring. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1962.
Chai, Y, P.G. Pardey, C. Chan-Kang, J. Huang, K. Lee and W. Dong. "Passing the Food and
     Agricultural R&D Buck? The United States and China." Food Policy 86 (2019)
     doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2019.101729.
Claassen, R., M. Bowman, J. McFadden, D. Smith and S. Wallande. Tillage Intensity and
     Conservation Cropping in the United States, EIB-197, U.S. Department of Agriculture,
     Economic Research Service, 2018.
Clancy, M., P. Heisey, Y. Ji, G. Moschini. "The Roots of Agricultural Innovation: Patent
     Evidence of Knowledge Spillovers." Chapter in P. Moser, ed. Economics of Research and
     Innovation in Agriculture, NBER conference volume in process, March 12, 2020.
Coase, R.H. "The Nature of the Firm." Economica 4(16)(1937): 386­405.
Cooper, M., C. Gho, R. Leafgren, T. Tang, and C. Messina. 2014. "Breeding Drought-Tolerant
    Maize Hybrids for the U.S. Corn Belt: Discovery to Product," Journal of Experimental
    Botany 65(21): 6191-204.
Dehmer, S.P., P.G. Pardey, J.M. Beddow and Y. Chai. "Reshuffling the Global R&D Deck,
    1980-2050." PLOS ONE (March 2019): https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0213801.
Deloitte Centre for Health Solutions. "Measuring the Return on Pharmaceutical Innovation 2014:
     Turning a Corner?" Deloitte LLP (United Kingdom), 2014.
Dixon, R. Hybrid Corn Revisited." Econometrica 48(6)(1980): 1451-61.
Donley, N. "The USA Lags Behind other Agricultural Nations in Banning Harmful Pesticides."
     Environmental Health 18(Article 44)(2019) 18:44 https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-019-
     0488-0.
Erickson, B., J. Lowenberg-DeBoer, and J. Bradford. 2017 Precision Agriculture Dealership
     Survey. Lafayette, Indiana: Departments of Agricultural Economics and Agronomy, Purdue
     University. December 2017.
Feder, G. and D.L. Umali. "The Adoption of Agricultural Innovations: A Review."
     Technological Forecasting and Social Change 43(1993): 215-239.




                                                 40
Fennimore, S., and M. Cutulle. "Robotic Weeders Can Improve Weed Control Options for
     Specialty Crops." Pest Management Science 75(7)(2019): 1767­1774.
     https://doi.org/10.1002/ps.5337
Fernandez-Cornejo, J., S. Wechsler, M. Livingston and L. Mitchell Genetically Engineered
     Crops in the United States. USDA Economic Research Report No. 162. Washington, D.C.:
     United States Department of Agriculture, 2014.
Filmer, A. "Automated Weeders are Attracting More Interest: Steve Fennimore Explains."
     Farms.Com News September 26, 2019. www.farms.com/news/automated-weeders-are-
     attracting-more-interest-steve-fennimore-explains-149734.aspx
Fuglie, K.O. and D. Schimmelpfennig, eds. Public-Private Collaboration in Agricultural
     Research: New Institutions and Economic Implications. Ames: Iowa State University
     Press, 2000.
Gelvin, S.B. "Agrobacterium-Mediated Plant Transformation: The Biology Behind the "Gene-
     Jockeying" Tool." Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 67(1)(2003): 16­37. doi:
     10.1128/MMBR.67.1.16­37.2003
Glover, M., M. Buxton, S. Guthrie, S. Hanney, A. Pollitt and J. Grant. "Estimating the Returns to
     UK Publicly Funded Cancer-related Research in Terms of the Net Value of Improved
     Health Outcomes." BMC Medicine 12, 99(2014). doi.org/10.1186/1741-7015-12-99.
Gordon, R.J. "Interpreting the `One Big Wave' in U.S. Long-Term Productivity Growth." NBER
    Working Paper 7752. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2000.
Gordon, R.J. The Rise and Fall of American Growth. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
    2016.
Graff, G.D., F. de Figueiredo Silva, and D. Zilberman. "Venture Capital and the Transformation
     of Private R&D for Agriculture." Chapter in P. Moser, ed. Economics of Research and
     Innovation in Agriculture, NBER conference volume in process, March 12, 2020.
Griliches, Z.: "Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change,"
      Econometrica 25 (4)(1957): 501­522.
Griliches, Z. "The Sources of Measured Productivity Growth: United States Agriculture, 1940­
      60." Journal of Political Economy 71(4)(1963): 331­346.
Hall, B.H., J. Mairesse and P. Mohnen. "Measuring the Returns to R&D." chapter 24 in B. Hall
      and N. Rosenberg eds., Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, Volume 2. Amsterdam:
      Elsevier, 2010.
Hallauer, A.R. and J.B. Miranda. Quantitative Genetics in Maize Breeding. Ames: Iowa State
     University Press, 1981.
HERG (Health Economics Research Group), OHE (Office of Health Economics) and RAND
   Europe. Medical Research: What's it Worth? Estimating the Economic Benefits from
   Medical Research in the UK. London: UK Evaluation Forum, 2008. Available at
   www.mrc.ac.uk/publications/browse/medical-research-whats-it-worth/




                                                   41
Hurley, T.M, X. Rao and P.G. Pardey. "Re-examining the Reported Rates of Return to Food and
     Agricultural Research and Development." American Journal of Agricultural Economics
     96(5)(2014):1492-1504.
Janzen, T. "Do Farmers Still Care About Ag Data Privacy?" Janzen Ag Law, 2019. Available at
     www.aglaw.us/janzenaglaw/2019/1/3/farmers-care-about-data.
Jia, X., A. Khandelwal1, D.J. Mulla, P.G. Pardey, V. Kumar. "Bringing Automated, Remote-
      Sensed, Machine Learning Methods to Monitoring Crop Landscapes at Scale." Agricultural
      Economics 50 (S1)(2019): 41-50.
Johnston, L. and S.H. Williamson. What Was the U.S. GDP Then? MeasuringWorth.
     Downloaded January 2017 from https://www.measuringworth.com/datasets/usgdp/.
Joglekar, A.B., P.G. Pardey and U. Wood-Sichra. Where in the World are Crops Grown?
     HarvestChoice Brief. St. Paul, Minnesota and Washington, D.C.; University of Minnesota
     and International Food Policy Research Institute, 2016.
Jorgenson, D.W. and F.M. Gollop. "Productivity Growth in U.S. Agriculture: A Postwar
     Perspective." American Journal of Agricultural Economics 74 (3)(1992): 745-50.
Kalaitzandonakes, N., J.M. Alston, and K.J. Bradford. "Compliance Costs for Regulatory
     Approval of New Biotech Crops." Chapter 3 of R.E. Just, J.M. Alston, and D. Zilberman
     (eds.) Regulating Agricultural Biotechnology: Economics and Policy. New York: Springer-
     Verlag, 2006.
Lee, K., P.G. Pardey, S. Miller and S. Dehmer. "An Examination of Private (Sectoral and Firm-
     Level) Investments in U.S. Food and Agricultural R&D, 1950-2014." InSTePP Working
     Paper. St. Paul; University of Minnesota, Department of Applied Economics, 2020 (in
     process).
Lely. "Milking: More Milk in the Tank with Less Effort," 2020. Available at
      https://www.lely.com/us/solutions/milking/
Lin, A.Y.S. "The Modified Internal Rate of Return and Investment Criterion." Engineering
      Economist 21 (4)(1976): 237­47.
Lin, J.Y. "Rural Reforms and Agricultural Growth in China." American Economic Review
      82(1)(1992): 34-51
Lowenberg-DeBoer, J. and B. Erickson. "Setting the Record Straight on Precision Agriculture
    Adoption." Agronomy Journal 111(2019):1­18. doi:10.2134/agronj2018.12.0779.
MacDonald, J.M., R.A. Hoppe and D. Newton. Three Decades of Consolidation in U.S.
    Agriculture, EIB-189, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, March
    2018.
McFadden, J., D. Smith, S. Wechsler and S. Wallander. Development, Adoption, and
    Management of Drought-Tolerant Corn in the United States, EIB-204, U.S. Department of
    Agriculture, Economic Research Service, 2019.
National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine. Science Breakthroughs to Advance
     Food and Agricultural Research by 2030. Washington DC, National Academies Press,
     2019.

                                                  42
National Science Board. Science and Engineering Indicators 2018. NSB-2018-1. Alexandria,
     VA: National Science Foundation. Available at https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/indicators/.
     2018.
National Science Foundation (NSF), National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics.
     National Patterns of R&D Resources (annual series). 2019. Downloaded from
     https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2018/nsb20181/data/appendix on Dec 27th 2019.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), Frascati Manual 2015:
   Guidelines for Collecting and Reporting Data on Research and Experimental
   Development, The Measurement of Scientific, Technological and Innovation Activities.
   Paris: OECD Publishing, 2015.
Okrent, A.M., and J.M. Alston. Demand for Food in the United States: A Review of Literature,
     Evaluation of Previous Estimates and Presentation of New Estimates of Demand. Giannini
     Foundation Monograph Series No. 48, Giannini Foundation of Agricultural Economics,
     Berkeley, CA, 2011.
Okrent, A.M., and J.M. Alston. The Demand for Disaggregated Food-Away-from-Home and
     Food-at-Home Products in the United States. Economic Research Report no. 139,
     Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture ­ Economic Research Service, 2012.
Okrent, A.M., H. Elitzak, T. Park, and S. Rehkamp. Measuring the Value of the U.S. Food
     System: Revisions to the Food Expenditure Series, TB-1948, U.S. Department of
     Agriculture, Economic Research Service, 2018.
Olmstead, A.L. and P.L. Martin. "The Agricultural Mechanization Controversy." Science
    227(4687)(1985): 601­606. doi:10.1126/science.227.4687.601
Olmstead, A.L. and P.W. Rhode. Creating Abundance: Biological Innovation and American
    Agricultural Development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Olmstead, A.L. and P.W. Rhode. "The Red Queen and the Hard Reds: Productivity Growth in
    American Wheat, 1800-1940." Journal of Economic History 62 (4)(2002): 929-966.
Perry, E.D., G. Moschini and D.A. Hennessy. "Testing for Complementarity: Glyphosate
     Tolerant Soybeans and Conservation Tillage." American Journal of Agricultural
     Economics 98(3)(2016): 765­784. doi: 10.1093/ajae/aaw001
Pardey, P.G. and J.M. Alston. "Unpacking the Agricultural Black Box: The Rise and Fall of
     American Farm Productivity Growth." InSTePP Working Paper. St. Paul; University of
     Minnesota, Department of Applied Economics, 2019 (in process).
Pardey, P.G., M.A. Andersen, B.J. Craig and A.K.A. Acquaye. "Primary Data Documentation:
     U.S. Agricultural Input, Output, and Productivity Series, 1949­2002, Version 4." St. Paul:
     InSTePP, University of Minnesota, 2006. Available at
     https://www.instepp.umn.edu/products/instepp-primary-data-documentation-us-
     agricultural-input-output-and-productivity-series.
Pardey, P.G., J.M. Alston and C. Chan-Kang. Public Food and Agricultural Research in the
     United States: The Rise and Decline of Public Investments, and Policies for Renewal.
     AGree Report. Washington D.C.: AGree, 2013


                                                  43
Pardey, P.G., J.M. Alston and V.W. Ruttan. "The Economics of Innovation and Technical
     Change in Agriculture." Chapter 22 in B.H. Hall and N. Rosenberg, eds. Handbook of the
     Economics of Innovation, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2010.
Pardey, P.G., J.M. Alston, J.E. Christian and S. Fan. Hidden Harvest: U.S. Benefits from
     International Research Aid, Food Policy Report, Washington, D.C.: International Food
     Policy Research Institute, September 1996.
Pardey, P.G., J.M. Alston, C. Chan-Kang, T.M. Hurley, R.S. Andrade, S.P. Dehmer, K. Lee, and
     X. Rao. "The Shifting Structure of Agricultural R&D: Worldwide Investment Patterns and
     Payoffs." Chapter 1 in N. Kalaitzandonakes, E.G. Carayannis, E. Grigoroudis, and S.
     Rozakis, eds. From Agriscience to Agribusiness: Theories, Policies and Practices in
     Technology Transfer and Commercialization. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2018.
Pardey, P.G. and J.M. Beddow. Agricultural Innovation: The United States in a Changing
     Global Reality. CCGA Report. Chicago: Chicago Council on Global Affairs, 2013.
Pardey, P.G., C. Chan-Kang, J.M. Beddow and S.M. Dehmer. 2016. "InSTePP International
     Innovation Accounts: Research and Development Spending, Version 3.5 (Food and
     Agricultural R&D Series)-Documentation." St. Paul, MN: International Science and
     Technology Practice and Policy (InSTePP). Available at
     www.instepp.umn.edu/sites/instepp.umn.edu/files/product/downloadable/InSTePP%20Inter
     national%20Innovation%20Accounts-R%26D%20ver3.5%282SEPT2016%29.pdf.
Pardey, P.G., C. Chan-Kang, S.P Dehmer and J.M. Beddow. "Agricultural R&D is on the
     Move." Nature 15(537)(2016): 301-303.
Pardey, P., B. Koo, J. Drew, J, Horwich and C. Nottenburg. "The Evolving Landscape of Plant
     Varietal Rights in the United States, 1930-2008." Nature Biotechnology 31(1)(2013): 25-
     29.
Pardey, P.G., J. Roseboom and J.R. Anderson. "Regional Perspectives on National Agricultural
     Research." Chapter 7 in P.G. Pardey, J. Roseboom, and J.R. Anderson, eds. Agricultural
     Research Policy: International Quantitative Perspectives, Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press, 1991.
Pollan, M. The Omnivore's Dilemma: A Natural History of Four Meals. New York: Penguin,
     2007.
Qaim, M. Genetically Modified Crops and Agricultural Development. New York: Palgrave-
    Macmillan, 2016.
Qaim, M. "Role of New Plant Breeding Technologies for Food Security and Sustainable
    Agricultural Development." Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy (2020)
    https://doi.org/10.1002/aepp.13044
Rao, X., T.M. Hurley and P.G. Pardey. "Are Agricultural R&D Returns Declining and
     Development Dependent? World Development 122(2019a): 27-37.
Rao, X., T.M. Hurley and P.G. Pardey. "Recalibrating the Reported Returns to Agricultural
     R&D: What if We All Heeded Griliches?" InSTePP Working Paper P19-07. St. Paul;
     University of Minnesota, Department of Applied Economics, 2019b.
Ruttan, V.W. Agricultural Research Policy. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1982.

                                                 44
Rausser, G., D. Zilberman, and G. Kahn. "An Alternative Paradigm for Food Production,
     Distribution, and Consumption: A Noneconomist's Perspective." Annual Review of
     Resource Economics 7(2015): 309­331. doi.org/10.1146/annurev-resource-100913-012549
Rausser, G., D. Zilberman, and S. Sexton. "The Economics of the Naturalist Food Paradigm,"
     Annual Review of Resource Economics 11(2019): 217­236. doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
     resource-100516-053623
Rasmussen, W.D. "The Impact of Technological Change on American Agriculture, 1862­1962."
    Journal of Economic History 22(4)(1962): 578-591.
Saitone, T., R. Sexton and D. Sumner. "What Happens When Food Marketers Require
     Restrictive Farming Practices?" American Journal of Agricultural Economics 97(4)
     (2015):1021­1043.
Saksena, M.J., A.M. Okrent, T.D. Anekwe, C. Cho, C. Dicken, A. Effland, H. Elitzak, J. Guthrie,
     K.S. Hamrick, J. Hyman, J. Young. America's Eating Habits: Food Away From Home.
     Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture ­ Economic Research Service, 2018.
Sexton, R.J. and T. Xia. "Increasing Concentration in the Agricultural Supply Chain:
     Implications for Market Power and Sector Performance." Annual Review of Resource
     Economics 10(2018): 229­51.
Schimmelpfennig, D. Farm Profits and Adoption of Precision Agriculture. Economic Research
     Report Number 217. Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Agriculture, 2016.
Schimmelpfennig, D. "Crop Production Costs, Profits, and Ecosystem Stewardship with
     Precision Agriculture. Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics 50(1)(2018): 81­
     103
Schimmelpfennig, D. and R Ebel. "Sequential Adoption and Cost Savings from Precision
     Agriculture." Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics 41(1)(2016): 97­115.
Sumner, D.A. "American Farms Keep Growing: Size, Productivity, and Policy." Journal of
    Economic Perspectives 28(1)(2014): 147­166.
Taylor, N.J. and C.M. Fauquet. "Microparticle Bombardment as a Tool in Plant Science and
     Agricultural Biotechnology." DNA and Cell Biology 21 (12)(2002): 963-977.
Teralytic. "Soil Probes to Soil Insight." 2020. Available at https://teralytic.com/how-it-
     works.html.
United Nations Statistics Division. UN National Accounts Main Aggregates Database. New
     York: United Nations. 2017. Downloaded on January 25th 2017 from
     http://unstats.un.org/unsd/snaama/dnlList.asp. Data was uploaded by the UN on December
     2016.
USDA-CRIS (Current Research Information System). "Unpublished 2015 CRIS data files,
   authors extraction." Washington, D.C.: United States Department of Agriculture, Current
   Research Information System, 2020.
USDA-ERS (U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service). Economic
   Indicators of the Farm Sector: Production and Efficiency Statistics, 1981. ECIFS 1-3,
   Washington, D.C.: USDA, Economic Research Service, 1983.

                                                     45
USDA-NASS. Farm Producers. 2017 Census of Agriculture Highlights. Washington, DC:
   United States Department of Agriculture, 2019. Available at
   https://www.nass.usda.gov/Publications/Highlights/2019/2017Census_Farm_Producers.pdf
USDA-NASS. Census of Agriculture. United States, Summary and State Data. Washington, DC:
   United States Department of Agriculture. (various years). Available at
   http://agcensus.mannlib.cornell.edu/AgCensus/
USDA-ERS (U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service). Food Dollar Series.
   Washington, D.C.: USDA, Economic Research Service, March 2019.
   www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-dollar-series/.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1969 Census of Agriculture ­ Volume II
     General Report, Chapter 1 General Information, Procedures for Collection, Processing,
     Classification. U.S. Department of Commerce. Washington, DC: Government Printing
     Office. 1973 U.S.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. 1974 Census of Agriculture ­ United
     States Summary and State Data, Volume I Part 51. U.S. Department of Commerce.
     Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. 1977.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census. Census of Agriculture. United States,
     Summary and State Data. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. (various years)
     Available at http://agcensus.mannlib.cornell.edu/AgCensus/.
Van Eenennaam, A.L. "Application of Genome Editing in Farm Animals: Cattle." Transgenic
     Research 28 (2019):93­100.
Wight, A.J. "EU Gene-Editing Rule Squeezes Science." Nature 563 (2018):15.
Willett, W., J. Rockström, B. Loken, M. Springmann, T. Lang, S. Vermeulen, T. Garnett, D.
     Tilman, F. DeClerck, A. Wood, M. Jonell, M. Clark, L.J. Gordon, J. Fanzo, C. Hawkes, R.
     Zurayk, J.A. Rivera, W. De Vries, L.M. Sibanda, and A. Afshin. "Food in the
     Anthropocene: The EAT­Lancet Commission on Healthy Diets from Sustainable Food
     Systems." The Lancet 393.10170 (2019): 447­92.
World Bank. World Development Indicators Online. Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2017.
    Downloaded January 25th 2017 from http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-
    development-indicators. (last updated January 3rd 2017)
Wright, B.D. "Grand Missions of Agricultural Innovation." Research Policy 41(2012) 1716­
    1728. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.04.021
Wright, B.D. and P.G. Pardey. "The Evolving Rights to Intellectual Property Protection in the
    Agricultural Biosciences." International Journal for Technology and Globalization 2(1/2)
    (2006): 12-29.




                                                 46
Figure 1: U.S. farm area and farm numbers, 1850­2017

 Millionsoffarms                                                                            Millionsquaremiles
8                                                                                                              2.00
                                                                              Landinfarms
                                                                              (right-hand axis)
7                                                                                                              1.75
                   Numberoffarms
                   (left-hand axis)
6                                                                                                              1.50

5                                                                                                              1.25

4                                                                                                              1.00

3                                                                                                              0.75

2                                                                                                              0.50

1                                                                                                              0.25

0                                                                                                              0.00
    1850   1865     1880     1895      1910     1925     1940      1955     1970     1985        2000   2017          
Sources: Pardey and Alston (2019, Figure 4).
Notes: For number of farms, missing intercensal values were estimated by linear interpolation.
                                    




                                                        47
Figure 2: Labor use in U.S. agriculture, 1949­2012
Panel a: Structure of labor

  Billions ofhours                                                                                             Percentage
  25                                                                                                                   35
                                                             Hiredshare (right-handaxis)                                 30
  20
                                                                                                                         25
  15                                                                                                                     20
                          Operator                   Total                                                               15
  10
                                                                                                                         10
     5                               Hired
                                                                                                                         5
     0                         Family                                                                                    0
          1949               1957            1965            1973           1981          1989      1997       2005               
Panel b: Labor and other cost shares

  Percentage
   45
                              Labor                                                          Material


    30
                                                                     Land

    15
                                             Capital

          0
              1949            1957            1965            1973           1981           1989        1997      2005                   
Panel c: Part time farm operators

              80                                                                                                      160

                                                                                    Numberofdaysworkedoff
              60                                                                                                      120
                                                                                    farm peroperator
                                                                                                                              numberofdays




              40                      Shareofoperators                                                                80
percent




                                      workingfulltime

              20                                                                                                      40


              0                                                                                                       0
                   1930       1940           1950       1960          1970         1980      1990       2000   2010
                                                                                                                                             
Sources: Pardey and Alston (2019, Figure 6).
Notes: In all census years up to 1997, the reported number of operators was set equal to the total number of farms.
From 2002 onwards the census reported information on the total number of operators. If a farm had more than one
operator, it was counted accordingly.


                                                                             48
In all census years up to 1997, data are reported in terms of operators by days worked off-farm cohorts (e.g., 0 days,
1­49 days, 50­99 days etc.). For 2002, 2007, and 2012, data are reported in terms of cohorts of days worked off-
farm by the principal operator. In 1974, data were collected only for individual or family operations (sole
proprietorships) and partnerships. Thus, corporations and other types of organizations (e.g., cooperative, prison
farms, grazing associations, and Indian reservations) were excluded (for more details, see U.S. Bureau of Census,
1977, Appendix A, page A4). In all other years, data on days worked off-farm were collected for all types of farms.
To calculate the average number of days worked off-farm per operator, we proceeded as follows. First, the total
number of days worked off-farm in each cohort was estimated by multiplying the mid-point number of days worked
off farm in each cohort (e.g., 25 days for 1-49 days, 75 days for 50-99 days etc. and 200 days for 200 and more) by
the corresponding total number of operators. The total number of days worked off farms was obtained by summing
the estimated number of days worked off-farm across cohorts. The number of days worked off-farm per operator is
given by the total number of days worked off-farm divided by the total number of operators.
Data for intercensal years were estimated by linear interpolation.
The total number of operators working full time was estimated by subtracting the number of operators working off-
farms from the total number of operators.                                   




                                                          49
   Table 1: Growth rates in U.S. agricultural input, output, and productivity 1910­2007

                                                                  ProductivityIndexes
      Period                         Input     Output
                                                              MFP      Labor         Land      
                                                        percentperyear                         
      1910­1950                       0.46       1.47         1.01       2.16         0.50     
      1950­1990                      -0.21       1.76         1.97       4.07         1.92     
      1990­2007                       0.31       1.39         1.08       1.90         2.04     
                                                                                               
      1910­2007                       0.16       1.58         1.42       2.90         1.35     
     Notes: All figures are annual averages of year-to-year changes.
     Source: Growth rates of productivity indexes were calculated by the authors using the InSTePP Production
     Accounts, version 5, augmented with data from USDA-ERS (1983). See Pardey and Alston (2019).
                                  




                                                        50
Figure 3: Top 4, 8, and 20 firms' shares of U.S. grocery store sales, 1992­2016

                    80                                                                        700


                    70                                                                        600
                                       Top20
                    60
                                                                                              500
                                                                      Top8
                    50




                                                                                                    billionUS$
   percentofsales




                                                                                              400
                    40

                                                                 Top4                         300
                    30

                                                                                              200
                    20


                    10                                                                        100
                                                 Sales

                    0                                                                         0
                         1992   1998             2004               2010               2016
                                                                                                                 

Sources: USDA, Economic Research Service, using data from U.S. Census Bureau, Monthly Retail Trade Survey,
company annual reports, and industry sources. Sales based on North American Industry Classification System
(NAICS).
                                  




                                                    51
Figure 4: Food expenditures at home and away from home, 1988 and 2018




                                                                                                              

Sources: Calculated by USDA, Economic Research Service, from various sources. See details in Okrent et al.
(2018).
Notes: Nominal 1988 values inflated to 2018 values using CPI data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics:
https://www.bls.gov/data/inflation_calculator.htm


                                   




                                                       52
Figure 5: GERD versus agGERD trends, 1950­2015

Panel a: GERD
                 500                                                                                       76

                 450
                                                                                                           74
                 400                 ShareofPrivateintotal
                                                                                                           72
                 350                 R&D(RHSaxis)
                                                                                                           70




                                                                                                                Percent
                 300
billion2011US$




                 250                                                                                       68

                 200                                             PublicR&D                                 66
                 150
                                                                                                           64
                 100                                                                PrivateR&D
                                                                                                           62
                 50

                  0                                                                                        60
                       1953   1959   1965   1971   1977   1983        1989   1995     2001   2007   2013
                                                                                                                          
Panel b: AgGERD
                  16                                                                                       80


                  14                                                                                       70


                  12                                                                                       60
                              ShareofAgPrivatein
                  10          totalAgR&D(RHSaxis)                                                          50


                                                                                                                Percent
billion2011US$




                   8                                                                                       40


                   6                                              PublicR&D                                30


                   4                                                                                       20

                                                                               PrivateR&D
                   2                                                                                       10


                   0                                                                                       0
                       1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                                                                                                          
Sources: GERD data are from NSF (2019); AgGERD data are from InSTePP International Innovation Accounts:
Research and Development Spending (2019).
Notes: Public GERD include R&D expenditures from federal, non-federal, higher education and other non-profit
organization.
                               


                                                                 53
Figure 6: The intensity of investment in GERD versus agGERD, 1950­2015

Panel a: GERD, BERD, and PERD as a share of GDP
              3.0

                                                                                        GERD
              2.5



              2.0
   Percent




              1.5
                                                                                                 BERD


              1.0
                                                                                                 PERD
              0.5



              0.0
                    1950    1955    1960    1965      1970    1975    1980       1985   1990   1995    2000    2005   2010   2015
                                                                                                                                    

Panel b: AgGERD, AgBERD, and AgPERD as a share of AgGDP
             10

                                                                                           AgGERD
             8



             6
                                                                                                      AgBERD
   Percent




             4


                                                                                                         AgPERD
             2



             0
                  1950     1955    1960    1965      1970    1975    1980    1985       1990   1995    2000    2005   2010   2015
                                                                                                                                    
Sources: GERD (total), BERD (business) and PERD (Public) R&D spending data are from NSF (2018); AgGERD,
AgBERD and AgPERD data are from InSTePP International Innovation Accounts: Research and Development
Spending (2019); GDP data are authors' compilation based on data from UN (2017), World Bank (2017) and
Johnston and Williamson (2017); AgGDP data are authors' compilation based on data from UN (2017), and BEA
(2017).
                                                  

                                                                            54
Table 2: Company sales and R&D intensity, 2014/15

                                                                           R&D
                                                         Sales                                  R&DIntensity
                                                                       Expenditures
                                                            (millionsofdollars)                 (percentage)
   
   ManufacturingIndustries                            5,358,542              235,776                   4.4
     Chemicals                                        1,023,512               68,575                   6.7
           Pharmaceuticalsandmedicines                  456,424               58,879                  12.9
           Others                                       567,088                9,640                   1.7
     Machinery                                          360,719               13,347                   3.7
     Automobiles,trailersandparts                       795,662               19,096                   2.4
     Others                                           1,901,685               28,525                   1.5
    
   Non-manufacturingindustries                        3,691,358              118,123                    3.2
     Information                                      1,105,520               65,226                    5.9
     Financeandinsurance                                709,990                5,680                    0.8
     Others                                           1,453,882               10,177                    0.7
    
   Allindustries                                      9,049,901              352,946                    3.9
    
   FoodandAgriculture                                    767,857                9,447                   1.2
      Food                                               554,237                3,821                   0.7
      Agriculture(machinery,chemicalsand
    biology)                                             213,620                5,626                   2.6
Sources: Manufacturing, non-manufacturing and all industries data are from National Science Board (2018, Table
4.10); Food and Agriculture data are from Lee et al. (2020) taken from InSTePP International Innovation Accounts:
Research and Development Spending (2019)
Notes: Sales from manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries includes domestic net sales of companies that
perform or fund R&D, transfers to foreign subsidiaries, and export sales to foreign companies; excludes
intracompany transfers and sales by foreign subsidiaries. R&D intensity from manufacturing and non-manufacturing
industries represent domestic R&D paid for by the company and others and performed by the company divided by
domestic net sales.
                                   




                                                       55
Table 3: Returns to agricultural R&D

                                                         Numberof                          Values
                                                                           10th                    90%
                                      Units           Studies Estimates  percentile  Mean Median percentile
ReportedData                                                                                                
UnitedStates                                                                                                
Internalrateofreturn                  %peryear            80       986         12.5      63.0       31.9   101.2
Benefit-costratio                     Ratio               21       312          0.5      19.3       12.0    45.0
Restofworld                                                                                                     
Internalrateofreturn                  %peryear           381     1,641         16.0      57.6       41.2   101.0
Benefit-costratio                     Ratio              147       487          1.7      31.4       12.1    69.6
                                                                                                                
ImputedData(d=5%)                                                                                               
UnitedStates                                                                                                    
Benefit-costratio                     Ratio               66       796            2.1    34.4        7.5    44.6
Modifiedinternalrateofreturn          %peryear            66       796            7.7    11.4       12.3    19.2
Restofworld                                                                                                     
Benefit-costratio                     Ratio              345     1,330            2.6    25.7        9.0    57.3
Modifiedinternalrateofreturn          %peryear           345     1,330            8.4    13.6       13.0    20.2
Sources: Derived from InSTePP compilation used by Rao et al. (2019 a and b).
                                  




                                                       56
Figure 7: American agricultural mechanization, 1867­2012

Million                                                                                                 Million
30                                                                                                            6


25                                                                                                             5


20                                                                                                             4
                                                                      Tractors(right-handaxis)

15                                                                                                             3

                 EquineStock(left-handaxis)
10                                                                                                             2


                                                                        Combines(right-handaxis)
   5                                                                                                           1


   0                                                                                                           0
       1867   1879   1891     1903      1915   1927     1939     1951    1963    1975   1987     1999   2012       
Sources: Pardey and Alston (2019, Figure 5)
Notes: See Alston et al. (2010, page 29) for notes on equine stock.
                                     




                                                         57
Figure 8: Waves of technological adoption in U.S. agriculture

Panel a: Mechanical, chemical and conventional genetic improvement technologies
          100
                   Wheatvarieties                                         Tractors
                   releasedafter1920

           80

                       Automobiles
                                                                        Motortrucks
           60
percent




                            Telephone                                                                                 GE
           40                                              Fertilizer                                                 soybeans
                                                           use
                                                                                                                   GEcorn
           20                                                                              GE
                  Electricity
                                                                                           cotton
                                                       Semidwarf          Semidwarf
                                                       wheat              rice
                                       HybridCorn
           0
                1920            1934         1948           1962            1976          1990            2004              2018 

Panel b: Modern genetic transformation technologies and precision agriculture technologies
      100

                                                           GEsoybeans
          80
                                                                                      GEcorn
                                       GEcotton
                                                                                           Yieldmonitor          Autosteer
          60
                                                                                           w/GPS
percent




                                                                                   Grid/zonesoil
          40                                                                       sampling
                                                                                                                   VRTnutrient
                                                                                                                   application
                                                                                               Satelliteoraerial
          20
                                                                                               imagery


                                                                                        VRTseedingprescription
           0
                1990               1995             2000                2005              2010               2015                
Sources: Mechanical, infrastructure and fertilizer data were developed by authors based on estimates from the U.S.
Census of Agriculture (Bureau of Census and USDA-NASS, various years). Data for intercensus years were
linearly interpolated. Data on hybrid corn are from Alston et al. (2010); GE soybeans, GE corn, and GE cotton data
are from Alston et al. (2010) and USDA-NASS "June Agricultural Survey" available at www.ers.usda.gov/data-
products/adoption-of-genetically-engineered-crops-in-the-us/. Semidwarf wheat and rice areas and area of wheat
varieties released after 1920 are unpublished data from InSTePP. Estimated precision agriculture technologies
cropland area shares are from Erickson et al. (2017).
                                                                   58
Notes: For automobiles, motor trucks, tractors, electricity, and telephone, the data represent the shares of farms
using the designated technology. For hybrid corn, semidwarf rice, semidwarf wheat, GE soybeans and GE corn, the
data represent the shares of area planted to the designated technology. For fertilizer, the data represent the share of
cropland with fertilizer application. For precision agriculture technologies (autosteer, yield monitor with GPS,
grid/zone soil sampling, satellite or areal imagery, VRT nutrient application, and VRT seeding prescription) data
represent the share of the market area of various precision ag technologies used by farmers.
Tractors: From 1920 to 1945, tractors include wheel, crawler, and garden; from 1950 to 1969, tractors include wheel
and crawler; from 1978 to 1997, tractors include wheel tractor only; from 2002 to 2012, tractors include wheel and
crawler.
Automobiles: Details concerning the sudden and sustained drop in the number of automobiles in 1969 are reported
in US Department of Commerce, Bureau of Census (1973, p. 11).
Fertilizer: From 1954 to 1997 fertilizer do not include lime whereas from 2002 to 2012 lime is included. Manure is
excluded in all years. From 1978 to 2012, acres on which fertilizers were applied are reported for cropland only,
pastureland, and total (i.e., cropland and pastureland). In 1959, 1964, 1969 and 1974 however, data were reported
for pastureland and total acres fertilized. Thus, acres of cropland fertilized were estimated for those years by
subtracting acres of pastureland fertilized from total acres fertilized. In 1954, only data on total acres fertilized was
available. Thus, we estimated the area of cropland fertilized in 1954 by applying the share of cropland fertilized in
1959 to the 1954 cropland area.

                                     




                                                           59
Appendix Figure A-1: Quantity indexes of output, input, and MFP, U.S. agriculture, 1910­
2007

   Index(1910=100)

   550
                       Annual average%change,
                       1910-2007
   500                 Output       1.58
                       Input        0.16
   450                 MFP          1.42

   400


   350
                                                                                                   MFP
                                                                    Output
   300


   250


   200


   150


   100
                                                                                    Input
    50
         1910   1918    1926   1934    1942    1950   1958   1966    1974    1982   1990    1998    2006
                                                                                                           
Sources: Pardey and Alston (2019, Figure 1).
                                  




                                                      60
Appendix Table A-1: Food expenditures at home and away from home, 1988 and 2018

                                                1988               1988            2018
                                              (Nominal)         (Inflated)*
   FAH                                                                               
             GroceryStores                       177.9              385.9         460.0
                                                                                        
             Warehouseclubsand                       5.1                11.1      168.0
             supercenters                                                              
                                                                                       
             Other                                 68.4                148.4      153.0
                                                                                       
             Total                                251.3                545.4      780.9
                                                                                       
   FAFH                                                                                
             Full-servicerestaurants               73.1                158.7      337.8
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
             Limited-service                       72.2                156.7      340.2
             restaurants                                                               
                                                                                       
             Other                                 76.7                166.5      252.6
                                                                                       
             Total                                222.1                481.9      930.6
                                                                                       
*Calculated using CPI data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics:
https://www.bls.gov/data/inflation_calculator.htm
Source: Calculated by USDA, Economic Research Service, from various sources. See Okrent et al. (2018) for
details.






                                                        61
Appendix Table A-2: Regional growth in U.S. agricultural inputs, outputs, and
productivity

                     United
                                     Pacific   Mountain N.Plains      S.Plains    Central Southeast Northeast
                     States
                                                     annualaveragegrowthrate
AllInputs            -0.11            0.82        0.45         0.16     -0.12       -0.27      -0.41       -0.84
  Land               -0.10            0.59        0.41        -0.13      0.21       -0.51       0.29       -0.67
  Labor              -1.74           -0.47       -0.90        -1.64     -1.80       -1.92      -2.15       -2.26
  Capital            -0.07            0.08        0.02         0.25      0.13       -0.06      -0.74       -1.16
  Materials           1.88            2.58        2.35         2.09      2.05        1.57       2.29        0.65
                                                                                                            
AllOutputs            1.68            2.50        1.97         2.12      1.66        1.44       1.63        0.84
  Livestock           1.39            2.32        2.03         1.44      2.16        0.44       2.34        0.78
  FieldCrops          1.65            0.76        1.00         2.60      0.95        2.29       0.27        0.60
  SpecialtyCrops      2.21            2.82        2.60         1.20      1.55        1.62       2.36        0.60
                                                                                                            
Multi-FactorProductivity
  1949­2002           1.78            1.82        1.59        1.89       1.88       1.61        2.09        1.64
  1949­1990           2.02            2.02        1.89        2.31       2.01       1.70        2.49        2.16
  1990­2002           0.97            1.15        0.57        0.43       1.47       1.30        0.72       -0.14
                                                                                                                
Sources: InSTePP production accounts.
Notes: Average annual growth rates for inputs and multi-factor productivity span the period 1949­2002; for outputs
they span the period 1949­2006.






                                                         62
