                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                IN SEARCH OF DISTRESS RISK IN EMERGING MARKETS

                                         Gonzalo Asis
                                         Anusha Chari
                                          Adam Haas

                                      Working Paper 27213
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27213


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We thank Guido Lorenzoni, Lillian Cheung, Matthew Yiu, Giorgio Valente, Duan Jin-Chuan and
seminar participants at the HKIMR, the Federal Reserve Board, the IMF's Summer Research
Conference (Santiago, Chile), and UNC-Chapel Hill for thoughtful comments and suggestions.
Special thanks are due to Steve Cecchetti, Eric Ghysels, Peter Hansen, Christian Lundblad and
Mike Aguilar. This paper was written under the auspices of the Thematic Fellowship at the Hong
Kong Monetary Authority. This research was in part also supported by a NUS-RMI-CRI grant
and partially conducted during a visit by Asis to RMI.We thank Sun Wei, Zhifeng Zhang and the
team at RMI-CRI for their efforts. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Gonzalo Asis, Anusha Chari, and Adam Haas. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
In Search of Distress Risk in Emerging Markets
Gonzalo Asis, Anusha Chari, and Adam Haas
NBER Working Paper No. 27213
May 2020
JEL No. F3,G12,G15,G33

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper employs a novel multi-country dataset of corporate defaults to develop a model of
distress risk specific to emerging markets. The data suggest that global financial variables such as
US interest rates and shifts in global liquidity and risk aversion have significant predictive power
for forecasting corporate distress risk in emerging markets. We document a positive distress risk
premium in emerging market equities and show that the impact of a global "risk-off" environment
on default risk is greater for firms whose returns are more sensitive to a composite global factor.


Gonzalo Asis                                     Adam Haas
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill      Department of Economics
gonzaloasis7@gmail.com                           UNC-Chapel Hill
                                                 Chapel Hill, NC 27599
Anusha Chari                                     USA
301 Gardner Hall                                 adamhaas@live.unc.edu
CB#3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
achari@unc.edu
1    Introduction

Non-financial corporate debt in emerging markets surged from $4 trillion in 2004 to over $30 trillion

in 2019 (IIF, 2020). There is rising concern about the deteriorating health of emerging market firms

given heightened leverage levels and worsening solvency positions--recent evidence suggests that

the share of debt held by troubled firms is the highest its been in over a decade (IMF, 2015).1 Whether

through links with the global financial system or macroeconomic effects, a wave of corporate defaults

in emerging markets could trigger broader financial stress (Shin, 2013; McCauley et al., 2015; Acharya

et al., 2015). Fed Chair Jerome Powell warned that global debt paired with other macro conditions,

such as the risk of asset price drops and currency depreciation, could damage the ability of emerging-

market firms to repay their debts.2

    Yet there is little systematic research on the determinants of corporate distress specific to emerging

markets.3 An exception is Altman (2005), who adapts a longstanding bankruptcy risk model (Altman,

1968) to the idiosyncrasies of emerging market firms. Recent approaches principally focused on U.S.

data further develop the methodologies to measure probabilities of default (Shumway, 2001; Camp-

bell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi, 2008).

    This paper uses a novel multi-country dataset on corporate defaults to study factors that drive cor-

porate distress in emerging markets. We note that extant models do not account for emerging market

vulnerabilities to global financial conditions such as advanced-economy monetary policy changes,

U.S. dollar movements, or shifts in global liquidity and risk aversion. Depending on the extent of

global exposure, deteriorating international credit market conditions can affect the ability of emerg-

ing market firms to repay their debts. Consequently, model specifications developed using U.S. data

have low predictive power when applied to the emerging market context. Our objective is to disentan-

gle the economic mechanisms through which global financial conditions may drive corporate distress

in emerging markets.

    Our paper makes two main contributions. First, we explore how global financial conditions affect

financial distress in emerging economies. Second, we show that the "distress risk premium puzzle"

identified by Campbell et al. (2008) for developed economies does not seem to apply to emerging
   1 "IMF Flashes Warning Lights for $18 Trillion in Emerging-Market Corporate Debt," Wall Street Journal, September 25,

2015.
   2 "Prospects for Emerging Market Economies in a Normalizing Global Economy," Speech by Jerome Powell, October 12

2017.
   3 We use "default risk" and "distress risk" interchangeably throughout the paper.




                                                           1
economies: riskier firms in emerging economies command a larger risk premium.

     In settings with borrowing constrained firms and endogenous default, theoretically, there can

be a range of alternative mechanisms by which global financial shocks can impact corporate default

rates. Greater corporate leverage can, for example, make firms more vulnerable to adverse shocks

to their cash flows and asset values, driving up probabilities of default. Tightening global financial

conditions can exacerbate rollover and currency risks. In the absence of sufficient hedging, currency

depreciation can impose a more significant strain on the ability of emerging-market firms to service

any FX-denominated debts. Deteriorating global financial conditions can, therefore, directly impact

credit risk, elevating probabilities of corporate default, particularly for firms with weak fundamentals.

     The capital flows literature points to possible international transmission mechanisms, i.e., per-

turbations that originate in global financial markets that can impact corporate default probabilities in

emerging markets.4 We suggest a cost of external finance channel that operates through different types

of global funding shocks. Rising US interest rates, shortfalls in global liquidity, and foreign investor

risk appetite can increase the cost of borrowing and hamper the ability of firms in emerging markets

to repay their debts. Evidence suggests that tightening U.S. monetary policy shocks are correlated

with increasing bond yields and lower equity prices in emerging markets (Chari et al., 2020), which

in turn increase financing costs (Bruno and Shin (2015 a,b)). Through asset price and exchange rate

changes, financial shocks can affect collateral values, the borrowing capacity of firms, and corporate

default probabilities. Also, rollover risk can impact the ability to refinance corporate debt and trigger

corporate default events.

     Our dataset consists of corporate default events and a set of firm-specific and macroeconomic

explanatory variables. A majority of the data come from the CRI database.5 The database contains

detailed default, accounting, and market data for over 60,000 exchange-listed firms in 119 countries

between 1990 and 2016. The dataset is novel in its broad coverage of balance sheet variables and,

especially, of default events in emerging markets.

     Existing models that forecast corporate default incorporate accounting and market variables such

as stock prices to estimate default probabilities. In our setting, empirically, a simultaneity issue arises

as global financial conditions can jointly determine stock prices and probabilities of default. Once
    4 For example, papers on the global financial cycle (Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2019; Rey, 2015) and capital flow surges

and retrenchments (Forbes and Warnock, 2012) focus on flows and returns responses to global financial shocks. The litera-
ture on exchange rate changes paired with foreign currency-denominated borrowing and the risk-bearing capacity of foreign
intermediaries suggest that global financial shocks can impact collateral constraints and have adverse balance sheet effects
(Cespedes, Chang and Velasco, 2008; Bruno and Shin, 2015 a, b).
    5 CRI is the Credit Research Initiative of the Risk Management Institute at the National University of Singapore.



                                                             2
we control for stock prices that embed relevant information about a firm's global exposures through

foreign sales dependence or foreign financing sources, it is not clear what additional information the

global variables themselves may have for forecasting default. It is entirely conceivable that a firm's

stock price movements capture much of the effect of global financial shocks.

    To address the issue of simultaneity, we begin by examining the effect of global financial condi-

tions on both stock prices and probabilities of default. In doing so, we first capture the impact of

accounting and global variables on market variables such as stock prices and volatility of returns, and

then use the orthogonalized values of these variables to predict default.6 Separately, the strategy also

allows us to summarize information about the relationship between global variables and corporate

distress using fitted values to identify how the global transmission of shocks occurs.

    Introducing stock return sensitivities to global factors adds a new dimension to our understanding

of how distress risk operates through financial markets. To analyze the distress risk premium in

emerging market stocks, we use the probability of default measure developed in the first part of the

paper to explore the performance of distressed stocks between 2002 and 2015. We find that emerging

market stock returns embed a positive distress risk premium, a novel contribution to the literature on

predicting corporate default risk.

    We begin by estimating a logit model of the probability of corporate default on a set of firm-

specific accounting , as well as variables reflecting the domestic economic backdrop and global finan-

cial conditions. Controlling for corporate fundamentals and domestic economic conditions, we find

that emerging market firms are more likely to default when the U.S. Fed funds rate is high, the U.S.

Treasury yield curve is steep, U.S. monetary policy tightens, and funding liquidity is reduced. We also

find that firms who have defaulted in the past are more likely to do so again, to the best of our knowl-

edge a novel result in the literature. Our findings on the effect of broad U.S. dollar appreciation are

more subtle. While we expected a strong broad U.S. dollar (often a sign of investor risk aversion) to

be a drag on emerging market solvency, bilateral local currency strength vs. the U.S. dollar dominates

when both are appreciating and contributes to a lower risk of default.

    Introducing orthogonalized market variables in the model reveals that falling stock returns con-

tribute to firms' probability of default in ways that are not captured by global financial conditions

or corporate fundamentals, likely a result of collateral constraints. Importantly, though, we find that
    6 Note that a structural model would involve two simultaneous equations with the stock price and the risk of default

both depending on some unobservable financial condition variable that is determined by firm-specific idiosyncratic shocks,
country-level shocks, and global variables.



                                                            3
the accounting and global variables also operate through market variables such as excess returns to

impact probabilities of default.

    Computing marginal effects of the model's coefficients allows us to quantify the economic impact

(i.e., the change in the probability of default) of changes in each of the model's variables. Among

accounting variables, one-standard-deviation changes in leverage and cash have the greatest impact

(positive and negative, respectively) on firms' default risk. Among global variables, the Fed funds

rate and Treasury yield curve slope have the largest marginal effects. For instance, a one-standard-

deviation increase in the Fed funds rate increases the predicted number of corporate defaults in our

sample by 11%.

    Next, we focus on firms whose returns are most sensitive to global financial conditions in order to

explore whether stock returns carry information about the impact of the global financial environment

on default risk. We label these sensitivities "global betas," and they are extracted from firm-specific

time-series regressions of stock returns on a global variable, controlling for market returns. Introduc-

ing dummies for the tercile of firms with most negative global betas7 reveals that, for the Fed Funds

rate, five-year Treasury rates, and the VIX, the effect of increases in the global variable on the proba-

bility of default is larger for firms with most negative betas. Further, a composite global beta measure

helps us show that the effect of a global risk-off environment on distress risk is higher for firms whose

returns are more sensitive to global factors.

    Finally, we explore the asset pricing implications of our measure of distress risk. Asset pricing

theory suggests investors should demand a premium for holding stocks at risk of default. However,

prior literature using U.S. data finds an inverse correlation between distress risk and future stock

returns (Campbell, Hilscher, and Szilagyi, 2008). We construct ten portfolios sorted by firms' predicted

probability of default and find strong evidence of the presence of a distress risk premium in emerging

market stocks. Future twelve-month stock returns are monotonically increasing in the probability of

corporate default, a trend that is robust to the inclusion of controls for the Fama-French three factors,

momentum, short-term reversal, and long-term reversal.

    Related Literature: Shumway (2001) introduces a multiple logit model that combines accounting

data with a set of market variables comprised of market size, past stock returns, the idiosyncratic

standard deviation of stock returns, net income to total assets, and total liabilities to total assets.8
   7 I.e.,firms most negatively affected by increases in U.S. interest rates, VIX, the TED spread, and the U.S. dollar
   8 Chava   and Jarrow (2004) improve forecasting by shortening the observation intervals to the monthly frequency and
find the existence of an industry effect.



                                                          4
Campbell et al. (2008) builds on the work of Shumway (2001) to show that firms are more likely to

enter distress if they have higher leverage, lower profitability, lower market capitalization, lower past

stock returns, more volatile past stock returns, lower cash holdings, higher market-book ratios, and

lower prices per share.9,10 An important asset pricing implication of Campbell et al. (2008) is that

stocks of distressed companies experience abnormally low returns.

     Other related research focuses on specific financial sheet variables to identify country-wide corpo-

rate distress risk. Alfaro et al. (2017) use firm-level data to show that the correlation between leverage

and corporate fragility is time-varying and strongest for large firms and times of local currency deval-

uations.11 The research on the drivers and consequences of high currency exposure is limited given

the shortage of reliable data on the currency composition of debt.12 However, the view most widely

held is that foreign-currency liabilities are a concern for emerging market non-financial corporations

and particularly troubling for firms that do not have natural currency hedges in place (e.g. firms in

non-tradable industries).13

     To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first paper that estimates emerging market-specific prob-

abilities of corporate default and quantifies how the global macroeconomic environment they operate

in can affect their ability to remain solvent. Additionally, having a reliable measure of corporate de-

fault risk allows us to explore the behavior of distressed stocks in emerging markets.

     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes alternative transmission mecha-
    9 The  authors define distress as either filing for bankruptcy, getting delisted, or receiving a D rating. The authors use
Shumway's (2001) specification as a base and make modifications that improve the model's predictive power. First, they
divide net income and leverage (both explanatory variables) by the market value of assets instead of book value. Second,
they add corporate cash holdings, Tobin's Q, and price per share to the set of explanatory variables. Third, they study default
forecasts at different horizons, finding market capitalization, market-book ratio, and equity volatility the most consistently
predictive characteristics of corporate distress, and demonstrating the increased importance of balance sheet versus market
variables as the horizon increases.
    10 A small set of papers develop bankruptcy models for emerging markets. Notably, to adjust the Z-Score to the different

environment in emerging markets Altman (2005) introduces the modified Z-score. Pomerleano (1998) uses accounting ratios
to study the build-up of the Asian Financial Crisis, finding excess leverage and poor capital performance in the years leading
up to the crisis. Subsequent studies focus on expanding the types of variables included in the predictive model (Hernandez-
Tinoco and Wilson, 2013) and applying US-specific determinants of bankruptcy to other countries (e.g., NUS-RMI, 2016).
    11 Chui et al. (2014) and Bruno and Shin (2016) also focus on firms' balance sheets, as they point out the increase in cash

holdings among non-financial corporations in emerging markets. The papers argue that firms are not accumulating cash as
a precautionary measure, but to engage in cross-border speculative activities; i.e., to take advantage of interest rate spreads
between advanced and emerging economies. Hence, the traditional belief that cash increases a firm's repaying ability may
not hold in the current environment.
    12 The two significant issues compiling accurate data on debt currency composition are (a) Many corporate reports present

the currency composition of their liabilities in the notes of the reports and not in hard data, and (b) the use of offshore inter-
mediaries to borrow funds makes it difficult to establish the residence of the ultimate debt-holder-a problem documented
in Avdjiev et al. (2014).
    13 Harvey and Roper (1999) show that high foreign currency-denominated leverage and low profitability were important

factors spreading the Asian Financial Crisis. Dell'Ariccia et al. (2015) corroborate the idea that foreign currency borrowing
increases systemic risk and exposes lenders to the risk of default when the borrower's currency plunges.




                                                                5
nisms through which global financial shocks may impact the probability of corporate default in emerg-

ing markets. Section 3 explains the methodology and describes the data. Section 4 presents the results

on default probabilities and introduces global betas as predictors of default. Section 5 shows the asset

pricing implications of our measure of distress risk. Section 6 concludes.




2   Global Shocks and Corporate Default Probabilities: Alternative Trans-
    mission Mechanisms

This section surveys alternative transmission mechanisms through which global financial shocks may

impact the probabilities of corporate default in emerging markets. At the aggregate level, several stud-

ies beginning with the seminal work of Calvo et al. (1996) and Calvo (1998) show that countries with

higher levels of default risk are more sensitive to U.S. interest rates. The existing literature focuses on

the sovereign default risk implications of external shocks. To the best of our knowledge, the literature

does not provide micro evidence on the link between global financial conditions and corporate default

risk in emerging markets.

    Evidence from papers on boom-bust cycles in emerging markets demonstrates that episodes of

capital inflow surges lead to credit booms and high leverage (Tornell and Schneider, 2007; Men-

doza and Terrones, 2008; Lorenzoni, 2008) followed by credit busts, asset price collapses and painful

deleveraging (Gourinchas and Obstfeld, 2012; Rey, 2015). These papers focus on the impact of capital

flows on aggregate credit creation and the build-up of leverage in emerging markets. Search for yield

flows or returns chasing capital inflows can lead to falling bond yields and rising equity prices. In

turn, rising asset values can relax firm-level borrowing constraints due to the availability of lower-

cost funding as well as appreciated collateral values (Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1996). Higher

leverage has also been associated with, on average, rising foreign currency exposures (IMF, 2015).

A natural next step is to explicitly examine the link between global shocks, firm characteristics, and

corporate default probabilities.

    Candidate global financial shocks that receive attention in the capital flows literature primar-

ily fall into three inter-related categories: (i) U.S./advanced economy monetary policy shocks, (ii)

shocks that impact foreign investor risk aversion and liquidity in international financial markets, and

(iii) exchange rate shocks. For example, Forbes and Warnock (2012) and Fratzscher (2012) show that

global risk factors drive capital flows in and out of emerging markets. Jotikasthira et al. (2012) report


                                                    6
that "global funds substantially alter portfolio allocations in emerging markets in response to funding

shocks from their investor base." Focusing on U.S. monetary policy, market risk and investor senti-

ments, Bekaert et al. (2013), Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2019) and many others use the VIX as a

proxy to measure the risk appetite of global investors. Fratzscher (2012) includes the TED spread as

a measure of credit risk and liquidity in international capital markets. Chari et al. (2020) make use of

high-frequency identification to extract U.S. monetary policy shocks using Treasury derivatives data

to show that capital flows to emerging markets are sensitive to term premium shocks in the U.S. yield

curve. In this paper, we examine the link between alternative global shocks and the probabilities of

corporate default. To understand potential transmission mechanisms through which these alternative

shocks can impact corporate default probabilities, let us consider them in turn.

    Evidence suggests that there is a correlation between expansionary monetary policy in the U.S.

and a "risk-on" environment in financial markets that drives capital flows to emerging markets, in-

creases asset prices and drives up leverage (Bruno and Shin, 20015 a,b; Chari et al., 2020; Gourinchas

and Obstfeld, 2012). Conversely, tightening monetary policy shocks lead to a "risk-off" environment

with capital outflows, falling asset prices, and deleveraging in emerging markets. Risk-on and risk-off

states of the world also correlate with movements in measures of uncertainty and risk such as the VIX

that capture foreign investor risk sentiments and the TED spread that captures perceptions of credit

risk and liquidity in financial markets.14 We suggest that there is a correlation between corporate de-

fault probabilities in emerging markets and an amalgam of the U.S. interest rate environment, foreign

investor risk appetites, and liquidity in global financial markets.

    To fix ideas, consider the following. Chari et al. (2020) disentangle the channels through which

U.S. monetary policy shocks can alter expectations hypothesis-driven yields and risk premia in the

term structure of U.S. interest rates. Via portfolio rebalancing and signaling, changes in domestic

yields and risk premia can have a significant impact on equity prices and bond yields in emerging

markets.15 In particular, tightening U.S. monetary policy shocks are correlated with increasing bond

yields and lower equity prices in emerging markets­both of which can increase the cost of raising

external finance and impact expected probabilities of corporate default.

    Closely related to the cost of external finance is the rollover risk associated with the refinancing

of existing debt. Rollover risk specifically pertains to prevailing financial market conditions such as
  14 Bekaert   et al., 2013; Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, 2019; and Bruno and Shin, 2015a) show that U.S. monetary policy
changes impact global risk--higher U.S. rates correspond to rising risk premia.
   15 In addition to using high-frequency monetary policy shocks, we also consider the predictive power of the decomposed

values of short-term yields and term premia from a US-based term structure model on corporate default probabilities.


                                                           7
liquidity in credit markets and the state of the economy versus the financial position of borrowers.

If interest rates rise, market liquidity deteriorates, and credit market conditions tighten; the cost of

refinancing debt also rises and can impact corporate default probabilities. He and Xiong (2012) present

theoretical arguments to demonstrate the complex interaction between illiquidity in debt markets and

the corporate default premium, highlighting the role of short-term debt in exacerbating rollover risk.

Broner et al. (2013) suggest that the maturity composition of emerging market debt is predominantly

short-term because of a risk sharing problem between emerging economies subject to rollover risk and

risk averse international investors.

    Rollover risk is of particular concern for foreign currency-denominated emerging market debt.16 .

Lenders (foreign and domestic) are often unwilling to renew expiring loans during risk-off states of the

world when collateral values can drop if asset prices fall. Risk-on shocks and capital inflows that drive

up asset prices in emerging markets can also relax collateral constraints, making it easier for firms to

borrow and lever up. At the same time, risk-off shocks can lead to opposite effects. Together these

factors suggest that a global risk-off environment can directly impact the probabilities of corporate

default in emerging markets.

    Some facts worth bearing in mind are that $4.3 trillion of the total $20 trillion in global bonds

and loans that come due through the end of 2020 are in emerging markets (IIF, 2020). Approximately,

$772 billion of emerging market corporate debt is due to mature between 2020-2024 of which 26%

is of speculative-grade (S&P Global, 2020).17 Also, emerging markets will need to refinance $730

billion in total foreign-currency denominated debt through the end of 2020. Across emerging markets

with available data, foreign-currency denominated corporate debt stood at 26 percent of GDP in 2018

(World Bank, 2020). Further, a greater share of corporate debt is owed by firms with riskier financial

profiles (Beltran and Collins, 2018; Feyen et al., 2017).

    Bruno and Shin (2015 a, b) suggest that liquidity in dollar funding markets such as during phases

of expansionary monetary policy increases the risk-bearing capacity of financial intermediaries and

drives international banking flows to emerging markets. If the debt is in foreign currencies, the re-

sulting currency appreciations allow firms (and banks) to borrow more, possibly worsening currency

mismatches on balance sheets. Alfaro et al. (2019) show that the negative impact of exchange rate

shocks has a more acute impact on the more highly levered firms. This paper suggests that bilateral
  16 For  example, the World Bank cautioned that "Rollover risks are potentially acute for Indonesia and Thailand, given
their sizable stocks of short-term debt (around $50 billion and $63 billion, respectively)," World Bank 2018
   17 https://www.spglobal.com/ratings/en/research/articles/200203-credit-trends-global-refinancing-rated-corporate-

debt-due-through-2024-nears-11-trillion-11329293


                                                           8
exchange rate depreciation can have adverse balance sheet effects, making it harder for firms to repay

their debts and driving up predicted probabilities of default.

     In addition, exchange rate changes can affect foreign-currency-denominated sales, input, and bor-

rowing costs and, consequently, firm earnings and interest coverage ratios (interest expenses/EBIT,

where EBIT is a measure of earnings). Here, there can be a contemporaneous impact on both stock

prices via firm income and default probabilities. Exchange rate changes can also impact the net worth

of firms (especially for foreign currency-denominated liabilities).

     The impact on expected probabilities of default is inextricably tied to firm fundamentals, such

as profitability, leverage, and the cash that firms have on hand. In addition to global variables, our

baseline specification, therefore, includes firm-level accounting measures to condition on corporate

fundamentals. For example, Alfaro et al. (2019) show that firm size plays a critical role in the relation-

ship between leverage, firm fragility, and exchange rate movements in emerging markets.

     Further, the primarily US-focused bankruptcy literature in corporate finance shows that there is

predictive power in market variables such as stock returns, stock prices, market-to-book ratios, and the

volatility of returns for forecasting default. A simultaneity challenge arises if global financial shocks

and asset prices are jointly determined and together have an impact on corporate default probabilities.

     To overcome the issue of joint determination, therefore, our empirical investigation takes a two-

pronged approach. First, given that stock prices can be jointly determined by firm fundamentals that

impact expected future cash flows or discount rates as well as global financial shocks, we project firm-

level stock returns onto a set of firm financials and the set of global financial shocks. We then use the

orthogonalized component of the market variables in our baseline specification to see if they comprise

any additional information to predict corporate default.

     Second, note that these corporate fundamentals can also impact asset prices. To examine the chan-

nel through which market variables operate and impact corporate default probabilities, we use fitted

values of asset returns on (i) firm-specific accounting variables that capture information about firm

fundamentals and (ii) global variables in a separate exercise. Our empirical investigation, therefore,

focuses on the link between global financial shocks, firm fundamentals, and corporate default proba-

bilities.




                                                    9
3     The Data and Methodology

3.1    Methodology: Predicting Corporate Distress in Emerging Markets

Several studies from the corporate default literature show the importance of other accounting and

market variables (including leverage) in forecasting corporate bankruptcies. Earlier static bankruptcy

prediction models used accounting ratios to forecast default (See Altman, 1968; Ohlson, 1980; Zmi-

jewski, 1984). Shumway (2001) point out that static models effectively require arbitrary choices about

how long ahead of bankruptcy to observe firm characteristics ­ adding selection bias to the process.

In contrast, dynamic forecasting using hazard or dynamic logit models use all available information

to determine each firm's bankruptcy risk at each point in time. By including each firm-year as a sep-

arate observation, the data used for estimation is much larger and controls for the "period at risk,"

namely that some firms fail after being at risk for many years and others go from healthy to bankrupt

much faster. In addition to accounting for duration dependence, hazard models include time-varying

covariates, which provide a changing picture of a firm's health. Campbell et al. (2008) build on the

work of Shumway (2001) and improve the set of variables used to predict distress. The authors run a

logit model on US data, putting more emphasis on market variables as predictors of distress.

      Similar to Shumway (2001) and Campbell et al. (2008), we estimate a model of probability of de-

fault using a logit specification augmented by domestic and global macroeconomic factors that have

particular relevance to emerging market firms. We suggest that the domestic macroeconomic envi-

ronment may affect the financial health of emerging market firms through demand for their goods

and services, wage and borrowing costs, and other input costs. Evidence from the credit risk liter-

ature suggests that the incidence of firm failures rises during recessions ( Altman and Brady, 2001).

Further, inflation risk affects economic growth and uncertainty about the domestic economy. For ex-

ample, Hernandez-Tinoco et al. (2013) find a significant relationship between default risk and both

domestic inflation and interest rates in UK firms. To control for the impact of the domestic economic

conditions in the probability of default of emerging market firms, we include a number of domestic

macroeconomic indicators and country fixed effects in different specifications of the model.

      As outlined in Section 2 the globalization and increased interconnectedness of financial markets

propagates the transmission of financial and economic conditions from developed to emerging mar-

kets. Due to their high reliance on international markets for funding, the listed firms that make up our

dataset are likely affected by these changes in global conditions. For this reason, we include a number


                                                  10
of global variables that may influence the distress risk of emerging market firms. Section 4.5 discusses

in detail the methodology to compute global betas as a measure of emerging market risk exposure to

a range of global factors.




3.2    Model Performance

The existing literature uses a number of measures of a model's predictive power, most of which in-

volve ranking firms by their estimated probability of default. However, studies differ in the number of

firms and defaults, the size of the quantiles to group firms, and the allocation of distressed firms across

quantiles, making comparisons across models difficult. Chava and Jarrow (2004) improve compara-

bility by relying on the Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) score. The ROC score, also known

as "area under the power" or "area under the curve" (AUC), uses the cumulative fraction of defaults

as a function of the ordered population of firms from most to least likely to fail as predicted by the

model. The ROC curve plots the true positive rate (i.e., firms that actually default) against the false

positive rate (i.e., firms that are predicted to default but do not in fact default) for different threshold

settings. In machine learning, the true-positive rate is referred to as the sensitivity, or the probability

of detection.

      Appendix Figure B1 presents an example. Point A on the "High-Sensitivity Model" curve tells

us that the 20% of firms that a particular model identifies as most likely to default include 70% of

the firms that go on to default the next month. Point B in the "Low-Sensitivity Model" curve signals

that it takes 50% of firms ordered from most to least likely to default for the model to identify 70% of

defaulting companies. We compare the two models by computing the area under each of the curves

(AUC). A larger area indicates that the model is correctly predicting more distressed firms as being

likely to fail. An AUC of 0.5 indicates no discriminatory power, and the closer the score gets to 1 the

better the model identifies distressed firms.18 Contributing to the interpretation of the AUC, Hanley

and McNeil (1982) show that the score obtained by ranking observations by estimated likelihood of

failure represents the probability that a failed subject will be ranked ahead of a randomly chosen

healthy subject.

      To measure goodness of fit, we use McFadden's pseudo-R2 , which compares the model's like-

lihood ( L) to that of a model consisting of only a constant ( L0 ), i.e., the average default rate in the
  18 See   Sobehart and Keenan (2001) for more details on the ROC score.



                                                            11
                                                     log( L)
sample. Specifically, it is computed as 1 -         log( L0 )
                                                                and can be interpreted in the same manner as the

standard R2 (between 0 and 1, increasing in model fit).




3.3    The Data

Our dataset consists of corporate default events and a set of firm-specific and macroeconomic ex-

planatory variables. A majority of the data come from the CRI database, the Credit Research Initiative

of the National University of Singapore, accessed on December 1, 2016. The CRI database contains

detailed default, accounting, and market data for over 60,000 exchange-listed firms in 119 countries

between 1990 and 2016. The countries in our analysis are those classified as Emerging Markets by

MSCI during the majority of our sample period (1995-2016): Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colom-

bia, Czech Republic, Egypt, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Pakistan,

Peru, Philippines, Poland, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, and Vietnam.

      The dataset is novel in its broad coverage of balance sheet variables and, especially, of default

events in emerging markets.19 As Table 1 shows, the CRI database contains information on firms'

bankruptcies and other corporate default actions. This is important because countries differ in their

definitions of default. To construct our measure of financial distress, we define a default to be any

of the events in the "Bankruptcy Filing" (excluding "Petitions Withdrawn"), the "Delisting", and the

"Default Corporate Action" (excluding "Buyback options") groups.20 Delayed payments made within

a grace period are not counted as defaults.

      Table B1 in Appendix B shows our distress indicator over time for firms with sufficient data to

replicate our benchmark specification.21 The first column shows the number of firm-months of data

in each year, the second column the number of default events per year, and the third column the

corresponding percentage of firms that experienced a default event. The average default rate in the

sample is close to 0.1% per year, with some variation within years. Importantly, there is no strong

clustering across time, as the distress indicator displays considerable cross-time variation in the dis-

tribution of corporate defaults. The two years with highest share of defaults coincide with the depth

of the Asian Financial Crisis. Coverage of accounting variables varies. The number of firm-months
   19 Market data from emerging markets on stock prices and related variables are fairly accessible from sources such as

Datastream, Bloomberg, etc.
   20 The number of Default Corporate Action events is lower than the sum of its sub-components because some events

include multiple concurrent actions (e.g. Missed Loan Payment and Missed Coupon Payment)
   21 In order to run the logit model, we need every observation to have data for each explanatory variable.




                                                                12
and defaults with data for any of the variables in Campbell et al.'s (2008) specification is 2,724,716

and 2,150, respectively. However, in order to run the logit model we require every observation have

data for all explanatory variables included in the regression specification. Due to missing observa-

tions and the sparsity of some accounting data, the final sample in our baseline specification includes

589,224 observations and 589 default events. This data provides the widest coverage of default events

with sufficient accounting data to conduct the estimations and serves as the basis for our benchmark

regression specification.22

     As seen in Tables B2 and B3 in Appendix B, the data coverage varies substantially by country,

possibly influencing the lack of a clear pattern in the percentage of defaults by year. Comparing our

sample against prior studies using US firms, we find that the ratio of defaults to firms is lower in

emerging markets than in the United States. This could be due to a few reasons. First, governments

own a percentage of many listed firms in emerging markets and might be more inclined to bail out or

recapitalize struggling companies. Second, politically connected large firms may benefit from govern-

ment bail-outs. Legal system inefficiencies and lengthy court delays, common institutional features in

many emerging market economies, may also lead to lower bankruptcy rates.

     The set of covariates consists of three types of variables: firm-specific accounting and market

variables; domestic macroeconomic variables; and global variables, i.e. variables from outside the

emerging market countries and usually related to financial conditions in advanced economies. The

monthly firm-specific market variables are: log excess stock returns relative to the country's main in-

dex (EXRET), log of price per share (PRICE), volatility of daily returns over the prior month (VOL),

and the log ratio of market cap relative to the total market cap of all listed firms in the country (REL-

SIZE). The accounting variables have quarterly frequency and include the ratio of net income to the

market value of total assets (NIMTA), the ratio of total liabilities to the market value of total assets

(TLMTA), the ratio of cash and short-term assets to the market value of total assets (CASHMTA),

and the market-to-book ratio (MB).23 In some of our specifications we include a dummy variable that

equals one if the firm has experienced a default event in the past. Although we would have liked to

include a variable indicating the firm's age or listing date, unfortunately good quality data are not
   22 Coverage of country-specific macro variables is more sparse and in specifications with local macro variables, the sample

of observations falls as logit estimation does not allow for missing observations for any covariate. However, our preferred
benchmark specification includes country-fixed effects so that the observation count is 589,224 and includes all available
data on market, accounting and global variables.
   23 Campbell et. al. (2008) include time-weighted averages of NIMTA over the previous four quarters and EXRET over the

previous twelve months. Due to the sparsity of emerging market data, we would lose too many observations if we required
one consecutive year of data for those two variables. We use the single-period definition instead.



                                                             13
available for the firms in our sample.

     To control for large outliers and possible errors in the balance sheet and market data, we win-

sorize the firm-specific variables at the 1st and 99th percentile of their distributions24 . We also lag the

accounting ratios (TLMTA, NIMTA, CASHMTA, and MB) by three months to ensure the balance sheet

data was publicly available at the time we predict default.

     To capture the domestic macro environment in which firms operate, we incorporate five domestic

macro variables for each country. The first is the unemployment rate to capture slack in the economy,

retrieved from the World Bank. Inflation is the monthly change in CPI from the Bank for International

settlements, which reflects pricing pressures in the local economy. Real interest rates come also from

the World Bank, and we include them as a proxy for local borrowing costs and liquidity. The JP Mor-

gan Emerging Markets Bonds Spread, which measures the average spread on US dollar-denominated

bonds issued by sovereign entities over US Treasuries, incorporates international investors' percep-

tion of the government's credit risk. We include the 12-month average of the monthly change in a

country's bilateral exchange rate against the US dollar, as it is a major determinant of firms' revenues

from abroad and their ability to repay debts denominated in dollars.25

     Moving on to variables computed only with developed-market data, the CBOE Volatility Index,

known commonly as the VIX, measures the market's expectation for 30-day volatility in the S&P 500.

A higher VIX typically denotes a general increase in the risk premium and, consequently, an increase

in borrowing costs of emerging market firms. Rey (2015) finds one global factor correlated with the

VIX that drives the price of risky assets around the world, while Forbes and Warnock (2012) show

that changes in the VIX explain international capital flows. The effect of changes in US rates on capital

flows to emerging markets has also been established in the literature (Chari, Dilts and Lundblad,

2017), and Bruno and Shin (2015) introduce bank leverage as a mechanism through which changes in

US monetary policy impact international capital flows. To address the interest rate effect, we include

the US Fed funds rate and the yield curve slope as calculated by the difference between a the 5-year

Treasury and the Fed funds rates. The Federal Funds rate is indicative of monetary conditions and

changes in monetary policy in the United States, whereas the slope of the yield curve captures how

the bond market expects short-term interest rates (as a reflection of economic activity and future levels

of inflation) to move in the future, and therefore borrowing costs at longer maturities.
   24 Market-to-book ratio is winsorized at the 5th and 95th percentiles in order to deal with firm-months with very small or
negative book-to-equity values, which in turn make MB very large.
   25 The percentage of corporate debt denominated in US dollars has increased dramatically since the Global Financial

Crisis, as shown by IMF (2015) and others.


                                                             14
      In addition, to capture the period of unconventional monetary policy, we turn to two different

approaches. The first is to use that measure of monetary policy surprises extracted from 5-year Trea-

sury futures using high-frequency identification from Chari et al. (2017). The second is to use the

yield curve decomposition of the 5-year and 10-year Treasury rate into expected short rates and term

premia based on the model in Adrian, Crump and Moensch (2013).

      Given that the bilateral dollar is a country variable that it is outside the control of small open

economies (Rey (2015), we include changes in the broad US$ index as a global variable. This is the

trade weighted Broad US dollar index from FRED. Lastly, the TED spread is a proxy for perceived

credit risk in the US economy, and it is computed by subtracting the 3-month Treasury bill rate from

the 3-month LIBOR rate. Due to the correlation between TED spread and VIX, we use the orthogonal

component of the two, i.e. the residual of a regression of the TED spread on VIX, similar to Fratzscher

(2012).

      The global variables have monthly frequency and are common to all firms in the sample. Ap-

pendix A defines variables and their sources in greater detail. In later exercises we compute firm

exposures to these global variables and incorporate the firm-specific exposures into our distress pre-

diction specifications.




3.4    Summary Statistics

Table 2 reports simple equally-weighted means of the explanatory variables, as well as t-tests for

means. The first column presents means for the full sample, the second column for the Default group,

and the third for the Bankrupt group ­ a subset of the Default group. The fourth and fifth columns

show whether there is a statistically significant difference in means between the full sample and the

Default and Bankrupt groups, respectively.

      The firm-specific covariates show that firms in the Default group exhibit lower excess returns,

stock prices, and volatility. Firms under duress are also smaller, the average firm in the group com-

prising 0.01% of the country's market cap, compared to over 0.034% for the average firm in the full

sample. This is not surprising, since smaller firms may find it more difficult to access temporary

financing when facing default.

      Looking at firm balance sheets, firms one month away from default differ from the full sample

in the expected direction ­ and the difference in all four mean accounting ratios is larger for firms


                                                   15
in the Bankrupt group. Distressed firms have lower profitability and are on average making losses

in the months prior to failing to pay their obligations, compared to an average net income to total

assets of 0.004 in the full sample. These firms also have higher leverage (0.599 and 0.759 for Default

and Bankrupt groups, respectively) than the overall population (0.370), as well as lower cash holdings

over total assets: 0.041 and 0.024 for the Default and Bankrupt groups, compared to a full sample

average of 0.084. Both ratios are suggestive of firms' diminishing ability to repay their upcoming

liabilities. Lastly, troubled firms have low book value of equity relative to their market capitalization,

resulting in higher market-to-book ratios of 2.869 (Default) and 4.400 (Bankrupt), compared to 2.084

for the full sample. All summary statistics described so far are consistent with those in Shumway

(2001) and Campbell et al. (2008), except for the fact that volatility of stock returns is lower for firms

one month away from default.

    We also introduce a variable that, to the best of our knowledge, has not been used in the literature:

an indicator of whether a firm has defaulted in the past. Comparing the means of distressed firms and

the full sample, we find in the Default and Bankrupt groups a much higher percentage of firms which

have already suffered a default event; 54.5% and 42.9% compared to 6.1% for the full sample.

    The interpretation of the differences in the means of the domestic macroeconomic variables is less

clear, given that some countries will have structurally higher levels of interest rates, inflation, unem-

ployment or sovereign spreads than others throughout the sample. In any case, we find that domestic

macroeconomic environment for the Bankrupt group is characterized by higher unemployment and

real interest rates.

    The direction of the effect of global variables on corporate distress is intuitive based on how they

affect firms' ability to roll over or pay off their financial obligations to avoid default. We expect an

environment of high interest rates in the US to lower the search for yield and demand for riskier

emerging market debt instruments. Summary statistics support this hypothesis, with firms defaulting

in times of a higher Fed Funds rate: 1.806%, compared to 1.239% in the full sample. Lastly, the Default

group is characterized by having a higher TED spread; that is, higher global liquidity risk. VIX levels

are not significantly different between distressed firms and the full sample, while the broad dollar

index appears to decrease by 0.2%.




                                                   16
4     Results

4.1    Firm Fundamentals, Asset Prices and Global Financial Conditions

In this section, we investigate the impact of global financial conditions on corporate default probabil-

ities through different channels. In section 2, we suggest that in theoretical settings with borrowing

constrained firms and endogenous default, perturbations that originate in global financial markets can

impact corporate default probabilities in emerging markets through alternative channels. In particu-

lar, changes in international credit market conditions can impact firms with different degrees of global

exposure. As a result, default rates can vary conditional on the impact of global financial conditions

on corporate fundamentals (such as profitability and leverage).

      These shocks can alter the cost of external finance that impact the ability of firms to repay their

debts. Capital flows and retrenchments, changing investor risk appetites and global liquidity condi-

tions have direct effects on external financing costs. Collateral constraints can affect the borrowing

capacity of firms. These constraints can bind via changes in stock prices and exchange rates and have

balance sheet effects that in turn impact the net worth of firms and limit access to capital markets.

      The global financial shocks we investigate in this section fall into the following categories: (1) US

monetary policy changes; (2) changes in international investor risk aversion; (3) liquidity conditions

in international financial markets, and (4) exchange rate configurations.




4.2    Benchmark Specification

Existing closed-economy models of corporate default focus on domestic shocks to determine the abil-

ity of firms to repay their debts. We extend the analysis to an open-economy setting where global

shocks can interact with firm fundamentals and impact corporate default probabilities.

      We assume a logistic distribution for the marginal probability of default over the next period,

which is given by:


                                                               1
                                  Pt-1 (Yi,t = 1) =                                                     (1)
                                                      1 + exp(- -  xi,t-1 )

where Yi,t = 1 in the month t prior to firm i defaulting and Yi,t = 0 in all periods when the firm

does not default the following month. Firms disappear from the sample only after they experience a

bankruptcy event. Firms that do not default at any point in the sample have Yi,t = 0 throughout the


                                                       17
entire period, including in the month of their departure if they leave the sample for reasons other than

default (e.g. merger). The vector of explanatory variables, xi,t-1 , is known at the end of the previous

period. A higher level of  +  xi,t-1 implies a higher probability of default.

    To avoid the potentially confounding effects of simultaneously including market, accounting and

global variables in our baseline specification, we conduct the analysis in three steps. First, we estimate

a baseline regression that examines the impact of accounting and global variables on predicted prob-

abilities of default to capture the direct effect of firm fundamentals (accounting) and global financial

conditions on default risk (Table 3, Columns 1-6). At this stage we do not include any firm-level mar-

ket variables such as stock prices, excess returns or volatility. Second, to capture asset price exposure

to global financial conditions and firm fundamentals (e.g. profitability and leverage), we estimate the

impact of global and accounting variables on firm-level stock market variables (Appendix Table B5).

In the third stage, we use the orthogonalized component of the firm-level market variables to discern

the additional impact (if any) of these variables along with accounting and global variables on default

probabilities (Table 3, Columns 7 & 8). The benchmark specification in Table 3 (Column 8) includes

market variables that are expunged of global and accounting factors to discern their impact on default

risk.

    Table 3 shows the results of six iterations of the multivariate logistic regression without any mar-

ket variables. Column 1 estimates a baseline specification, using a set of accounting variables com-

monly used in U.S. bankruptcy models. The results in Column 1 suggest that profitability and cash

are inversely correlated with the probability of default, while leverage is positively correlated with the

probability of default. These coefficients are statistically significant at the 1% level and are consistent

with the findings in the previous literature (Altman, 1968; Zmieliewski, 1984; Shumway, 2001; Camp-

bell et al., 2008). The specification yields a pseudo-R2 of 0.097 and an AUC of 0.839. The results imply

that firms are more likely to default in the next month if they are less profitable, highly levered, have

less cash, and lower book-to-market ratios. In sum, weak corporate fundamentals make firms more

vulnerable to default.

    Next, we add a dummy variable signaling whether a firm has defaulted in the past. Includ-

ing a wider subset of events in our definition of "Default" rather than being restricted to outright

bankruptcy, allows us to examine the impact of prior distress states on the current probability of de-

fault. We find that this "prior default" dummy greatly increases explained variation and predictive

power (Column 2). The coefficient is positive and highly significant at the 1% level, suggesting that


                                                    18
if a firm has defaulted on interest or principal payments in the past, it is more likely to default in the

future. The pseudo-R2 for the specification goes up to 0.175 and the AUC rises to 0.902. The strong

significance of the prior default dummy suggests there is something about prior defaulters' risk of de-

fault which is not captured by firm-specific observable accounting and market variables. This could

indeed be the result of sectoral differences in handling corporate distress, or just the mechanical tran-

sition from more minor defaults towards bankruptcy. To the best of our knowledge ours is the first

paper to include this explanatory variable that is remarkably robust across specifications. Due to its

strong statistical and economic significance, we find it worth including as a control in the specifica-

tions moving forward.

     In the third column we add to the regression the domestic macro variables ­ unemployment, in-

flation, real interest rates, a 12-month trailing average of the change in the bilateral exchange rate with

the U.S. dollar and sovereign spreads. The pseudo-R2 increases to 0.183, but the AUC falls to 0.889,

suggesting a better model fit but not better predictive power. Controlling for firm-specific account-

ing variables, lower real interest rates and lower inflation rates are significant predictors of default.

Consistent with the exchange rate channel, bilateral appreciation of the U.S. dollar is significantly

positively correlated with the probability of default.

     Column 4 presents the results of a model that consists of the baseline accounting variables, the

prior default dummy, and global variables. The AUC of 0.902, similar to that in Column 3, suggests

that global variables contribute more to predictive power than domestic variables after controlling

for firm-specific covariates. The coefficients suggest that default risk is associated with a higher Fed

Funds rate, a steeper yield curve, tightening monetary policy surprises and a higher TED spread. The

Fed Funds rate and the yield curve are significant at the 1% level, the TED spread at the 5% level, the

monetary policy surprise and the broad dollat at the 10% level, and the VIX at the 15% level. After

controlling for firm-specific accounting variables it appears that emerging market firms are more likely

to default when US Fed Funds rates are high, the yield curve is steep, there is a tightening monetary

policy stance in the U.S., and funding conditions are less liquid. In terms of transmission mechanisms

it appears that the most salient factors pertain to the U.S. monetary policy environment and global

liquidity conditions.26

     Regarding the US dollar, we find that broad dollar appreciations lower probabilities of default.27
   26 Also,note that since we explicitly include the yield curve slope in the specification, increases in the Fed Funds rate
can be interpreted as level increases in the yield curve. The implication here is that the yield curve term incorporates
expectations of the future short-term rates (i.e., the 5-year Treasury rate).
   27 The broad dollar is said to appreciate when the index value rises and vice versa. The bilateral dollar is expressed as $



                                                             19
At first pass this appears to be a counter-intuitive finding. Dollar appreciation is often a sign of a risk-

off environment, which has an adverse impact on capital flows to emerging markets and also for firms

with dollar-denominated debts. On the other hand, dollar appreciation is beneficial for exporters-

a weaker domestic currency implies greater export competitiveness. The sign of the coefficient on

the broad dollar variable as a predictor of corporate default probabilities depends on which effect

dominates­improved export competitiveness or the adverse balance sheet impact.

     A specification that includes both domestic and global variables is presented in Column 5. The

specification in Column 5 includes both the bilateral dollar and the broad dollar. A notable result

is that the statistical significance of the coefficient on the 12-month trailing average change in the

U.S. dollar (bilateral) rises to 5%. Bilateral U.S. dollar appreciation ($ per foreign currency unit) is

significantly correlated with the predicted probability of default.

     The negative coefficient on the broad dollar suggests the contrary. One interpretation of these

opposite sign coefficients on the bilateral and broad dollar is that controlling for the bilateral dollar

effect (the leverage channel that impacts dollar-denominated debts), a broad dollar appreciation is

beneficial for emerging market firms via the trade channel. However, Avdjiev et al., 2018 suggest

that broad dollar strength may lead to contractions in cross-border lending and is a key barometer

of risk-taking capacity in global capital markets. Caution is therefore warranted in interpreting the

negative coefficient on the broad dollar as the more intuitive and straightforward prior would be that

conditional on leverage, broad dollar strength drives up probabilities of default, in which case we

would expect a positive sign on the coefficient on the broad dollar.

     Finally, in Column 6, a specification that includes country fixed effects yields the best predictive

power yet, with an AUC of 0.907. Including country fixed effects allows us to control for country-

specific differences in characteristics like legal system, bankruptcy laws, and state intervention, all of

which are difficult to quantify. To estimate the model with country fixed effects we must drop local

macroeconomic variables, as well as any country with no defaults during the period being used for

estimation. As in the baseline specification, we find that a firm is more likely to default next month

if it has low profitability, and cash, as well as high leverage and market-to-book ratios. The VIX,

our measure of global investor risk appetite, becomes statistically significant and positively correlated

with default, at the expense of the TED spread, which loses some significance. The Fed funds rate and

the slope of the yield curve remain highly significant predictors of default and the monetary policy
per foreign currency unit, which implies that the dollar appreciates when the bilateral dollar value declines.



                                                             20
surprise variable gains significance (5% level) in predicting the probability of default.




4.3    The Joint Determination of Asset Prices, Global Factors and Default Probabilities

Market participants typically discount the market equity of firms in distress or close to bankruptcy.

Existing bankruptcy studies therefore include market variables in addition to accounting variables to

predict probabilities of default. Shumway (2001) and Campbell et al. (2008) show that stock prices,

past excess returns and relative market capitalization contain valuable information for predicting cor-

porate distress. Similarly, firms with more variable cash flows tend to have more volatile stock returns.

Therefore, the idiosyncratic volatility of stock returns is also an important predictor of corporate fi-

nancial distress.

      However, global variables may jointly determine both asset prices (market variables) and prob-

abilities of default. Incorporating global variables into the specification to disentangle their impact

on default probabilities, therefore presents an empirical challenge. To address the simultaneity issue

and to more effectively estimate default probabilities whilst including global variables into the bench-

mark specification, we introduce orthogonalized components of the market variables into our baseline

specification.

      To extract the orthogonalized values of the market variables, we estimate the impact of global

and accounting variables on firm-level stock market variables. This exercise captures firm exposures

to global financial conditions as well as firm characteristics such as profitability and leverage. We do

this by regressing the firm-level market variables using ordinary least squares (OLS) on the full set of

accounting and global variables. Appendix Table B5, Panel C reports the results.

      Using the coefficient estimates from the OLS estimation, we extract the orthogonalized compo-

nents of the market variables- the aforementioned firm-level stock prices, excess returns, stock return

volatility and relative market capitalization. The subsequent analysis uses the orthogonalized com-

ponent of the firm-level market variables to discern the additional impact (if any) of these variables

along with accounting, local, and global variables on default probabilities (Table 3, Columns 7 & 8). In

other words, the baseline regression is modified to include market variables expunged of global and

accounting factors to discern their impact on default risk.

      The results show that the orthogonalized components of the market variables contribute signif-

icantly to default probabilities. Controlling for accounting, domestic macro and global variables,


                                                   21
falling orthogonalized excess returns and stock prices predict increases in probabilities of default. The

results suggest that stock prices convey additional information about distress risk over and above fac-

tors such as firm profitability, leverage, cash as well as the domestic and global macro conditions. The

pattern of results also holds in specification 8 which includes country-fixed effects. It is encouraging

to note that across the board, with a few exceptions, the coefficient estimates for the firm-specific and

global variables remain remarkably stable with the inclusion of the orthogonalized market variables.

    Our dataset contains missing observations for a number of local macroeconomic variables, re-

ducing the sample size for specifications that include these factors. In contrast, specifications which

include country fixed effects retain many of these observations. The sample used for our benchmark

specification including fixed effects (Column 8) contains 589,224 firm-months, 589 distress events, and

we are left with firms from Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines,

Poland, South Korea, and Thailand. Being the specification with highest predictive power, we use

Column 8 as our measure of probability of default in the remainder of the paper.

    As noted before, the extant literature on distress risk does not account for exposure of emerging

market firms to global macroeconomic shocks, the analysis of which is the main focus of our paper.

The ROC curve associated with the baseline specification (8), that including local macroeconomic

variables (7), and model (1) with accounting variables, is shown in Figure 1. Figure 3 plots, for each

quarter, the number of defaults predicted by these same models against the number of actual defaults.

    The Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curves illustrate the importance of global factors in

the identification of distressed firms (Figure 1). Our benchmark model (Table 3, Column 8) performs

substantially better in identifying at-risk firms. Over 80% of the defaulting firms are included in the

top 10% of firms when ranked by predicted default probability (blue curve). The specification in

Column 1 that includes only accounting variables takes nearly 40% of the sample to get to this same

rate of identification (red curve).

    Figure 3 also shows a visible benefit in terms of matching the time series dynamics of default

clustering and timing. Our benchmark specification is less flat through the majority of the sample and

matches some of the default clustering that we see in the data. The additional information captured

in these global monetary and macroeconomic variables influence the model more drastically in times

of global turmoil, as evidenced by the widening spread between the models in 2005-2006 and in 2009.

    An econometric model that includes frailty or contagion (or both) has the potential to improve

upon our ability to match the surges in defaults around 2004, 2012, and 2014. However, the model


                                                   22
structure in leading contagion/frailty papers rely on unobservable, underlying factor analysis to an-

alyze correlated defaults. For example, in Azizpour et al. (2018), the main focus is on the number of

defaults in a period, but it generalizes away from firm-level heterogeneity and only incorporates one

observable macro factor. The default intensity model in Duffie et al. (2009) imposes similar restrictions

in terms of number of covariates. Both types of models lack the ability to analyze the impact of an

array of global factors, which is our primary goal.28

     We test the robustness of our estimates by running two out-of-sample tests of predictive power.

First, we estimate the probability of default model one time using data from the earliest 70% of our

sample and use the estimates to compute the AUC for each month in the remaining 30% of the sample.

Second, we estimate the model in a recursive manner (increasing the estimation window every month,

starting with the earliest 60% of data) and predict default on the following month. Both methods yield

an AUC of 0.913, compared to an in-sample AUC of 0.922.29

     Having accounted for the simultaneity issue we are reassured of the the independent impact of

global financial conditions on default probabilities. Note that since we use lagged values of the firm

fundamental variables such as profitability and leverage to predict default, simultaneity is less of a

concern when including accounting variables into the specification. Next, we exploit the fitted com-

ponents of the market variables to identify the channels through which firm fundamentals and global

financial conditions impact probabilities of default.

     Recall that in Appendix Table B5, Panel C we examine the impact of the full set of accounting

and global variables on the market variables. We also regress the market variables separately on the

set of accounting variables (Panel A) and global variables (Panel B). We now use the fitted values of

the market variables to examine the channels through which firm fundamentals and global variables

operate via market variables to impact probabilities of default. Given that we are using the same set of

accounting and global variables to fit the market variables, we encounter co-linearity issues and can

enter the fitted variables only one by one into the baseline specification. Table 5 presents the results for

excess returns in specifications with local macro variables and country fixed effects. Appendix Tables
   28 The analysis of contagion and correlated defaults while outside the scope of this paper, could be a fruitful avenue for

future research.
   29 We are cognizant of the multicollinearity concerns associated with our multivariate framework. Table B4 in Appendix

B shows the correlation matrix of the variables in our model and, in the last two rows, two popular measures of multi-
collinearlity, the Tolerance value (TOL) and its reciprocal Variance Inflation Factor (VIF), for each of the regressors. VIF is
computed as 1/(1 - R2                2         2                                                                    2
                         k ), where Rk is the R value of a regression of factor k on all others. TOL is simply 1 - Rk . VIF values
larger than 10 are typically considered suggestive of multicollinearity in a model. In our specification, no variable has VIF
 10, and only the Fed Funds Rate and yield curve slope have VIF > 2, presumably due to the high correlation between the
two. The correlation between Fed Funds Rate and yield curve slope is -0.678, the only pairwise correlation larger than 0.6 in
absolute value among all our variables.


                                                               23
B6, B7, and B8 present the results of stock prices, the volatility of returns and the relative market

capitalization respectively.

    We see that both accounting and global variables also operate through excess returns to impact

probabilities of default. Column 2 examines the impact of excess returns fitted on the set of accounting

variables that proxy for firm financial health and shows that that the coefficient of the fitted excess

return variable is a negative and highly significant predictor of default. The global variables continue

to have the same pattern of predictive power for the probabilities of default. A higher Fed funds

rate, steeper yield curve, tightening monetary policy surprises and a rising VIX predict increases in

probabilities of default, while a strengthening broad dollar appears to predict reductions in default

probabilities.

    Column 3 conducts the same exercise with excess returns fitted on global variables. Firm-level

accounting variables enter the specification as additional controls. We see that in a a composite sense

the impact of global variables operating through excess returns has a highly significant impact on

default probabilities. In particular, an overall rise in global variables, mostly representing a high

interest rate environment in the United States, rising VIX levels and less liquid financial markets have

a negative impact on excess returns. In turn, lowered excess returns predict increases in the probability

of default.

    Collectively, the pattern of results from the orthogonalized and fitted components of market vari-

ables on default probabilities suggests the following. First, market variables such as excess returns

and stock prices carry independent information about default probabilities. Second, accounting vari-

ables that impact corporate financial fragility such as profitability, leverage and cash on hand as well

as variables that summarize the state of the global financial environment also operate through market

variables to impact probabilities of default. From the orthogonalized market variables specification

we can quantify the total impact of global variables on default probabilities whereas the fitted mar-

ket variables allow us to quantify the indirect effects of global variables operating through market

variables on default risk.




                                                   24
4.3.1    Alternative Global Variables

Global Illiquidity: We consider two alternative measures of global illiquidity. The first is the noise

measure of illiquidity from Hu, Pan and Wang (2013) in US Treasury bills, notes, and bonds markets.30

The measure has the advantage that it uses information from the entire yield curve as opposed to

focusing on a single maturity bond. Additionally, we use the on-/off-the-run 10-year yield spread,

which is calculated as the difference in yields between 10-year on-the-run and off-the-run Treasury

bonds. We find that the coefficients on all these alternative measures of illiquidity are positive and

statistically significant (Table 10, Columns 2 & 3). They predict increases in default probabilities as

global financial markets (US and Europe) become more illiquid.

      Monetary Policy: We decompose the 5-year Treasury rate into an expected short rate and a term

premium component based on the model in Adrian, Crump and Moensch (2013). The coefficients

on both the short rate and term premium components are positive and statistically significant and

predict increases in default probabilities as short rates and term premia rise (Table 10, Columns 4 &

5). The results are robust to the inclusion of the alternative measures of monetary policy as well as the

decomposed shocks. It is interesting to note that the decomposed monetary policy shock components

are highly correlated with the VIX and therefore the coefficient on the VIX loses significance in the

specification that includes the decomposed variables.




4.4     Marginal Effects and Predicted Defaults

Ultimately, the economic significance of the coefficients from the logit specification lies in predicting

actual defaults. Marginal effects allow us to examine the impact of changes in a specific predictor

variable on the probability of default, holding all other predictors constant.

      To calculate marginal effects, we take the first derivative of equation (1). Using the chain rule

implies that the change in the probability of default with respect to a change in the conditioning

variable is:

dPt-1 (Yi,t = 1| Xi,t-1 )       j exp(- -  xi,t-1 )
                          =                          =  j (1 - Pt-1 (Yi,t = 1| Xi,t-1 )) · ( Pt-1 (Yi,t = 1| Xi,t-1 ))
           dx j             (1 + exp(- -  xi,t-1 ))2
                                                                                                                 (2)
  30 The  illiquidity measure is modeled based on a smooth zero-coupon yield curve which is used to calculate prices for
all available bond maturities. The measure is constructed by aggregating the deviations (RMSE) between the model and
market yields.



                                                          25
That is, a one-unit change in Xi creates a change in the probability equal to the coefficient  i times one

minus the probability times the probability.

    Note that, in contrast to a linear model such as OLS, the partial derivative in Equation 2 is not

exclusively based on the regression coefficient (  j ) for the variable of interest. In fact, all model co-

efficients ( s) and variables (the vector xi,t-1 ) influence this partial derivative through multiplicative

terms and influence the magnitude of any derived marginal effects for any given variable j. The

non-linearity of the logit model allows us analyze how firm heterogeneity and evolving global finan-

cial conditions are interdependent and jointly enter into our marginal analysis. In other words, the

marginal impact of global variables on default probabilities is conditional on all other aspects of firm

health and the levels of all other global variables.

    In this section we begin by computing marginal effects, then use alternative methods to explore

the non-linear response in default probabilities to changes in covariate values, and finally translate

our marginal effects into estimated predicted defaults.



4.4.1   Marginal Effects at the Mean (MEM) and Average Marginal Effects (AME)

We begin by computing marginal effects at the mean (MEM)-the effect of a one standard deviation

change in an explanatory variable on the probability of default for a representative firm with ac-

counting, market and global variables held at their respective sample means. We calculate average

marginal effects (AME) by taking averages of the individual marginal effects for one standard devia-

tion changes in the explanatory variables for each firm evaluated at their true accounting, market and

global variable values across the sample.

    Specifically, from equation (2), letting ht ( X ) = Pt-1 (Yi,t = 1| X ), MEM and AME for the jth covari-

ate are calculated as:

                               ¯)
                         dht ( X
            MEM j =                               ¯ )) · (ht ( X
                                  =  j (1 - h t ( X            ¯ ))                                          (3)
                           dx j
                                 N ,T                                 N ,T
                          1              dht ( Xi,t-1 )        1
            AMEj =
                         N×T                  dx j
                                                        = j
                                                              N×T      (1 - ht (Xi,t-1 )) · (ht (Xi,t-1 ))   (4)
                                  i ,t                                i ,t


    Table 4 presents the results using the coefficient estimates from the benchmark specification (Col-

umn 8) with country fixed effects and orthogonalized market variables. Columns 1 and 2 present the

standard deviations of each variable and marginal effects at the mean (MEM). Column 3 presents the



                                                              26
average marginal effects (AME).31 We see that the marginal effects for the firm-specific variables and

the monetary policy variables are quite large. It is important to remember that although at first blush

the magnitude of the global variables may appear small, these are systemic effects and can translate

to large numbers of predicted defaults when aggregated across firms.

     We find that among the accounting variables, leverage and cash have the largest average marginal

effects, such that a one-standard-deviation increase in the predictor is associated with 0.088 and -0.048

percentage point changes in the probability of default, respectively. From the set of global variables,

Fed funds rate and the yield curve slope have the largest average marginal effects at 0.051 and 0.041,

respectively.



4.4.2   Global Variables, Firm Characteristics and Predicted Default Probabilities

It is important to recognize that the MEM and AME-style marginal effects of the logit model depend

on the values of other covariates. To illustrate this dependence, we examine predicted probabilities of

default for "healthy" firms as well as those that default in the next month. Specifically, we simulate

a healthy firm in 2006 by setting all firm accounting and market variables equal to their respective

means for the subset of non-defaulting firms for that year. We simulate an unhealthy firm in a similar

manner using data from the subset of firms that defaulted in the next month. All macroeconomic

variables for both firms are set to their mean values in 2006.

     Figure 2 shows the probability of default for our healthy (blue) and un-healthy (red) firms across

the entire sample range of each global variable, as in Appendix Figure B2.32 The stark difference
   31 The two approaches yield estimated marginal effects of different magnitudes for the following reasons. First, since the
logit model specification is non-linear, marginal effects for continuous variables vary depending on the point in the sample
space at which we evaluate them. To see this, Appendix Figure B2 plots predicted probabilities across the sample range of
each variable, holding all other variables at their means. The slopes of the individual covariate curves at their respective
mean values give the MEM value. Second, since AME is the average of individual marginal effects, higher moments of the
distribution for each of the covariates will influence AME. For example, highly skewed covariates will see larger differences
between AME and MEM if their skew is towards values that increase the probability of default (this depends both on the
distribution of covariates and the degree of convexity of the response function). Further, the marginal effects of each variable
will also depend on the values of all other covariates.
   32 Due to the non-linearity of the logit model, marginal effects are somewhat harder to interpret than in OLS. To better

visualize the response of default probabilities to changes in covariates we include Appendix Figure B2, which shows the
paths of predicted probabilities for the entire range of each explanatory variable in our model, while keeping all the other
predictors constant at their means. The grey shaded areas are 95% confidence intervals, computed using the 95% confidence
intervals of each variable's coefficient in the logit regression. The plots allow us to compare the probability of default at
various levels of each variable for the "average firm". The convexity in the pattern of stock price and relative size predicted
probabilities stands out against the more linear excess returns and volatility of returns. The patterns suggest that the tails of
the two former variables are relatively more harmful to firms than that of the latter. The flatness of the volatility of returns
plot as well as the wide error shading is consistent with its coefficient's lack of statistical significance in the logit regression
(Column 8 in Table 3). The leverage plot reveals a large spread in the probability of default between the two extremes,
which increases faster at high leverage levels. Since Prior default is a dummy, the line in the plot is simply connecting firms'
probability of default when the variable equals zero (no prior default) and one (the firm has defaulted in the past).


                                                                27
in the levels and slopes of these two curves illustrates that firm characteristics play a large role in

determining the impact of global shocks on default probabilities. The figure illustrates that, in contrast

to their healthy peers, unhealthy firms are, for all values of the global variables, more likely to default.

The impact of adverse global shocks is similarly far greater for unhealthy firms since a firm's marginal

effect is proportional to its probability of default conditional on values for firm characteristics such as

leverage, profitability, and so on.

     An insight we gain from computing marginal effects by firm health status is that even without

explicitly including interaction terms in our logit specification, we can examine how firm heterogene-

ity may interact with global financial conditions in determining default probabilities. We explore the

cross-sectional variation in the global exposures of firms further in Section 4.5.



4.4.3   The Predicted Number of Defaults

Given our interest in predicting actual defaults, we can use the estimates of marginal effects at the

mean (MEM) to predict the change in the number of defaults. Column 4 of Table 4 presents the

results. Our estimates tell us, for example, that a one standard deviation increase in the Fed funds rate

increases the predicted probability of default (at the mean) by 0.011pp. Over our entire sample, this

translates to an additional 64 defaults, or an 11% increase.

     We use our estimates to simulate changes in probabilities of default at the firm level for different

values of the global variables.33 For example, given the true accounting and market data for each firm,

and allowing global variables to be fixed at their means during each time period, our model predicts

the total number of defaults as 57, 34, and 46 defaults in 2006, 2007, and 2008 respectively. Simulating

a one standard deviation increase in the Fed Funds rate (1.8pp), we predict an increase in the number

of defaults (and as a fraction of the total for the year) to be 5 (9%=5/57), 7 (21%), and 15 (33%) in 2006,

2007, and 2008 respectively. Similarly, a one standard deviation increase in the slope of the yield curve

(0.85pp) predicts an increase in the number of defaults to be 10 (18%), 7 (21%), and 23 (50%) in 2006,

2007 and 2008 respectively.

     We can also analyze the impact that co-movements of our global variables have on predicted

probabilities of default. The impact of a simultaneous 1pp increase in the Fed funds rate and a 0.75pp

increase in the 5 year Treasury rate yields is 10 (18%), 6 (18%), and 9 (20%) in 2006, 2007, and 2008
   33 Dueto the convexity of the probability function as well as the distribution of covariate values, MEM estimates tend to
provide a lower bound for predicted defaults while AME estimates provide an upper bound.



                                                            28
respectively. Including a 1pp depreciation in the broad dollar index makes those increases 16 (27%),

10 (29%), and 13 (28%). The marginal effects computations in logit specifications are interactive in

nature and therefore greater than the raw effect of any given variable, i.e., the individual  j s. These

exercises provide evidence that firm heterogeneity and an amalgam of global variables impact distress

probabilities. In the next section, we address the impact of global risk-on/risk-off states of the world

in further detail.

      What is clear from these results is that US interest rates have far-reaching effects. These findings

are consistent with evidence that suggests that the change in emerging market bank leverage follow-

ing extended monetary policy easing in the United States has a bigger impact on financial leverage

than domestic policy. This suggests that the impact of monetary policy tightening in the US can have

a significant impact on the increase in median annual defaults. We do not directly explore the feed-

back effect of US monetary policy on the lagged leverage response. However, it is worth noting that

bilateral exchange rates and sovereign spreads can also move in response to US monetary policy tight-

ening, lowering emerging market firm leverage.




4.5    Asset Prices and Cross-Sectional Variation in Global Exposure

If stock returns carry information about the impact of global factors on firms, we may expect the de-

fault risk of firms whose returns are more sensitive to global factors to be more correlated with such

variables. However, the global variables in the logistic regression mask the fact that some emerg-

ing market firms are more dependent on or exposed to global markets than others. In other words,

when we include global variables in our baseline model of probability of default, the average effect

of these factors on our entire sample might hide stronger coefficients and predictive power for the

more globally-exposed firms. Appendix Table B5 shows that stock returns are correlated with global

variables. In this section we further explore the variation in global exposures in the cross-section of

firms.

      To test the hypothesis that stock returns may contain information that varies across firms by the

degree of their global exposure, we compute firm-specific betas of stock returns for each of the global

factors in our model. Specifically, we run a time series regression of returns on each global factor for

each firm which has at least two years of data on returns and the global variable. The dependent

variable is the firm's stock returns, and the explanatory variables are the global factor and the returns


                                                    29
of the country's main stock index. We take the resulting coefficient for each global factor to represent

the sensitivity of the firm's returns to the global factor, after controlling for the country's returns.

Having computed betas for each of the global factors, we select the tercile of firms with most negative

betas, i.e. whose returns fall most with increases in the global factor. In the case of the change in the

broad dollar index, we choose the tercile of firms with the most positive betas; that is, whose returns

fall most severely with decreases in the trade-weighted value of the dollar. Once our firms are sorted

by betas, we create a dummy variable that indicates whether a firm belongs to the top tercile.

    Panel A in Table 6 reports the results of logit regressions of probability of default where the ex-

planatory variables are the global variable and the interaction of that global variable with the top-

tercile beta dummy. The coefficient on the interaction term tells us whether the magnitude of the

impact of each global factor on the probability of default differs for the subset of firms whose returns

are most sensitive to that factor. We find positive, statistically significant coefficients in the top-third

dummy interactions for five-year Treasury rates, VIX, and Fed funds rate (Columns 1, 2, and 4). This

implies that the adverse impact on the probability of default of increases in these variables is larger

for the stocks which fall most during increases in those variables. For instance, the risk of default in-

creases more with VIX for firms with most negative VIX betas. To verify that this result is robust to the

inclusion of firm characteristics, in Panel B we control for the eight accounting and market variables in

our baseline regressions. We find that the interaction coefficient is significant for the same three vari-

ables - the five-year Treasury rate, the VIX, and Fed funds rate. In addition, the unconditional effects

of increases in the TED spread and broad dollar are also significant with directions of magnitude con-

sistent with the results reported throughout the paper. We can therefore conclude that the difference

in the impact of the global factors between firms with more or less sensitive returns remains robust

to the inclusion of firm characteristics. Further, the firm-specific variables retain the same signs and

levels of statistical significance as in Table 3.

    Combining all global variables into one global factor yields further evidence that the sensitivity

of returns to global financial conditions is related to the effect those global conditions have on firms'

probability of default. We construct an index of return sensitivity to the global environment ­ which

we call the Global Beta Z score ­ by combining the betas of the six global variables in our model. We

standardize the beta for each global factor by subtracting the mean beta across firms and dividing by

the standard deviation. We then add together the resulting values of the six factors.34 The result is a
  34 We   subtract the change in the broad dollar rate since we want an increase in the US dollar to impact the Global Beta Z



                                                             30
combined measure that gives equal weight to each beta and serves as proxy for how much a firm's

returns respond to global financial conditions. A lower (more negative) Global Beta Z score implies

that a firm's returns are more negatively affected by increases in the global variables. We compute

a Global Variable Z in the same manner, using the global variables as inputs instead of the betas. A

higher Global Variable Z score is associated with a more difficult environment for emerging markets

to finance themselves (what is often known as a "risk-off" environment).

     In Table 7 we show the results of a logit regression of the probability of default on Global Beta Z,

Global Variable Z, and the interaction of the two. Columns 1, 2 and 3 progressively add firm char-

acteristics, prior default and domestic variables. In the baseline analog in Column 4, we control for

firm-specific variables and country fixed effects and find that the coefficient on Global Beta Z is is pos-

itive and statistically significant, implying that exposure to global financial conditions is a predictor

of default. The Global Variable Z is also positively correlated with default risk and highly statistically

significant; i.e. emerging market firms are more likely to default in global risk-off conditions. Addi-

tionally, the interaction of the two returns a significant, negative coefficient. This tells us that, all else

equal, the effect of a risk-off environment on default risk is larger for firms whose returns respond

more negatively to such global conditions.

     We can conclude that, for some global factors like the Fed Funds rate, five-year Treasury rates, the

VIX and for a composite global factor, the sensitivity of a firm's returns to the factor(s) affects the extent

to which its solvency depends on the level of such factor(s). There are at least two possible explana-

tions behind this connection between default risk and market betas. First, the stock market captures

the effect of global conditions on the firms' probability of default, and the price responds more sharply

than for other firms. Second, the fact that returns respond more strongly to the global environment

increases the firm's probability of default. In other words, the larger response of returns in some firms

accentuates the direct impact of the global conditions on the firm's ability to remain solvent. Should

the first explanation hold, it would suggest a distress risk premium exists in emerging market stock

returns. We explore this and other asset pricing implications of our measure of probability of default

in the next section.


score in the same direction as an increase in rates, VIX, sovereign spread, and TED spread.




                                                            31
5   The Distress Risk Premium in Emerging Markets

We use our estimated probability of default (Column 8 in Table 3) to study the stock returns of dis-

tressed firms in emerging markets. As was the case with the distress risk measure, research on the

distress risk premium has been mostly focused on US equities (e.g. Fama and French, 1996; Vassa-

lou and Xing, 2004; Campbell et al., 2008). Asset pricing theory suggests investors should demand a

premium for holding stocks at risk of default. However, Campbell et al. (2008), among others, find

the opposite: stocks of firms with a high probability of default yield lower returns than their safer

or more solvent counterparts. Campbell et al. (2008) show this result holds even after controlling

for Fama-French factors and a momentum factor. The findings have important implications for the

understanding of risk factors in asset prices, since distress risk is often argued to be the reason behind

the small cap and value premia (Chan and Chen, 1991; Fama and French, 1996).

    We test whether a distress risk premium puzzle exists in emerging market stocks. Every month

between January 2002 and December 2015 we estimate our measure of next-month probability of

default using all prior data in the sample to prevent look-ahead bias. In the first month, we sort

all stocks based on this predicted probability of default and construct ten portfolios of equal size,

placing the stocks with lowest distress risk in Portfolio 1 and those most likely to default in Portfolio

10. We re-balance the portfolios every month thereafter based on the stocks' updated distress risk,

again placing the least and most likely to default in Portfolios 1 and 10, respectively. As a proxy for

expected returns, we use average realized returns over the 12 months after distress risk is computed.

Next-month realized returns leave little room for information surprises to cancel out, and, by looking

at returns over a longer horizon, we average out temporary over- and under-performance due to

idiosyncratic events unrelated to firm health.

    Panel A of Table 8 shows each portfolio's average estimated probability of default, its twelve-

month average monthly returns, and the results of a regression of returns on six common factors.

The spread in the probability of default across portfolios is large: the average firm in the portfolio

with lowest default risk has just a 0.0018% probability of failing next month (Column 1), compared

to 0.94% for the average firm in the riskiest decile (Column 10). The average twelve-month returns

reported in the second row are broadly increasing in probability of default, consistent with a positive

risk premium associated with distress. The safest and riskiest portfolios return 0.95% and 1.55% per

month, respectively. These results don't necessarily imply the existence of a distress risk premium in



                                                   32
emerging market stocks, since our measure of distress risk may be associated with other factors that

demand premia of their own.

    To address this, we control for six common factors from the literature in order to separate the

distress risk premium from other sources of risk premia that may be present in our sample. The

first three factors we control for are the three factors from Fama and French (1993): excess market

returns (RM), Small minus Big (SMB), and High value minus Low value (HML). The other three are

momentum, short-term reversal, and long-term reversal. Below we describe the computation of these

factors for the emerging market firms in our sample in greater detail.

    We compute three factors following Fama and French (1993). The market factor, RM, is the return

on the market minus the risk-free rate. To account for the various countries in our sample we construct

a weighted average of returns of the main index in each country, where the weights are based on the

number of stocks from each country in our sample. The Fed Funds rate serves as proxy for the risk-free

rate.

    The other two factors are size and book-to-market. Each January, we sort all stocks by market

capitalization and divide the sample in two groups of equal size: Small and Big. We also sort all firms

by book-to-market and use the 30th and 70th percentiles to divide the cross-section into three groups:

Low, Neutral, and High. We then construct 6 portfolios from the intersection of the two sorting results

and compute their simple monthly average returns: SL, SN, SH, BL, BN, and BH. Lastly, we find

the returns of portfolios mimicking the Size (Small-Minus-Big, or SMB) and Book-to-Market (High-

Minus-Low, or HML) factors as in Fama and French (1993):

                                    1                  1
                           SMB =      (SL + SN + SH ) - ( BL + BN + BH )
                                    3                  3

                                          1             1
                                 HML =      (SH + BH ) - (SL + BL)
                                          2             2

We rebalance the portfolios every January and end up with a monthly time series of returns for each

factor-mimicking portfolio. For the remaining three factors, momentum is computed as the return in

the prior year excluding the prior month, short-term reversal as the return in the prior month, and

long-term reversal as the return in the prior five years excluding the prior year.

    A regression of 12-month average returns on the six factors returns the following results. We find

that high failure risk portfolios have more positive betas on SMB, reflecting the prevalence of small

firms among distressed stocks; more negative betas on HML, consistent with growth stocks being


                                                   33
more at risk of default; and more positive betas on RM, symptomatic of stocks more exposed to broad

market fluctuations also being more likely to default. We include the average market capitalization

and market-to-book ratios of the firms in each decile to illustrate the sorting that generates the nearly-

monotonically increasing factor loadings for SMB and HML with smaller firms and high market-to-

book firms in the highest probabilities of default deciles.

    The three Fama-French factors, as well as the firm specific long and short term reversal, and mo-

mentum factors, explain a portion of the 12-month average excess returns of each firm's stock. The

constant, or alpha, of this regression can be interpreted as the portion of returns not explained by the

factors. We observe alphas that are increasing in default risk. This allows us to conclude that, even

after correcting for the sources of risk captured by the factors, investors can expect a higher return on

portfolios comprised of stocks at high risk of default. In other words, we find a positive distress risk

premium in emerging market stocks.

    Figure 4 plots the 6-factor alphas and their 95% confidence intervals, which show that the alpha on

Portfolio 10 (highest probability of default) is significantly larger than the alphas on Portfolios 5 and

lower, and the alpha on Portfolio 1 (lowest probability of default) is significantly smaller than those

of the highest two deciles' alphas. Caution is warranted in interpreting any overlap in confidence

intervals across deciles as a formal test of the difference in these alpha estimates. In a later robustness

test we conduct a t-test to determine the statistical significance of this difference in estimated alphas.

    We run a number of different exercises in order to test the statistical significance of these results.

First, we form two "long-short" portfolios, LS90-10 and LS80-20 ­ the first long the most distressed

portfolio (Portfolio 10) and short the portfolio with least distressed stocks (Portfolio 1), and the sec-

ond long the two most distressed portfolios and short the two with least distressed stocks. We run

a 6-factor regression using the 12-month average return of LS90-10 and LS80-20, and the results are

shown in the first two columns of Table 9. The first row tells us that average returns are 0.55 per-

centage points larger in the most distressed portfolio than in the least distressed (Column 1), and 0.47

percentage points larger for the 20% riskiest stocks than the 20% safest (Column 2). Both differences

are statistically significant. The coefficients on the Fama-French factors confirm that the exposure to

SMB or small firms and HML for growth stocks is larger for the portfolios with more distressed stocks.

Most importantly, the positive, statistically significant alphas reveal that the factor-adjusted compen-

sation is in fact larger and highly significant for the portfolios with higher distress risk, validating our

finding of a positive distress risk premium.


                                                    34
    Panel B of Table 8 presents an alternative method for computing 6-factor alphas using returns over

a 12-month period. For every month of the year following portfolio formation, we run a regression of

12-month average returns on the six factors computed in that same month. By doing this, the timing

of the distress risk portfolio formation corresponds to the timing of the factors, instead of using the

factors computed only in January of each year as controls for the average 12-month returns.

    Panel B of Table 8 shows monotonically increasing alphas in distress risk, and the long-short

regression coefficients in Columns 3 and 4 of Table 9 include positive, statistically significant alphas.

We also run a t-test of means on the monthly alphas estimated for the lowest and highest risk portfolios

in Panel B. We find the mean of the high risk alphas to be statistically larger than those of the low risk

alphas at a confidence level of 1%. In addition, due to the more appropriate factor timing, the factor

loadings are more intuitive. We see both growth- and value-mimicking portfolio returns as well as

mostly positive loadings on the market factor.

    To further test the robustness of our findings, we run firm-level Fama-Macbeth regressions of 12-

month average returns on firms' probability of default. We find a positive, statistically significant co-

efficient in the second stage cross-sectional regression. Specifically, the average gamma across months

is 0.0089 with a t-test p-value less than .01, also confirming the presence of a distress risk premium in

emerging market stocks.

    Lastly, we use valuation ratios instead of realized returns to extract the distress risk premium.

While realized returns are unbiased estimates of expected returns, their use as proxies for expected

returns in the short and medium term has been questioned in the literature (e.g. Elton, 1999; Lundblad,

2007). Valuation measures like implied cost of capital, dividend yield, and earnings-to-price ratio are

commonly suggested alternatives (e.g. Pastor et al., 2008), on the basis that they are a better reflection

of investors' expectations of future stock performance. Panel C in Table 8 does not show a clear pattern

in the relationship between the earnings-to-price ratio (using net-income as proxy for earnings) and

our measure of probability of default.35




  35 We   do not have data to compute dividend yield or implied cost of capital.


                                                             35
6   Conclusion

There is a dearth of rigorous research on the determinants of corporate distress in emerging markets.

The goal of this paper is to shed light on factors that adversely impact the solvency of emerging market

firms and explore whether there is investor compensation for taking on distress risk. We believe

that developing a framework that allows policymakers to anticipate corporate defaults in emerging

markets may inform efforts to mitigate their regional and global impact.

    We show that global financial conditions can be transmitted to firms in emerging markets through

several channels. Although existing models proposed for US firms yield reasonable forecasting power,

they do not account for vulnerabilities specific to emerging market companies, such as advanced-

economy monetary policy changes, US dollar movements, or shifts in global liquidity and risk aver-

sion. A novel multi-country dataset of corporate defaults allows us to develop a model of distress risk

specific to emerging markets, as well as quantify the importance of global shocks on emerging market

corporate distress.

    We find that controlling for firm-specific variables and country fixed effects, increasing Fed funds

rates, a steeper US yield curve, tightening US monetary policy shocks, and poor global liquidity con-

ditions affect default probabilities adversely in emerging markets. Introducing a dummy variable

indicating whether a firm has defaulted in the past has a very positive impact on the model's predic-

tive power. The finding is novel. A baseline specification that includes accounting, market, and global

financial variables, along with country fixed effects and a prior-default dummy, yields superior ex-

planatory power for emerging market corporate distress than existing US-based bankruptcy forecast

models.

    We also explore whether stock returns embed information about default risk. We first do so by

focusing on firms whose returns are most sensitive to global financial conditions. Analysis of these

global betas reveals that the effect of the global variable on the probability of default is more significant

for firms with the most negative betas. Furthermore, a composite global beta measure we call the

Global Beta Z helps us show that the effect of a global risk-off environment on distress risk is higher

for firms whose returns respond more negatively to such global conditions.

    Finally, we explore the asset pricing implications of our probability of default measure. Previous

studies using reduced-form measures of default risk have struggled to identify a positive distress risk

premium in US equities. We, on the other hand, find strong evidence of the presence of a distress risk



                                                     36
premium in emerging market stocks. Future twelve-month stock returns are monotonically increasing

in the probability of corporate default, a trend that holds after controlling for six prevalent factors.

Several robustness tests confirm the statistical significance of our findings.




                                                    37
References

[1] Acharya, Viral, Stephen Cecchetti, José de Gregorio, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Philip Lane, and Ugo

   Panizza (2015). Corporate Debt in Emerging Economies: A Threat to Financial Stability? Brookings

   Institution Report, September.

[2] Alfaro, Laura, Asis, Gonzalo, Chari, Anusha and Panizza, Ugo (2019). Corporate debt, firm size

   and financial fragility in emerging markets, Journal of International Economics, 118(C), 1-19.

[3] Altman, Edward (1968). Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis and the Prediction of Corporate

   Bankruptcy. Journal of Finance, 23 (September),589-609.

[4] Altman, Edward (2005). An Emerging Market Credit Scoring System for Bonds. Emerging Market

   Review, 6,3011-323.

[5] Altman, Edward and Brooks Brady (2001). Explaining Aggregate Recovery Rates on Corporate

   Bond Defaults. Salomon Center Working Paper, November.

[6] Avdjiev, Stefan, Michael Chui, and Hyun Song Shin (2014). Non-financial Corporations from

   Emerging Market Economies and Capital Flows. BIS Quarterly Review, December,67-77.

[7] Bekaert, Geert, Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca (2013). Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy,

   Journal of Monetary Economics, 60 (7), 771-788.

[8] Beltran, D.O., and C. G. Collins. 2018. How Vulnerable are EME Corporates? IFDP Notes K.7,

   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC.

[9] Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler and Simon Gilchrist (1999). The Financial Accelerator in a

   Quantitative Business Cycle Frame- work, in J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of

   Macroeconomics, Vol. 1 of Handbooks in Economics, 1341-1393.

[10] Broner, Fernando, Guido Lorenzoni and Sergio Schmuckler (2013). Why Do Emerging Economies

   Borrow Short Term? Journal of the European Economic Association, 11, 167-100.

[11] Bruno, Valentina and Hyun S. Shin, Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity, Review of Eco-

   nomic Studies, 2015a, 82(2), 535-564.

[12] Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin (2015). Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking Channel of

   Monetary Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics, 71, 119-132.

                                                     38
[13] Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart (1996). Inflows of Capital to De-

   veloping Countries in the 1990s. Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(2),123-39

[14] Calvo, Guillermo A (1998), "Capital Flows and Capital-market Crises: The Simple Economics of
                                                           S54.
   Sudden Stops," Journal of Applied Economics, 1 (1), 35âA¸

[15] Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Luis-Fernando Mejía (2008). Systemic Sudden Stops:

   The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects and Financial Integration. NBER Working Paper 14026.

[16] Campbell, John, Jens Hilscher, and Jan Szilagyi (2008). In Search of Distress Risk. Journal of Fi-

   nance, 63, 6, 2899-2939.

[17] Cespedes, Luis Felipe, Roberto Chang, and AndrÃl's Velasco (2004). "Balance Sheets and Ex-

   change Rate Policy." American Economic Review, 94 (4): 1183-1193.

[18] Chan, K.C. and Nai-Fu Chen (1991). Structural and Return Characteristics of Small and Large

   Firms. Journal of Finance, 46, 4, 1467-1484.

[19] Chari, Anusha, Karlye Dilts Stedman, and Christian Lundblad (2020). Taper Tantrums: Quanti-

   tative Easing, its Aftermath, and Emerging Market Capital Flows. Forthcoming Review of Financial

   Studies.

[20] Chava, Sudheer and Robert Jarrow (2004). Bankruptcy Prediction with Industry Effects. Review

   of Finance, 8, 537-569.

[21] Chui, Michael, Ingo Fender, and Vladyslav Sushko (2014). Risks Related to EME Corporate Bal-

   ance Sheets: The Role of Leverage and Currency Mismatch. BIS Quarterly Review, September, 35-

   47.

[22] Crosbie, Peter and Jeff Bohn (2003). Modeling Default Risk. Moody's KMV White Paper, (San

   Francisco: Moody's Investor Service) December 18.

[23] Das, Sanjiv, Darrell Duffie, Nikunj Kapadia, and Common Failings: How Corporate Defaults Are

   Correlated. Journal of Finance, 62, 1, 93-117.

[24] Dell'Ariccia, Giovanni, Luc Laeven, and Robert Marquez (2016). Financial Frictions, Foreign Cur-

   rency Borrowing, and Systemic Risk. Working Paper.



                                                    39
[25] Duan, Jin-Chuan, Jie Sun, and Tao Wang (2012). Multiperiod Corporate Default Prediction ­ A

   Forward Intensity Approach.Journal of Econometrics, 170, 1, 191-209.

[26] Duffie, Darrell, Andreas Eckner, Guillaume Horel, and Leandro Saita (2009). Frailty Correlated

   Default.Journal of Finance, 64, 5, 2089-2123.

[27] Elton, Edwin (1999). Expected Return, Realized Return, and Asset Pricing Tests. Journal of Finance,

   54, 4, 1199-1220.

[28] Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French (1993). Common Risk Factors in the Returns of Stocks and

   Bonds. Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 1, 3-56.

[29] Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French (1996). Multifactor Explanations of Asset Pricing Anomalies.

   Journal of Finance, 51, 1, 55-84.

[30] Feyen, E., N. Fiess, I. Z. Huertas, and L. Lambert (2017). Which Emerging Markets and Devel-

   oping Economies Face Corporate Balance Sheet Vulnerabilities? A Novel Monitoring Framework.

   Policy Research Working Paper 8198, World Bank, Washington, DC.

[31] Forbes, Kristin and Francis Warnock (2012). Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight and Re-

   trenchment. Journal of International Economics, 88, 2, 235-251.

[32] Fratzscher, Marcel (2012). Capital Flows, Push versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis

   Journal of International Economics, 88, 341-356.

[33] Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2018). On the International Spillovers of

   US Quantitative Easing. The Economic Journal, 128, 608, 330-377.

[34] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Maurice Obstfeld (2012). "Stories of the Twentieth Century for

   the Twenty-First." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4 (1): 226-65.

[35] Hanley, James and Barbara McNeil (1982). The Meaning and Use of the Area Under a Receiver

   Operating Characteristic (ROC) Curve. Radiology, 143, 29-36.

[36] Harvey, Campbell and Andrew Roper (1999). The Asian Bet. The Crisis in Emerging Financial Mar-

   kets, ed. by Harwood, A., Litan, R.E., Pomerleano, M., Brookings Institution Press, Washington,

   DC, 29-115.

[37] He, Z. and Xiong, W. (2012), Rollover Risk and Credit Risk. The Journal of Finance, 67: 391-430.

                                                      40
[38] Hernandez-Tinoco, Mario and Nick Wilson (2013). Financial Distress and Bankruptcy Prediction

   among Listed Companies using Accounting, Market and Macroeconomic Variables. International

   Review of Financial Analysis, 30, 394-419.

[39] Institute of International Finance (2020). Global Debt Monitor, January 2020.

[40] International Monetary Fund (2015). Corporate Leverage in Emerging Markets-A Concern?

   Global Financial Stability Report, October, 83-114.

[41] Jotikasthira, Chotibhak, Christian Lundblad, and Tarun Ramadorai (2012). Asset Fire Sales and

   Purchases and the International Transmission of Funding Shocks. Journal of Finance, 67, 6, 2015-

   2050.

[42] Lorenzoni, Guido (2008). Inefficient Credit Booms. Review of Economic Studies, 75, 3, 809-833.

[43] Lundblad, Christian (2007). The Risk-Return Tradeoff in the Long Run: 1836-2003. Journal of Fi-

   nancial Economics, 85, 1, 123-150.

[44] McCauley, Robert Neil, Patrick McGuire, and Vladyslav Sushko (2015). Global Dollar Credit:

   Links to US Monetary Policy and Leverage. BIS Working Paper 483.

[45] Mendoza, Enrique and Marco Terrones (2008). An Anatomy of Credit Booms: Evidence from

   Macro Aggregates and Micro Data. IMF Working Paper, April.

[46] Merton, Robert (1974). On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates. Journal

   of Finance, 29, 2, 449-470.

[47] Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and Helene Rey, US Monetary Policy and the Global Financial Cycle,

   February 2018. NBER Working Paper No. 21722.

[48] NUS-RMI Credit Research Initiative (2016). Technical Report, Version: 2016 Update 1. Global

   Credit Review, 6, 49-132.

[49] Ohlson, James (1980). Financial Ratios and the Probabilistic Prediction of Bankruptcy. Journal of

   Accounting Research, 19, Spring, 109-131.

[50] Pastor, Lubos, Meenakshi Sinha, and Bhaskaran Swaminathan (2008). Estimating the Intertem-

   poral Risk-Return Tradeoff Using the Implied Cost of Capital. Journal of Finance, 63, 6, 2859-2897.


                                                    41
[51] Pomerleano, Michael (1998). The East Asian Crisis and Corporate Finances: The Untold Microe-

   conomic Story. Emerging Markets Quarterly, Winter, 14-27.

[52] Powell, Andrew (2014). Global Recovery and Monetary Normalization: Escaping a Chronicle

   Foretold?. 2014 Latin American and Caribbean Macroeconomic Report, Inter-American Develop-

   ment Bank.

[53] Rey, Helene (2015). Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy

   Independence. NBER Working Paper No. 21162.

[54] Schneider, Martin and Aaron Tornell (2004). Balance Sheet Effects, Bailout Guarantees, and Fi-

   nancial Crises. Review of Economic Studies, 71, 3, 883-913.

[55] Shumway, Tyler (2001). Forecasting Bankruptcy More Accurately: A Simple Hazard Model. Jour-

   nal of Business, 74, 1, 101-124.

[56] Vassalou, Maria and Yuhang Xing (2004). Default Risk in Equity Returns. Journal of Finance, 59, 2,

   831-868.

[57] Zmijewski, Mark (1984). Methodological Issues Related to the Estimation of Financial Distress

   Prediction Models. Journal of Accounting Research Supplement, 59-86.




                                                   42
                               Figure 1: In-sample Predictive Power
This figure shows the Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve for models 1, 7, and 8 of Table 3. The
curves shown are the averages of the ROC curves in each month in the sample.




                                                    43
                 Figure 2: Predicted Probabilities: Healthy vs. Unhealthy Firms

This figure shows predicted probabilities for a 'healthy' firm (in blue) and for an 'unhealthy' firm (in red) for all
values of each global variable. All other variables for the 'healthy' firm are set at their means for the subset of
firms that do no default the next month. All other variables for the 'unhealthy' firm are set at their means for
the subset of firms that do default next month. The shaded grey areas are 95% confidence intervals, computed
using the 95% confidence intervals of each variable's coefficient in our benchmark logit regression.




                                                         44
                     Figure 3: Time Series of Actual and Predicted Defaults

This figure shows the number of actual defaults per month (averaged by quarter) and the number of defaults
predicted using models 1, 7, and 8 of Table 3. The number of predicted defaults in a month is the sum of the
estimated probabilities of default for all firms.




                                                    45
                                       Figure 4: Six-Factor Alphas
This figure plots six-factor alphas from Panel B of Table 8 and their 95% confidence intervals for 10 portfolios
sorted by increasing distress risk.




                                                      46
                                    Table 1: Types of default events
Panel A presents the types of default events covered in the CRI database and their classification into Bankruptcy,
Delisting, and Corporate Default Action categories, as CRI does in its databaseâA Zs
                                                                                   ´ technical report (NUS-RMI
Technical Report 2016, Table A.9, p. 106). Panel B counts the number of each type of event in our final sample;
i.e. the sample of firm-months with data on all accounting and market variables.

                                                   PANEL A
 Action Type                                                         Subcategory
 Bankruptcy Filing                          Administration, Arrangement, Canadian CCAA, Chapter
                                            7, Chapter 11, Chapter 15, Conservatorship, Insolvency,
                                            Japanese CRL, Judicial Management, Liquidation, Pre-
                                            Negotation Chapter 11, Protection, Receivership, Rehabilita-
                                            tion, Rehabilitation (Thailand 1997), Reorganization, Restruc-
                                            turing, Section 304, Supreme court declaration, Winding up,
                                            Work out, Sued by creditor, Petition Withdrawn, Other
 Delisting                                  Bankruptcy
 Default Corporate Action                   Bankruptcy, Coupon & Principal Payment, Coupon Payment
                                            Only, Debt Restructuring, Interest Payment, Loan Payment,
                                            Principal Payment, ADR (Japan only), Declared Sick (India
                                            only), Regulatory Action (Taiwan only), Financial Difficulty
                                            and Shutdown (Taiwan only), Buyback option, Other

                                                    PANEL B
 Action Type                                                               Count
 Bankruptcy                                                                 74
 Delisting                                                                   3
 Default Corporate Action                                                   509
   Bankruptcy Corporate Action                                               11
   Coupon & Principal Payment                                                19
   Coupon Payment                                                            19
   Restructuring                                                            133
   Interest Payment                                                          10
   Loan Payment                                                             320
   Principal Payment                                                         10
   Other                                                                     2
   Unknown                                                                   12




                                                       47
                                      Table 2: Summary statistics
Summary statistics for firm-months with data for all accounting, market, domestic and global macrovariables.
The first three columns show unconditional means, means for those firms that default next month, and means
for the subset of firms whose default was listed as a bankruptcy. The last two columns show the results of a
two-sample t-test for equal means of each group of distressed firms against the whole sample. ***, **, *, and 
indicate p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.10, and p < 0.15.

                                                           Means                    t-Tests
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)
                                   Full Sample     Default     Bankrupt     Default    Bankrupt
          Excess returns              -0.008        -0.049       -0.060                 
          Stock price                  2.479         1.249        0.156                 
          Volatility of returns        1.533         0.748        0.727                 
          Relative size               -7.972        -9.136       -9.233                 
          Profitability                0.004        -0.019       -0.049                 
          Leverage                     0.370         0.600        0.759                 
          Cash                         0.084         0.041        0.024                 
          Market-to-book ratio         2.084         2.869        4.400                 
          Prior default                0.061         0.545        0.429                 
          Unemployment rate            4.474         4.490         5.471                
          Inflation rate               0.036         0.036         0.031                
          Real interest rate           4.033         2.760         8.113                
          Sovereign spread             2.430         2.628         1.965                
          FX 12m avg                  -0.000        -0.001         0.001       
          Fed funds rate               1.239         1.806        1.547    
          Yield slope (5y-FF)          1.131         1.031        1.238    
          Fed MP surprise             -0.002         0.001       -0.002    
          VIX                         19.496        19.707       21.311                       
          TED spread                  -0.070         0.008       -0.111    
          Broad US$                    0.000        -0.002        0.000    




                                                     48
                                          Table 3: Logit Regressions of Probability of Default Next Month

     Results of logit regression combining accounting and orthogonalized market variables with local and global macro variables to explain the probability of
     default next month. Column 1 uses firm accounting variables as covariates. Column 2 adds a dummy indicating whether a firm has experienced a default
     event in the past. Column 3 adds domestic macro variables, Column 4 includes global variables, and Column 5 has both domestic and global. Column 6
     incorporates country fixed effects to the model in Column 4. Columns 7 & 8 add orthogonalized firm market variables the specifications in columns 5 &
     6. The dependent variable in all specifications is binary, indicating whether a firm experienced a distress event the following month. Pseudo-R2 refers to
     Mc-Fadden's Pseudo-R2 , and AUC is the area under the ROC curve. ***, **, *, and  indicate four levels of statistical significance of the coefficients: p <
     0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.10, and p < 0.15 respectively.

                                          (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)            (8)
      Constant                        -8.926          -9.013         -7.908         -9.934          -8.477        -11.290          -8.667        -11.477
      Excess returns (orth)                                                                                                        -1.119         -1.628
      Stock price (orth)                                                                                                           -0.259         -0.200
      Volatility of returns (orth)                                                                                                 -0.001         -0.024
      Relative size (orth)                                                                                                          0.175          0.191
      Profitability                   -7.230          -7.051         -7.076         -6.982          -7.345         -8.351          -8.259         -8.831
      Leverage                         3.283           2.675          2.555          2.636           2.407          3.726           2.407          3.560
      Cash                            -3.459          -2.576         -3.791         -2.432          -3.355         -5.467          -3.781         -5.597
      Market-to-book ratio             0.232           0.132          0.103          0.134           0.104          0.058           0.108          0.064




49
      Prior default                                    2.538          2.424          2.526           2.437          2.079           2.463          2.143
      Unemployment rate                                               0.009                        -0.018                          0.003
      Inflation rate                                                -10.510                       -10.129                         -8.065
      Real interest rate                                             -0.055                        -0.041                         -0.045
      Sovereign spread                                               -0.015                         0.000                         -0.019
      FX 12m avg                                                    -12.566                       -17.966                        -17.338
      Fed funds rate                                                                 0.235           0.160          0.275          0.156           0.291
      Yield slope (5y-FF)                                                            0.406           0.288          0.522          0.261           0.495
      Fed MP surprise                                                                1.325           1.179          1.744          0.945           1.191
      VIX                                                                            0.007           0.004          0.015          0.009           0.020
      TED spread                                                                     0.255           0.527          0.181          0.558           0.083
      Broad US$                                                                     -6.105          -8.077         -6.177        -11.327          -8.376
      Pseudo-R2                         0.097           0.175          0.183          0.182           0.189          0.221           0.201          0.237
      AUC                               0.839           0.902          0.889          0.902           0.892          0.907           0.903          0.922
      Observations                     705824          705824         424011         705824          424011         705824          372673         589224
      Defaults                           681             681            593            681             593            681             524            589
      Country FE
                                       Table 4: Marginal effects
Marginal effects from our benchmark model, column 8 of table 3. Column 1 lists standard deviations of each
variable. Columns 2 & 3 show MEM and AME estimates for 1 standard deviation increases in each variable.
Column 4 shows the estimated change in the number of defaults over the sample due to 1 standard deviation
increases in each global variable, calculated using MEM estimates.

                                          SD            MEM            AME           defaults
        Excess returns (orth)             0.138         -0.005        -0.022
        Stock price (orth)                1.215         -0.005        -0.024
        Volatility of returns (orth)      9.160         -0.005        -0.021
        Relative size (orth)              1.553          0.006         0.029
        Profitability                     0.028         -0.005        -0.024
        Leverage                          0.253          0.019         0.088
        Cash                              0.089         -0.010        -0.048
        Market-to-book ratio              1.533          0.002         0.009
        Fed funds rate                    1.804          0.011         0.051        64
        Yield slope (5y-FF)               0.850          0.009         0.041        51
        Fed MP surprise                   0.047          0.001         0.005         7
        VIX                               8.468          0.004         0.017        21
        TED spread                        0.367          0.001         0.003         4
        Broad US$                         0.012         -0.002        -0.010       -12




                                                   50
Table 5: Transmission of Global Shocks and Firm Fundamentals through Excess Returns
Results of logit regression combining fitted excess returns (generated from the regression detailed in Table
B5) and accounting variables with local and global macro variables to explain the probability of default next
month. Column 1 uses specification 5 from Table 3 as a baseline, and Columns 2 & 3 add excess returns fitted
on accounting and global variables, respectively. Column 4 uses specification 6 from Table 3 as a baseline,
and Columns 5 & 6 add excess returns fitted on accounting and global variables, respectively. The dependent
variable in all specifications is binary, indicating whether a firm experienced a distress event the following
month. Pseudo-R2 refers to Mc-Fadden's Pseudo-R2 , and AUC is the area under the ROC curve. ***, **, *, and
 indicate four levels of statistical significance of the coefficients: p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.10, and p < 0.15
respectively.

                                        (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
 Constant                             -8.477    -8.189        -8.167      -11.290       -9.810       -9.985
 Fitted excess returns (accounting)             -28.810                                -34.059
 Fitted excess returns (global)                               -22.824                               -57.455
 Profitability                        -7.345                   -7.101      -8.351                    -8.350
 Leverage                              2.407                    2.505       3.726                     3.699
 Cash                                 -3.355                   -3.850      -5.467                    -5.667
 Market-to-book ratio                  0.104                    0.100       0.058                     0.044
 Prior default                         2.437      3.057         2.549       2.079         2.864       2.203
 Unemployment rate                     -0.018    -0.008         0.030
 Inflation rate                       -10.129    -5.929        -8.251
 Real interest rate                    -0.041    -0.028        -0.060
 Sovereign spread                       0.000     0.005        -0.030
 FX 12m avg                           -17.966   -19.161       -14.703
 Fed funds rate                        0.160      0.233                     0.275        0.357
 Yield slope (5y-FF)                   0.288      0.334                     0.522        0.540
 Fed MP surprise                       1.179      1.076                     1.744        1.482
 VIX                                   0.004      0.007                     0.015        0.017
 TED spread                            0.527      0.538                     0.181        0.193
 Broad US$                            -8.077    -12.098                    -6.177       -9.248
 Pseudo-R2                              0.189     0.165         0.188        0.221        0.190        0.227
 AUC                                    0.892     0.837         0.889        0.907        0.844        0.916
 Observations                          424011    372673        372673       705824       589224       589224
 Defaults                                593       524           524          681          589          589
 Country FE




                                                         51
                                 Table 6: Top Tercile Betas by Global Variable

Results of logit regressions of probability of default on each global factor, controlling for firm-specific variables.
The explanatory variables in Panel A are the global variable of the same name as each column and the interaction
of that variable with a dummy indicating whether a firm's returns are among the top-third most sensitive to the
global factor. Panel B also includes accounting and orthogonalized market variables as controls. The dependent
variable is binary, indicating whether a firm experienced a distress event the following month. Pseudo-R2 refers
to Mc-Fadden's Pseudo-R2 . ***, **, and * indicate three levels of statistical significance of the coefficients: p <
0.01, p < 0.05, and p < 0.10, respectively.

                                                           PANEL A
                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)
                                 Fed funds rate   5y T-bill   FED MP surprise    VIX      TED spread    Broad US$
 Constant                          -7.229         -7.708           -7.019       -7.135      -7.015       -7.022
 Global variable                    0.127          0.245            1.239       -0.002       0.236       -7.084
 Global variable * top-tercile      0.065          0.082           -1.474        0.020       0.234       -4.459
 Pseudo-R2                           0.006         0.010                0        0.003        0.001        0.001
 Observations                       774705        774705             774705     774705       774705       774705
 Defaults                             692           692                692        692          692          692



                                                           PANEL B
                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)
                                 Fed funds rate   5y T-bill   FED MP surprise    VIX      TED spread    Broad US$
 Constant                          -9.158         -9.576           -8.912       -8.938      -8.929       -8.914
 Excess returns (orth)             -1.092         -1.081           -1.124       -1.114      -1.073       -1.110
 Stock price (orth)                -0.315         -0.326           -0.289       -0.288      -0.291       -0.290
 Volatility of returns (orth)       0.004          0.001            0.004        0.004       0.005        0.004
 Relative size (orth)               0.227          0.232            0.214        0.210       0.216        0.215
 Profitability                     -7.248         -7.225           -7.196       -7.167      -7.194       -7.186
 Leverage                           3.215          3.208            3.189        3.293       3.226        3.182
 Cash                              -3.352         -3.340           -3.470       -3.704      -3.446       -3.463
 Market-to-book ratio               0.253          0.256            0.250        0.246       0.252        0.251
 Global variable                     0.127         0.228            1.828       -0.011       0.461      -10.693
 Global variable * top-tercile       0.066         0.053           -2.605        0.028      -0.058       -0.130
 Pseudo-R2                           0.107         0.110              0.102      0.107        0.104        0.103
 Observations                       586985        586985             586985     586985       586985       586985
 Defaults                             586           586                586        586          586          586




                                                              52
                Table 7: Composite Global Beta Z Score as Predictor of Default

Results of logit regressions of probability of default on a composite global factor. Beta Z and Variable Z are
the sum of the standardized global betas and global variables, respectively. We control for accounting, orthog-
onalized market, and domestic macro variables. The dependent variable is binary, indicating whether a firm
experienced a distress event the following month. Pseudo-R2 refers to McFadden's Pseudo-R2 . ***, **, *, and
 indicate four levels of statistical significance of the coefficients: p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.10, and p < 0.15,
respectively.

                                              (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
         Constant                         -8.862            -8.971         -7.884          -9.719
         Excess returns (orth)            -1.079            -1.248         -1.053          -1.535
         Stock price (orth)               -0.304            -0.199         -0.237          -0.187
         Volatility of returns (orth)      0.005             0.005          0.001           0.005
         Relative size (orth)              0.222             0.135          0.165           0.175
         Profitability                    -7.249            -6.927         -7.761          -8.542
         Leverage                          3.228             2.550          2.369           3.506
         Cash                             -3.359            -2.138         -4.028          -6.257
         Market-to-book ratio              0.250             0.146          0.101           0.057
         Prior default                                       2.605          2.474           2.147
         Unemployment rate                                                  0.014
         Inflation rate                                                    -8.442
         Real interest rate                                                -0.054
         Sovereign spread                                                  -0.023
         FX 12m avg                                                       -12.788
         Beta Z                           -0.002             0.007          0.018           0.049
         Global Z                          0.111             0.090          0.083           0.057
         Beta Z * Global Z                -0.022            -0.023         -0.033          -0.023
         Pseudo-R2                           0.109           0.191           0.198           0.232
         AUC                                 0.848           0.911           0.901           0.920
         Observations                       586985          586985          371292          586985
         Defaults                             586             586             522             586
         Country FE




                                                       53
                        Table 8: Returns on Portfolios Sorted by Distress Risk
Stocks sorted monthly based on our predicted probability of default and placed in ten portfolios of equal size.
Portfolio 1 contains the firms with the lowest probability of default and Portfolio 10 those with highest predicted
distress risk. We rebalance the portfolios every month from January 2002 to December 2015 based on the stocks'
updated distress risk. Panel A shows, for each portfolio, average estimated probability of default, average
monthly return for the 12 months following portfolio formation, alpha and selected coefficients from a 6-factor
regression, and average relative size and market-to-book ratio. RM equals the return of a weighted average of
country index returns minus the risk-free rate, and SMB and HML are the returns of factor-mimicking portfolios
constructed as in Fama and French (1993). The other factors (coefficients not shown) are momentum, short-
term reversal, and long-term reversal. For panel A, all factors are computed in January. Panel B shows the
average coefficients of 12 monthly regressions of average monthly returns for the 12 months following portfolio
formation on the factors computed for each respective month. In Panel C, we run the same regression as in
Panel A, but using as our dependent variable the net-income-to-price ratio as a proxy for expected returns.

                                              PANEL A: Single Regressions
 Portfolios                 1         2         3        4        5          6        7        8        9        10
 Mean P(default) (%)      0.0018     0.0038    0.0065   0.0104   0.0164     0.0267   0.0485   0.0897   0.1475   0.9374
 Mean 12-month returns    0.0095     0.0098    0.0103   0.0099   0.0077     0.0076   0.0089   0.0114   0.0144   0.0155
 6-factor alpha           0.0103  0.0104  0.0109  0.0109  0.0091  0.0093  0.0110  0.0133  0.0162  0.0173
 RM                      -0.0241 -0.0198 -0.0142 -0.0135  0.0064  0.0192  0.0178  0.0190  0.0125  0.0256
 SMB                     -0.1381 -0.1343 -0.1011 -0.0843 -0.0477 -0.0250 -0.0254  0.0294  0.0890  0.1080
 HML                     -0.0336 -0.0301 -0.0260 -0.0457 -0.0681 -0.0916 -0.1188 -0.1309 -0.1186 -0.1204
 Relative size           -5.1163 -5.1811 -5.6671 -6.3853 -6.8932 -7.3709 -7.8813 -8.2084 -8.4637 -8.7022
 Market-to-book ratio     1.5683  1.5670  1.5473  1.5924  1.6908  1.7108  1.8605  2.3392  2.1260  2.3260


                                      PANEL B: Average of Monthly Regressions
 Portfolios                 1         2         3        4        5          6        7        8        9        10
 6-factor alpha           0.0086  0.0091       0.0097   0.0103  0.0107  0.0109  0.0130  0.0167  0.0208  0.0233
 RM                      -0.0009  0.0032       0.0169   0.0108  0.0143  0.0361  0.0319  0.0769  0.0963  0.0877
 SMB                     -0.0471 -0.0510       0.0101   0.0228  0.0744  0.0900  0.0845  0.1417  0.1779  0.1794
 HML                      0.0640  0.0661       0.0749   0.0350 -0.0011 -0.0368 -0.0470 -0.0571 -0.0568 -0.0775


                                   PANEL C: Single Earnings/Price Ratio Regressions
 Portfolios                 1         2         3        4        5          6        7        8        9        10
 Mean E/P ratio           1.1025     0.0160 -0.3489 -0.0092 -0.5994         0.1857 -0.0370 -0.0166     0.0029 -0.1618
 6-factor alpha           0.6805  0.0165 -0.6559 -0.0035 -0.0527   0.2352 -0.0426 -0.0165 -0.0095 -0.1789
 RM                      -2.6830 -0.0353  3.7722 -0.0924 -24.1165 -2.5768  0.3262 -0.1431  0.0054 -0.0246
 SMB                     -5.8143 -0.0104 -3.8946 -0.0517 -6.4357   3.8457  0.2573  0.0894 -0.4127 -0.0581
 HML                     31.8551  0.0031 13.5426 -0.1195 -25.9156  0.1286 -0.1671  0.0286  0.7530  1.7765




                                                          54
                               Table 9: Returns on Long-Short Portfolios

For long-short portfolios LS90-10 and LS80-20 (long the riskiest and short the safest one and two deciles, respec-
tively), this table shows average monthly returns for the 12 months following portfolio formation and alphas
and selected Fama-French factors from a six-factor regression. The first two columns present the results of a
regression using factors computed each January, while the last two show the average coefficients of 12 monthly
regressions of average monthly returns for the 12 months following portfolio formation using factors computed
for each respective month. ***, **, and *, and  indicate four levels of statistical significance of the coefficients: p
< 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.10, and p < 0.15, respectively.

                                                      Single                   Average of
                                                    Regressions            Monthly Regressions
                                                 (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)
                                               LS90-10         LS80-20      LS90-10       LS80-20
                Mean 12-month returns           0.0055         0.0047       0.0055         0.0047
                6-factor alpha                 0.0065 0.0059 0.0142 0.0127
                RM                             0.0487   0.0400   0.0865   0.0887
                SMB                            0.2452   0.2338   0.2283   0.2295
                HML                           -0.0886  -0.0895  -0.1440  -0.1346




                                                          55
                             Table 10: Robustness to Alternative Measures
Results of logit regression using our benchmark specification are shown in column 1. Columns 2 & 3 show
results from regressions replacing VIX with Noise Illiq. and On/Off-Run spread, respectively. Columns 4 & 5
show results from regressions replacing Fed funds rate and Yield slope with 5-year and 10-year Treasury bond
rate decompositions, respectively. The dependent variable in all specifications is binary, indicating whether a
firm experienced a distress event the following month. Pseudo-R2 refers to Mc-Fadden's Pseudo-R2 , and AUC
is the area under the ROC curve. ***, **, *, and  indicate four levels of statistical significance of the coefficients:
p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.10, and p < 0.15 respectively.

                                                          VIX robustness                    MP robustness
                                        (1)              (2)          (3)                  (4)         (5)
 Constant                          -11.477          -11.023          -12.538          -11.417          -11.834
 Excess returns (orth)              -1.628           -1.622           -1.625           -1.633           -1.643
 Stock price (orth)                 -0.200           -0.199           -0.186           -0.198           -0.198
 Volatility of returns (orth)       -0.024           -0.013           -0.025           -0.037           -0.031
 Relative size (orth)                0.191            0.191            0.179            0.191            0.194
 Profitability                      -8.831           -8.706           -8.774           -8.906           -8.836
 Leverage                            3.560            3.524            3.615            3.655            3.643
 Cash                               -5.597           -5.657           -5.549           -5.527           -5.561
 Market-to-book ratio                0.064            0.064            0.059            0.061            0.061
 Prior default                       2.143            2.136            2.159            2.152            2.154
 VIX                                   0.020                                              0.012            0.009
 Noise Illiq.                                           0.052
 On/Off-Run spread                                                       0.716
 Fed funds rate                        0.291            0.253            0.474
 Yield slope (5y-FF)                   0.495            0.429            0.463
 5y short rate                                                                            0.261
 5y term premium                                                                          0.718
 10y short rate                                                                                            0.347
 10y term premium                                                                                          0.545
 Fed MP surprise                     1.191            1.026            0.231            0.737            0.778
 TED spread                          0.083            0.084            0.031            0.021           -0.005
 Broad US$                          -8.376           -9.950           -3.910           -6.298           -5.390
 Pseudo-R2                             0.237            0.237            0.241            0.239            0.239
 AUC                                   0.922            0.922            0.922            0.921            0.921
 Observations                         589224           589224           589224           589224           589224
 Defaults                               589              589              589              589              589
 Country FE




                                                          56
Appendix A: Variable and Factor Definitions

 Variable Name               Variable Definition
 Excess returns              Log (1 + firm returns) - log (1 + country (market) index returns).
 Stock price                 Log price per share.
 Volatility of returns       Standard deviation of daily returns over the previous month.
 Relative size               Log (Firm market cap) - log (country market cap). The market capitalization
                             of listed domestic companies comes from the World Bank.
 Profitability               Ratio of net income to the market value of total assets, where the market value
                             of assets is equal to the sum of the firm's market capitalization and total liabilities.
 Leverage                    Ratio of total liabilities to the market value of total assets.
 Cash                        Ratio of cash and cash equivalents to the market value of total assets.
 Market-to-book ratio        Ratio of market capitalization to book value of equity, where book
                             value of equity is total assets minus total liabilities. Following Campbell et al.
                             (2008), if a firm has a negative book value of equity, we set its book value of equity
                             equal to $1 in order to place that firm's market-to-book ratio in the right-hand side
                             of the distribution (Large positive MB instead of a negative MB).
 Fed funds rate              Federal Funds Rate, retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
 Yield slope (5y-FF)         The slope of the US yield curve calculated as the difference between the US 5-year
                             Treasury rate and the Fed funds rate.
 Fed MP surprise             US monetary policy surprise measured as in Chari et. al (2020) as the daily change
                             in 5-year US Treasury futures on FOMC announcement days.
 VIX                         CBOE Volatility Index.
 TED spread                  Component of the TED spread orthogonal to VIX. The TED spread is the spread
                             between 3-month LIBOR RATES and 3-month T-bill rates, often used as a measure
                             of liquidity risk in bond markets. Due to collinearity between VIX and the TED
                             spread, we regress the TED spread on the VIX and keep the residual.
  Broad US$                  Monthly percentage change in the broad dollar index, calculated using trade-
                             weighted averages of exchange rates from a broad basket of US trading partners;
                             quoted as international currency units per dollar.
 Noise Illiq.                Measure of illquidity in US Treasury bills, notes, and bonds markets, as calculated
                             in Pan, Hu, and Wang (2013). Computed by aggregating the deviations (RMSE)
                             between market and smooth zero-coupon yield curve model implied yields.
 On/Off-Run spread           Difference in yields between 10-year off-the-run and on-the-run Treasury bonds.
 5y & 10y short rate         Short rate for 5-year and 10-year Treasury bond yield decomposition from Adrian,
                             Crump, and Moench (2013).
 5y & 10y term premium Term premium for 5-year and 10-year Treasury bond yield decomposition from
                             Adrian, Crump, and Moench (2013).
Sources: Default data and all accounting and market variables come from the CRI database, the Credit
Research Initiative of the National University of Singapore, accessed on December 1, 2016.




                                                    57
                Online Appendix


In Search of Distress Risk in Emerging Markets
       Gonzalo Asis   Anusha Chari   Adam Haas




                          58
            Figure B1: Example of Receiver Operating Characteristics Curve
Point A in the "good model" ROC curve shows that the 20% of firms with highest probability
of default include 70% of the firms that default the following month. Point B in the "bad
model" curve indicates that to capture 70% of firms that default next month one needs to
include the top 50% firms with highest probability of default.




                                           59
                                    Figure B2: Predicted Probabilites
This figure shows predicted probabilities (in red) for all values of each variable, keeping all other predictors con-
stant at their means. The shaded grey areas are 95% confidence intervals, computed using the 95% confidence
intervals of each variable's coefficient in our benchmark logit regression.




                                                         60
                    Table B1: Number of Defaults and Observations per Year
This table lists the number of defaults and firm-months per year of our sample, aggregated across countries, for
the observations with all data for our benchmark specification.

                                 Year    Firm-Months       Defaults      %
                                 1995          16               ·        ·
                                 1996         370               ·        ·
                                 1997         669               ·        ·
                                 1998        1369              5       0.365
                                 1999        2012              8       0.398
                                 2000        4470              6       0.134
                                 2001        5869              5       0.085
                                 2002        13496             14      0.104
                                 2003        21903             19      0.087
                                 2004        28816             67      0.233
                                 2005        30745             55      0.179
                                 2006        31941             46      0.144
                                 2007        36454             42      0.115
                                 2008        37692             47      0.125
                                 2009        38940             54      0.139
                                 2010        42335             52      0.123
                                 2011        50851             18      0.035
                                 2012        54429             47      0.086
                                 2013        63880             58      0.091
                                 2014        63561             25      0.039
                                 2015        59406             21      0.035
                                 Total       589224           589      0.100




                                                      61
                                            Table B2: Number of Observations per Country and Year

               This table lists the number of firm-months with all data for our benchmark specification per country and per year of our sample.

     Year    Argentina   Brazil    China     India   Indonesia     Malaysia     Mexico    Philippines     Poland    South Korea      Thailand     Total
     1995        ·          ·        ·          ·         ·            ·           ·            ·            ·             ·             16         16
     1996        ·          ·        ·          ·         ·            ·          123           ·            ·             ·            247        370
     1997       27          ·        ·          ·         ·            ·          225           ·            ·             ·            417        669
     1998       42          ·        ·          ·         ·            ·          255           ·            ·             ·            1072      1369
     1999       61          ·        ·          ·         ·           173         265          129           ·             ·            1384      2012
     2000       165        373       ·          ·        33          1817         431          225          57            6            l1363      4470
     2001       182        457       ·          ·        308         2270         468          218          301           23            1642      5869
     2002       124        493       ·          ·        454         2469         448          223          402          7077           1806      13496
     2003       97        553      4933       27        513          2447         455         235          438          10204           2001      21903




62
     2004       166        609     7720        12        732         4761         507          217          913         11057           2122      28816
     2005       304        709     7846        15        869         5556         483          244         1316         11273           2130      30745
     2006       359        803     7539        18        948         6099         525          265         1469         11620           2296      31941
     2007       422       1188     9682       42        1206         6492         559          320         1732         12341           2470      36454
     2008       401       1350     10647       78       1285         5096         521          690         2194         12956           2474      37692
     2009       380       1361     11484      105       1329         4872         577          835         2386         13147           2464      38940
     2010       376       1444     12991      455       1602         5717         590          912         2571         12892           2785      42335
     2011       396       1520     16071     4305       1919         5633         567         1004         2787         13863           2786      50851
     2012       311       1441     17919     9626       2079         5536         595         1164         2788         10013           2957      54429
     2013       320       1600     18298    12246       2256         5508         610         1124         2814         15942           3162      63880
     2014       357       1656     17449    11647       2315         5706         575         1265         2807         16418           3366      63561
     2015       371       1545     16958     6791       2341         5472         584         1364         2854         17607           3519      59406
     Total     4861       17102    159537   45367       20189        75624       9363         10434        27829        176439         42479      589224
                                           Table B3: Number of Defaults per Country and Year

                                     This table lists the number of defaults per country and per year of our sample.

     Year    Argentina   Brazil   China   India   Indonesia      Malaysia     Mexico     Philippines     Poland    South Korea   Thailand   Total
     1995        ·         ·        ·       ·           ·             ·          ·             ·            ·           ·           ·         ·
     1996        ·         ·        ·       ·           ·             ·          ·             ·            ·           ·           ·         ·
     1997        ·         ·        ·       ·           ·             ·          ·             ·            ·           ·           ·         ·
     1998        2         ·        ·       ·           ·             ·          ·             ·            ·           ·           3        5
     1999        1         ·        ·       ·           ·             ·          ·             3            ·           ·           4        8
     2000        1         ·        ·       ·           ·             1          ·             1            ·           ·           3        6
     2001        ·         ·        ·       ·           1            3           ·             ·            ·           ·           1        5
     2002        2         1        ·       ·           1            2           ·             4            1           2           1        14
     2003        ·         1       11       ·           1             ·          2             2            ·           1           1        19




63
     2004        ·         ·       63       ·           ·             1          ·             2            ·           ·           1        67
     2005        ·         1       51       ·           ·             2          ·             ·            ·           1           ·        55
     2006        ·         ·       40       ·           ·             5          ·             ·            ·           1           ·        46
     2007        ·         ·       35       ·           ·             6          ·             ·            ·           ·           1        42
     2008        ·         ·       29       ·           ·            10          1             1            ·           5           1        47
     2009        ·         ·       36       ·           2            3           3             2            1           2           5        54
     2010        ·         ·       26       1           1            18          1             ·            ·           4           1        52
     2011        ·         ·        4       2           1            8           ·             ·            ·           3           ·        18
     2012        ·         3       12      24           ·             2          1             ·            5           ·           ·        47
     2013        ·         7        9      29           ·             3          2             ·            1           7           ·        58
     2014        ·         4        1      13           1             1          ·             ·            ·           5           ·        25
     2015        ·         ·        2      12           ·             ·          2             ·            3           1           1        21
     Total       6        17       319     81           8            65          12           15            11         32           23      589
                                                        Table B4: Correlation Matrix and Multicollinearity Analysis

     The last two rows of this table show the Tolerance Value (TOL) and its reciprocal Variance Inflation Factor (VIF). VIF is computed as 1/(1 - R2
                                                                                                                                                   k ), where
      2         2                                                                           2
     Rk is the R value of a regression of variable k on all others. TOL is simply 1 - Rk . VIF values larger than 10 are typically considered suggestive of
     multicollinearity in a model. The rest of the matrix presents pairwise correlations between all variables in our various specifications.

         Var1       EXRET    PRICE    VOL     RELSIZE   NIMTA    TLMTA    CASH     MB      UR      Inflation    RIR     SovSpread    FX      BDI     Fed funds   Yield slope   MP surprise   VIX     TED spread
      EXRET          1.000
      PRICE          0.025    1.000
      VOL            0.002    0.057  1.000
      RELSIZE        0.022    0.589  0.037     1.000
      NIMTA          0.048    0.098  0.007     0.108     1.000
      TLMTA         -0.067   -0.139 -0.024    -0.155    -0.142    1.000
      CASH          -0.023   -0.188 -0.033    -0.120     0.093   -0.062    1.000




64
      MB             0.065    0.165  0.052     0.124    -0.091   -0.466   -0.272   1.000
      UR             0.010    0.211   0.075    0.351    -0.006    0.002   -0.132  0.084  1.000
      Inflation     -0.024    0.234   0.039    0.090     0.007    0.139   -0.134  0.003  0.217      1.000
      RIR            0.010    0.037   0.065    0.074    -0.011    0.110   -0.110 -0.006  0.333      0.114       1.000
      SovSpread     -0.016    0.143   0.033   -0.086    -0.009    0.165   -0.142 -0.035  0.193      0.532       0.151     1.000
      FX            -0.002   -0.004   0.001    0.045     0.025   -0.122    0.044  0.045 -0.016     -0.240      -0.151    -0.382      1.000
      BDI            0.008   -0.024  0.000    -0.011    -0.003   -0.027    0.002  0.025 -0.012      0.059       0.018     0.020     -0.047  1.000
      Fed funds     -0.009   -0.083  0.003     0.119     0.017    0.081   -0.046 -0.078  0.094     -0.004      -0.031    -0.176      0.224 -0.102      1.000
      Yield slope   -0.009    0.125 -0.008     0.041    -0.012   -0.008    0.004 -0.005 -0.024     -0.125       0.033     0.025     -0.089  0.046     -0.678       1.000
      MP surprise   -0.010    0.017  0.002    -0.006    -0.006   -0.019   -0.002  0.021 -0.010      0.012      -0.040    -0.028      0.071  0.077      0.026      -0.089          1.000
      VIX            0.019    0.034 -0.010     0.090     0.010    0.032    0.019 -0.036  0.018      0.023       0.007     0.042      0.043 -0.018     -0.120       0.163         -0.190      1.000
      TED spread    -0.016   -0.140  0.001    -0.004     0.022   -0.017   -0.010  0.029  0.046      0.180      -0.077    -0.043      0.119  0.123      0.477      -0.464          0.031      0.062      1.000
      TOL            0.989    0.548   0.988     0.519    0.929    0.667    0.829   0.659   0.722     0.612      0.844     0.577      0.783   0.939     0.411        0.467         0.942      0.888      0.634
      VIF            1.011    1.824   1.012     1.928    1.077    1.498    1.207   1.519   1.385     1.635      1.185     1.734      1.277   1.065     2.430        2.140         1.061      1.127      1.578
                                                              Table B5: OLS Regression of Market Variables

     This table shows OLS regression results of excess returns, stock price, volatility of returns, and relative size on various subsets of our accounting and global
     covariates. Panel A uses as explanatory variables the set of accounting variables, excluding market-to-book ratios for columns 2 & 4 due to collinearity
     between stock price and relative size, and market-to-book ratio. Panel B utilizes global variables, and Panel C uses both sets of covariates as explanatory
     variables.

                                       Panel A: Accounting variables                      Panel B: Global variables                 Panel C: Accounting & Global variables
                               (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)      (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)       (9)          (10)        (11)         (12)
                             Returns        Price      Volatility       Size    Returns      Price      Volatility     Size     Returns       Price      Volatility     Size
      Constant               -0.000        2.241         3.667         -5.014    0.008       1.552        6.514       -6.479     0.006       2.517       10.815       -5.669




65
      Profitability           0.334       10.358         7.955          9.338                                                    0.337      10.399        9.087        9.212
      Leverage               -0.020       -1.783        -4.264         -1.460                                                   -0.020      -1.755       -3.534       -1.522
      Cash                   -0.035       -1.143        -3.200         -1.901                                                   -0.038      -1.160       -3.721       -1.769
      Market-to-book ratio    0.004                      0.047                                                                   0.004                    0.021
      Fed funds rate                                                            -0.002     -0.037        -0.826        0.125    -0.002      -0.047       -1.495        0.172
      Yield slope (5y-FF)                                                       -0.002     -0.114        -1.464        0.152    -0.007      -0.102       -2.546        0.215
      Fed MP surprise                                                           -0.020      0.015         3.398        0.212    -0.006       0.035        8.898        0.131
      VIX                                                                       -0.000     -0.006        -0.088        0.006     0.000      -0.005       -0.110        0.008
      TED spread                                                                -0.005      0.193         3.463        0.097    -0.014       0.032        4.610       -0.120
      Broad US$                                                                  0.186      2.362       -14.323        4.079     0.198       1.672      -33.132        4.010
      R2                      0.011         0.860        0.537          0.780    0.002      0.752         0.429        0.742     0.013        0.861        0.540        0.784
      Observations           671762        671768       671762         671768   1637846    1637846       1637846      1637846   671762       671768       671762       671768
  Table B6: Transmission of Global Shocks and Firm Fundamentals through Stock Price
Results of logit regression combining fitted stock price (generated from the regression detailed in Table B5) and
accounting variables with local and global macro variables to explain the probability of default next month.
Column 1 uses specification 5 from Table 3 as a baseline, and Columns 2 & 3 add stock price fitted on accounting
and global variables, respectively. Column 4 uses specification 6 from Table 3 as a baseline, and Columns
5 & 6 add stock price fitted on accounting and global variables, respectively. The dependent variable in all
specifications is binary, indicating whether a firm experienced a distress event the following month. Pseudo-R2
refers to Mc-Fadden's Pseudo-R2 , and AUC is the area under the ROC curve. ***, **, *, and  indicate four levels
of statistical significance of the coefficients: p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.10, and p < 0.15 respectively.

                                     (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
 Constant                          -8.477      -7.761         -7.911     -11.290       -7.909        -8.595
 Fitted stock price (accounting)               -0.248                                  -1.225
 Fitted stock price (global)                                  -0.098                                 -0.990
 Profitability                     -7.345                     -7.194      -8.351                     -8.218
 Leverage                           2.407                      2.566       3.726                      3.795
 Cash                              -3.355                     -4.213      -5.467                     -6.296
 Market-to-book ratio               0.104                      0.098       0.058                      0.045
 Prior default                      2.437       3.089          2.515       2.079         2.527        2.207
 Unemployment rate                  -0.018     -0.033          0.030
 Inflation rate                    -10.129      2.698         -4.653
 Real interest rate                 -0.041     -0.011         -0.053
 Sovereign spread                    0.000      0.005         -0.037
 FX 12m avg                        -17.966    -17.453         -8.706
 Fed funds rate                     0.160       0.247                      0.275        0.305
 Yield slope (5y-FF)                0.288       0.394                      0.522        0.507
 Fed MP surprise                    1.179       1.289                      1.744        1.473
 VIX                                0.004       0.007                      0.015        0.014
 TED spread                         0.527       0.282                      0.181        0.288
 Broad US$                         -8.077     -11.687                     -6.177       -9.949
 Pseudo-R2                           0.189       0.157         0.189        0.221        0.214         0.223
 AUC                                 0.892       0.831         0.891        0.907        0.900         0.915
 Observations                       424011      372673        372673       705824       589224        589224
 Defaults                             593         524           524          681          589           589
 Country FE




                                                         66
Table B7: Transmission of Global Shocks and Firm Fundamentals through Volatility of
Returns
Results of logit regression combining volatility of returns (generated from the regression detailed in Table B5)
and accounting variables with local and global macro variables to explain the probability of default next month.
Column 1 uses specification 5 from Table 3 as a baseline, and Columns 2 & 3 add volatility of returns fitted on
accounting and global variables, respectively. Column 4 uses specification 6 from Table 3 as a baseline, and
Columns 5 & 6 add volatility of returns fitted on accounting and global variables, respectively. The dependent
variable in all specifications is binary, indicating whether a firm experienced a distress event the following
month. Pseudo-R2 refers to Mc-Fadden's Pseudo-R2 , and AUC is the area under the ROC curve. ***, **, *, and
 indicate four levels of statistical significance of the coefficients: p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.10, and p < 0.15
respectively.

                                               (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
 Constant                                    -8.477    -7.914    -8.139    -11.290       -8.561      -9.683
 Fitted volatility of returns (accounting)             -0.322                            -0.716
 Fitted volatility of returns (global)                           -0.073                              -0.078
 Profitability                               -7.345              -6.973     -8.351                   -8.164
 Leverage                                     2.407               2.684      3.726                    3.774
 Cash                                        -3.355              -4.134     -5.467                   -6.224
 Market-to-book ratio                         0.104               0.095      0.058                    0.045
 Prior default                                2.437      2.966    2.527      2.079        2.666       2.207
 Unemployment rate                            -0.018     0.006     0.043
 Inflation rate                              -10.129     0.572    -4.948
 Real interest rate                           -0.041     0.002    -0.056
 Sovereign spread                              0.000     0.010    -0.033
 FX 12m avg                                  -17.966   -16.988   -11.684
 Fed funds rate                               0.160      0.211               0.275        0.314
 Yield slope (5y-FF)                          0.288      0.324               0.522        0.493
 Fed MP surprise                              1.179      1.130               1.744        1.644
 VIX                                          0.004      0.004               0.015        0.016
 TED spread                                   0.527      0.440               0.181        0.202
 Broad US$                                   -8.077    -11.774              -6.177       -9.686
 Pseudo-R2                                     0.189     0.161     0.189      0.221        0.209       0.223
 AUC                                           0.892     0.833     0.893      0.907        0.894       0.915
 Observations                                 424011    372673    372673     705824       589224      589224
 Defaults                                       593       524       524        681          589         589
 Country FE




                                                          67
Table B8: Transmission of Global Shocks and Firm Fundamentals through Relative Size

Results of logit regression combining relative size returns (generated from the regression detailed in Table B5)
and accounting variables with local and global macro variables to explain the probability of default next month.
Column 1 uses specification 5 from Table 3 as a baseline, and Columns 2 & 3 add relative size fitted on account-
ing and global variables, respectively. Column 4 uses specification 6 from Table 3 as a baseline, and Columns
5 & 6 add relative size fitted on accounting and global variables, respectively. The dependent variable in all
specifications is binary, indicating whether a firm experienced a distress event the following month. Pseudo-R2
refers to Mc-Fadden's Pseudo-R2 , and AUC is the area under the ROC curve. ***, **, *, and  indicate four levels
of statistical significance of the coefficients: p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.10, and p < 0.15 respectively.

                                       (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
 Constant                            -8.477    -14.806        -9.983    -11.290       -17.164       -0.788
 Fitted relative size (accounting)              -0.629                                 -1.306
 Fitted relative size (global)                                -0.213                                 1.509
 Profitability                       -7.345                   -7.258     -8.351                     -8.230
 Leverage                             2.407                    2.645      3.726                      3.637
 Cash                                -3.355                   -4.330     -5.467                     -5.576
 Market-to-book ratio                 0.104                    0.080      0.058                      0.046
 Prior default                        2.437      3.002         2.549      2.079         2.626        2.197
 Unemployment rate                    -0.018     0.115          0.085
 Inflation rate                      -10.129     2.724         -1.620
 Real interest rate                   -0.041    -0.018         -0.054
 Sovereign spread                      0.000    -0.106         -0.162
 FX 12m avg                          -17.966   -31.431        -15.057
 Fed funds rate                       0.160     0.393                     0.275         0.323
 Yield slope (5y-FF)                  0.288     0.552                     0.522         0.521
 Fed MP surprise                      1.179     1.654                     1.744         1.498
 VIX                                  0.004     0.025                     0.015         0.015
 TED spread                           0.527     0.188                     0.181         0.268
 Broad US$                           -8.077    -9.579                    -6.177        -9.767
 Pseudo-R2                             0.189     0.183          0.194      0.221         0.208        0.226
 AUC                                   0.892     0.848          0.885      0.907         0.891        0.916
 Observations                         424011    372673         372673     705824        589224       589224
 Defaults                               593       524            524        681           589          589
 Country FE




                                                         68
      Table B9: Returns on Portfolios Sorted by Distress Risk (1 month ahead returns)
Stocks sorted monthly based on our predicted probability of default and placed in ten portfolios of equal size.
Portfolio 1 contains the firms with the lowest probability of default and Portfolio 10 those with highest predicted
distress risk. We rebalance the portfolios every month from January 2002 to December 2015 based on the stocks'
updated distress risk. Panel A shows, for each portfolio, average estimated probability of default, average
monthly return for the 12 months following portfolio formation, alpha and selected coefficients from a 6-factor
regression, and average relative size and market-to-book ratio. RM equals the return of a weighted average of
country index returns minus the risk-free rate, and SMB and HML are the returns of factor-mimicking portfolios
constructed as in Fama and French (1993). The other factors (coefficients not shown) are momentum, short-term
reversal, and long-term reversal. For panel A, all factors are computed in January. Panel B shows the average
coefficients of 12 monthly regressions of 1 month ahead returns on the factors computed for each respective
month. In Panel C, we run the same regression as in Panel A, but using as our dependent variable the net-
income-to-price ratio as a proxy for expected returns.

                                              PANEL A: Single Regressions
 Portfolios                 1         2         3        4        5          6        7        8        9        10
 Mean P(default) (%)      0.0018     0.0038    0.0065   0.0104   0.0164     0.0267   0.0485   0.0897   0.1475   0.9374
 Mean 12-month returns    0.0095     0.0098    0.0103   0.0099   0.0077     0.0076   0.0089   0.0114   0.0144   0.0155
 6-factor alpha           0.0103  0.0104  0.0109  0.0109  0.0091  0.0093  0.0110  0.0133  0.0162  0.0173
 RM                      -0.0241 -0.0198 -0.0142 -0.0135  0.0064  0.0192  0.0178  0.0190  0.0125  0.0256
 SMB                     -0.1381 -0.1343 -0.1011 -0.0843 -0.0477 -0.0250 -0.0254  0.0294  0.0890  0.1080
 HML                     -0.0336 -0.0301 -0.0260 -0.0457 -0.0681 -0.0916 -0.1188 -0.1309 -0.1186 -0.1204
 Relative size           -5.1163 -5.1811 -5.6671 -6.3853 -6.8932 -7.3709 -7.8813 -8.2084 -8.4637 -8.7022
 Market-to-book ratio     1.5683  1.5670  1.5473  1.5924  1.6908  1.7108  1.8605  2.3392  2.1260  2.3260


                         PANEL B: Average of Monthly Regressions (1 month ahead returns)
 Portfolios                 1         2         3        4        5          6        7        8        9        10
 6-factor alpha           0.0250  0.0221  0.0253  0.0224  0.0212  0.0252  0.0298  0.0358  0.0357  0.0388
 RM                       0.1699  0.1817  0.1936  0.2434  0.2252  0.2804  0.2633  0.2942  0.2616  0.2043
 SMB                     -0.9104 -0.8656 -0.7722 -0.6067 -0.4383 -0.3838 -0.2795 -0.1210  0.0563  0.1748
 HML                     -0.4291 -0.4186 -0.3965 -0.4432 -0.5197 -0.8513 -0.9997 -1.3489 -1.2799 -1.1835


                                   PANEL C: Single Earnings/Price Ratio Regressions
 Portfolios                 1         2         3        4        5          6        7        8        9        10
 Mean E/P ratio           1.1025     0.0160 -0.3489 -0.0092 -0.5994         0.1857 -0.0370 -0.0166     0.0029 -0.1618
 6-factor alpha           0.6805  0.0165 -0.6559 -0.0035 -0.0527   0.2352 -0.0426 -0.0165 -0.0095 -0.1789
 RM                      -2.6830 -0.0353  3.7722 -0.0924 -24.1165 -2.5768  0.3262 -0.1431  0.0054 -0.0246
 SMB                     -5.8143 -0.0104 -3.8946 -0.0517 -6.4357   3.8457  0.2573  0.0894 -0.4127 -0.0581
 HML                     31.8551  0.0031 13.5426 -0.1195 -25.9156  0.1286 -0.1671  0.0286  0.7530  1.7765




                                                          69
             Table B10: Returns on Long-Short Portfolios (1 month ahead returns)

For long-short portfolios LS90-10 and LS80-20 (long the riskiest and short the safest one and two deciles, respec-
tively), this table shows average monthly returns for the 12 months following portfolio formation and alphas
and selected Fama-French factors from a six-factor regression. The first two columns present the results of a
regression using factors computed each January, while the last two show the average coefficients of 12 monthly
regressions of 1 month ahead returns using factors computed for each respective month. ***, **, and *, and
 indicate four levels of statistical significance of the coefficients: p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.10, and p < 0.15,
respectively.

                                             Single                    Average of
                                           Regressions             Monthly Regressions
                                                                 (1 month ahead returns)
                                        (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)
                                      LS90-10       LS80-20       LS90-10        LS80-20
                   Mean returns        0.0055       0.0047        0.0034         0.0047
                   6-factor alpha  0.0065 0.0059 0.0133                         0.0127
                   RM              0.0487   0.0400   0.0323                     0.0887
                   SMB             0.2452   0.2338   1.0870                     0.2295
                   HML            -0.0886  -0.0895  -0.7568                    -0.1346




                                                       70
                             Table B11: Logit Regressions of Probability of Default Next Month, Balanced Sample

     Results of balanced sample logit regression combining accounting and orthogonalized market variables with local and global macro variables to explain
     the probability of default next month. Column 1 uses firm accounting variables as covariates. Column 2 adds a dummy indicating whether a firm has
     experienced a default event in the past. Column 3 adds domestic macro variables, Column 4 includes global variables, and Column 5 has both domestic and
     global. Column 6 incorporates country fixed effects to the model in Column 4. Columns 7 & 8 add orthogonalized firm market variables the specifications
     in columns 5 & 6. The dependent variable in all specifications is binary, indicating whether a firm experienced a distress event the following month.
     Pseudo-R2 refers to Mc-Fadden's Pseudo-R2 , and AUC is the area under the ROC curve. ***, **, *, and  indicate four levels of statistical significance of the
     coefficients: p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.10, and p < 0.15 respectively.

                                          (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)
      Constant                         -8.074         -8.356          -8.057         -9.102          -8.609        -11.206          -8.667        -11.545
      Excess returns (orth)                                                                                                         -1.119         -1.374
      Stock price (orth)                                                                                                            -0.259         -0.174
      Volatility of returns (orth)                                                                                                  -0.001         -0.019
      Relative size (orth)                                                                                                           0.175          0.161
      Profitability                    -9.325         -7.465          -7.124         -7.627          -7.406         -7.637          -8.259         -8.375
      Leverage                          2.771          2.262           2.601          2.272           2.476          3.305           2.407          3.229
      Cash                             -4.799         -3.231          -4.082         -2.947          -3.638         -5.511          -3.781         -5.613
      Market-to-book ratio              0.197          0.087           0.097          0.088           0.098          0.026           0.108          0.042




71
      Prior default                                    2.642           2.524          2.626           2.530          2.328           2.463          2.300
      Unemployment rate                                                0.034                          0.008                          0.003
      Inflation rate                                                  -7.648                         -7.740                         -8.065
      Real interest rate                                              -0.063                         -0.046                         -0.045
      Sovereign spread                                                -0.033                         -0.015                         -0.019
      FX 12m avg                                                     -11.550                        -18.523                        -17.338
      Fed funds rate                                                                  0.183           0.147          0.298           0.156          0.321
      Yield slope (5y-FF)                                                             0.313           0.259          0.492           0.261          0.509
      Fed MP surprise                                                                 1.118           1.037          1.530           0.945          1.290
      VIX                                                                             0.005           0.005          0.016           0.009          0.022
      TED spread                                                                      0.564           0.591          0.223           0.558          0.100
      Broad US$                                                                     -12.149         -11.118        -11.424         -11.327        -10.594
      Pseudo-R2                          0.089          0.180           0.187          0.189           0.194           0.219          0.201           0.225
      AUC                                0.839          0.904           0.889          0.904           0.896           0.910          0.903           0.913
      Observations                      372673         372673          372673         372673          372673          372673         372673          372673
      Defaults                            524            524             524            524             524             524            524             524
      Country FE
                 Table B12: Top Tercile Betas by Global Variable, Balanced Sample
Results of balanced sample logit regressions of probability of default on each global factor, controlling for firm-
specific variables. The explanatory variables in Panel A are the global variable of the same name as each column
and the interaction of that variable with a dummy indicating whether a firm's returns are among the top-third
most sensitive to the global factor. Panel B also includes accounting and orthogonalized market variables as
controls. The dependent variable is binary, indicating whether a firm experienced a distress event the following
month. Pseudo-R2 refers to Mc-Fadden's Pseudo-R2 . ***, **, and * indicate three levels of statistical significance
of the coefficients: p < 0.01, p < 0.05, and p < 0.10, respectively.

                                                           PANEL A
                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)          (6)
                                 Fed funds rate   5y T-bill   FED MP surprise    VIX     TED spread   Broad US$
 Constant                          -7.229         -7.708           -7.019       -7.135    -7.015       -7.022
 Global variable                     0.127         0.245            1.239       -0.002     0.236       -7.084
 Global variable * top-tercile       0.065         0.082           -1.474        0.020     0.234       -4.459
 Pseudo-R2                           0.006         0.010                         0.003      0.001        0.001
 Observations                       774705        774705             774705     774705     774705       774705
 Defaults                             692           692                692        692        692          692



                                                           PANEL B
                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)        (5)          (6)
                                 Fed funds rate   5y T-bill   FED MP surprise    VIX     TED spread   Broad US$
 Constant                          -9.158         -9.576           -8.912       -8.938    -8.929       -8.914
 Excess returns (orth)             -1.092         -1.081           -1.124       -1.114    -1.073       -1.110
 Stock price (orth)                -0.315         -0.326           -0.289       -0.288    -0.291       -0.290
 Volatility of returns (orth)       0.004          0.001            0.004        0.004     0.005        0.004
 Relative size (orth)               0.227          0.232            0.214        0.210     0.216        0.215
 Profitability                     -7.248         -7.225           -7.196       -7.167    -7.194       -7.186
 Leverage                           3.215          3.208            3.189        3.293     3.226        3.182
 Cash                              -3.352         -3.340           -3.470       -3.704    -3.446       -3.463
 Market-to-book ratio               0.253          0.256            0.250        0.246     0.252        0.251
 Global variable                     0.127         0.228            1.828       -0.011     0.461      -10.693
 Global variable * top-tercile       0.066         0.053           -2.605        0.028    -0.058       -0.130
 Pseudo-R2                           0.107         0.110              0.102      0.107      0.104        0.103
 Observations                       586985        586985             586985     586985     586985       586985
 Defaults                             586           586                586        586        586          586




                                                              72
   Table B13: Composite Global Beta Z Score as Predictor of Default, Balanced Sample

Results of balanced sample logit regressions of probability of default on a composite global factor. Beta Z
and Variable Z are the sum of the standardized global betas and global variables, respectively. We control for
accounting, orthogonalized market, and domestic macro variables. The dependent variable is binary, indicating
whether a firm experienced a distress event the following month. Pseudo-R2 refers to McFadden's Pseudo-R2 .
***, **, *, and  indicate four levels of statistical significance of the coefficients: p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.10, and
p < 0.15, respectively.

                                                (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)
         Constant                            -8.009            -8.268          -7.884           -9.647
         Excess returns (orth)               -1.035            -1.076          -1.053           -1.261
         Stock price (orth)                  -0.314            -0.220          -0.237           -0.160
         Volatility of returns (orth)         0.004             0.004           0.001            0.005
         Relative size (orth)                 0.207             0.144           0.165            0.145
         Profitability                       -9.999            -8.033          -7.761           -8.108
         Leverage                             2.680             2.116           2.369            3.198
         Cash                                -4.937            -3.118          -4.028           -6.390
         Market-to-book ratio                 0.198             0.090           0.101            0.036
         Prior default                                          2.572           2.474            2.297
         Unemployment rate                                                      0.014
         Inflation rate                                                        -8.442
         Real interest rate                                                    -0.054
         Sovereign spread                                                      -0.023
         FX 12m avg                                                           -12.788
         Beta Z                              -0.015             0.001           0.018            0.067
         Global Z                             0.128             0.104           0.083            0.072
         Beta Z * Global Z                   -0.028            -0.030          -0.033           -0.029
         Pseudo-R2                             0.107            0.192            0.198            0.220
         AUC                                   0.848            0.909            0.901            0.914
         Observations                         371292           371292           371292           371292
         Defaults                               522              522              522              522
         Country FE




                                                          73
