                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS:
                              A STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS

                                          Kaiji Chen
                                      Patrick C. Higgins
                                           Tao Zha

                                     Working Paper 27214
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27214


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We thank Lars Hansen, Boyan Jovanovic, Vincenzo Quadrini, Juan Sanchez, and seminar
participants at University of Notre Dame, University of Illinois, the 2017 AEA meeting, 2016
SED meeting, Bank of Korea, European Central Bank, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and
Federal Reserve Board of Governors for helpful discussions. Tong Xu provided superlative
research assistance. Earlier versions of this paper were titled "Lending Efficiency Shock.'" The
research is supported in part by the National Science Foundation Grant SES 1558486 through the
NBER and by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Research Grants 71633003 and
71473168. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kaiji Chen, Patrick C. Higgins, and Tao Zha. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cyclical Lending Standards: A Structural Analysis
Kaiji Chen, Patrick C. Higgins, and Tao Zha
NBER Working Paper No. 27214
May 2020
JEL No. C51,C81,C82,E32,E44,G21

                                        ABSTRACT

Lending standards are a direct measure of credit conditions. We use the micro data merged from
three separate sources to construct this measure and document that an uncertain macroeconomic
outlook, rather than banks' balance sheet positions, was an important reason that a majority of
banks tightened bank lending standards during the Great Recession. Our extensive data analysis
disciplines how we introduce credit frictions in the banking sector into a macroeconomic model.
The model estimation reveals that an exogenous shock to credit supply drives cyclical lending
standards and accounts for a significant portion of fluctuations in bank loans and aggregate
output.

Kaiji Chen                                     Tao Zha
Emory University                               Department of Economics
1602 Fishburne Drive                           Emory University
Atlanta, GA 30322-2240                         Rich Memorial Building
and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta            1602 Fishburne Drive
kaiji.chen@emory.edu                           Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
                                               and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Patrick C. Higgins                             and also NBER
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta                tzha@emory.edu
1000 Peachtree Street, N.E.
Atlanta, GA 30309-4470
patrick.higgins@atl.frb.org
                               CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                     1

                                     I. Introduction
   Credit shocks to the banking sector have long been recognized as an important driving force
behind the output fluctuation (Bernanke, 1983). The observed series of lending standards set
by bank loan o cers, perhaps the best direct gauge of credit conditions across countries, has
been used as evidence to motivate a building of macroeconomic models with exogenous credit
shocks for understanding the Great Recession (Perri and Quadrini, 2018). In this paper, we
provide an extensive analysis of the cyclical fluctuation of lending standards using the micro
data merged from three separate sources: the quarterly Consolidated Report of Condition
and Income (Call Report) for banks and the analogous FR Y-9C report for bank holding
companies, the Federal Reserve Board's Senior Loan O cer Opinion Survey (SLOOS) on
Bank Lending Practices, and the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). We connect
our data analysis to an introduction of informational frictions in the banking sector into a
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model.
   Our data analysis consists of two parts. First, we exploit the micro data to construct
the aggregate series of lending standards, as a measure of the weighted fraction of banks
that tighten their lending standards. This constructed series of lending standards allows for
potential influences of various aggregate shocks (supply and demand) on the loan market.
Second, we explore the possible reasons why a bank tightens or loosens the standards at
both the bank level and the aggregate level. By combining the Call Report, SLOOS, and
CRSP, we document that balance sheet positions of banks measured by either their book or
market values, while relevant for an individual bank to tighten its credit supply, were not a
primary reason for a majority of banks to tighten their lending standards during the Great
Recession. Instead, a more uncertain macroeconomic outlook was the main reason.
   We avail ourselves of this data analysis to discipline our DSGE model by abstracting from
considerations of the bank's capital position while emphasizing informational frictions in the
banking sector. This abstraction is based on the fact that only a very small fraction of banks
viewed their current or expected capital positions as an important economic reason for tight-
ening their credit supply during the Great Recession and even for these banks both book and
market values of their capitalizations were as healthy as other banks. The model builds on
Townsend (1979), Williamson (1987), and Greenwood, Sanchez, and Wang (2010) but with
an intermediation process in which the degree of informational asymmetry between lender
and borrower determines how many banks would engage in costly state verification. In our
model, a shock to bank credit supply is equivalent to a productivity shock to the monitoring
technology, which aects the bank's probability of discovering misreports by borrowers. The
informational frictions in our model manifest the moral hazard problem present in the lend-
ing market. More severe informational frictions reduce the bank's probability of detecting
misreports by borrowers and force an individual bank to conduct more frequent verification,
which results in an increase of the fraction of banks that engage in costly state verification.
                                   CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                             2

   A fraction of banks engaging in state verification in the model is linked to a fraction of
banks changing their lending standards in the data. Negative shocks to bank credit supply,
originated from moral hazard in the lending market, exacerbate informational frictions in the
model. A shock to credit supply in our model generates a countercyclical movement of the
supply of bank loans as observed in the data. Other economic shocks, such as a technology
shock to production and a risk shock to the borrower's delinquency, shift the demand for
bank credit, which moves the frequency of state verification and bank loans (output) in the
same direction. Our estimated model reveals that credit supply shocks drive the cyclical
fluctuation of bank lending standards and explain over 40% of the short-run fluctuations
in bank loans and aggregate output. And these impacts are persistent over the four-year
horizon. The persistent eects on aggregate conditions such as bank loans and output imply
that negative shocks to credit supply produce a more uncertain economic outlook, which is
the main reason for the tightening of lending standards as observed in the data.
   Our paper relates to the literature on the role of financial factors in the business cycle. The
bulk of the recent literature focuses on the role of borrowers' net worth or corporate bond
spreads in propagating shocks originating in nonfinancial sectors of the economy (Bernanke,
Gertler, and Gilchrist, 1999; Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno, 2014; Gilchrist and Zakraj       sek,
2012, for example). A notable exception is Jermann and Quadrini (2012), who shift attention
back to the role of shocks that originate directly in the financial sector (the so-called "financial
shocks") as a source of the business cycle fluctuation. In Jermann and Quadrini (2012),
however, financial shocks stem from disruptions in the pledgeability of firms' assets. Several
other papers have studied sources of banks' problems and the role of credit supply shocks
with three approaches. The first approach focuses on banks' incentive problems and the eect
of changes in banks' net worth or their ability to absorb disruptions hitting their liabilities
(Gertler and Kiyotaki, 2010; Gertler and Karadi, 2011; Christiano and Ikeda, 2013; Quadrini,
2017). The second approach examines the impact of banks' relaxation of credit constraints on
the boom of house prices (Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti, 2017). The third approach
emphasizes how banks' liquidity mismatch opens up the possibility of bank runs (Diamond
and Dybvig, 1983; Gertler and Kiyotaki, 2015, for example).
   Our paper is motivated by dierent sources of the micro data showing that the decision
made by a majority of banks to tighten their credit supply during the Great Recession
was due to an uncertain or less favorable macroeconomic outlook, rather than the book or
market values of banks' balance sheet positions.1 This finding is consistent with the empirical
evidence provided by Begenau, Bigio, Majerovitz, and Vieyra (2019) (BBMV hereafter) on
the role of commercial banks' capitalization in the business cycle.
   In another related paper, Bassett, Chosak, Driscoll, and Zakraj       sek (2014) (BCDZ here-
after) construct a diusion index of "exogenous" lending standards. They apply this ex-
ogenous series to their vector autoregression (VAR) analysis. As various economic shocks
  1Since capital positions of investment banks could play a potentially important role in the propagation of
the Great Recession, our paper focuses on commercial banks only for which we have relevant micro data.
                                   CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                            3

influence changes in bank lending standards, however, it is conceptually di cult, if not
impossible, to construct purely exogenous lending standards via reduced-form econometric
procedures. It would also be conceptually di cult to connect such an exogenous series to any
shock in a general equilibrium model without an explicit linkage between observed lending
standards and the theoretical model.
   For these reasons, we depart from BCDZ's approach and construct an aggregate series of
bank lending standards that are not exogenous but aected by variations in macroeconomic
conditions. Our DSGE model allows us to answer which structural shock drives the move-
ment of lending standards. We place a special emphasis on how model and data should be
synthesized in the context of credit conditions reflected in bank lending standards. We use
the rich micro data information to discipline how certain credit frictions should be intro-
duced into a structural model for the purpose of explaining the cyclical fluctuation of bank
lending standards.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses how the micro and macro
data are constructed and analyzed. Section III presents a DSGE model with informational
frictions in the banking sector and builds the linkage between the model and the observed
series of lending standards. Section IV discusses the estimation strategy and analyzes the
empirical results. Section V oers concluding remarks.

           II. Credit supply tightening and cyclical lending standards
  In this section, we first construct a series of bank lending standards. As this is an involved
construction process, we provide a detailed description so that researchers can replicate or
modify our data for macroeconomic analysis. We then analyze main economic reasons for
banks to tighten their lending standards by merging the SLOOS, Call Report, and CRSP
data.
II.1. Methodology. Our sample from 1990Q1 to 2017Q4 covers a longer period than BCDZ's
sample, which ends in 2012Q3.2 A longer length of the sample is not the main reason for
us to construct our own series. Because the goal of this paper is to use the micro data to
discipline our theoretical model, the data must be constructed by selecting categories of the
survey as consistent as possible with the scope of the theory. This construction requirement
applies to the other time series discussed in Section IV.1 as well.
   From April 1990 until now, SLOOS has asked banks about changes in their lending stan-
dards.3 We focus on two loan categories relevant to the model: commercial and industrial
loans (C&I loans) and consumer loans (CS loans). CS loans do not include credit cards and
most loans are related to consumer durables. Participating banks are asked about whether
and how they have tightened or eased their lending standards in the following wording: "Over
the past three months, how have your bank's credit standards for approving loans of type k
  2The  Federal Reserve Board of Governors provides us with the confidential microdata that ends in 2017Q4.
  3April  1990 corresponds to 1990Q1 in our sample since banks' answers correspond to tightening or easing
lending standards in the previous quarter.
                                      CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                                 4

changed? " where type k refers to C&I loans or CS loans. Banks are requested to respond
to this questionnaire with a scale ranging from 1 to 5, where 1 means "eased considerably",
2 "eased somewhat", 3 "about the same or unchanged", 4 "tightened somewhat", and 5
"tightened considerably". Since banks rarely report either easing or tightening standards
considerably, we consolidate these responses on the following three point scale and create the
categorical variable Ii,k,t as
          8
          >
          < 1 if bank i reports easing standards on loan category k in quarter t
 Ii,k,t =   0    if bank i reports no changes in standards on loan category k in quarter t .
          >
          : 1    if bank i reports tightening standards on loan category k in quarter t
   The original responses to the survey are reported separately for large and middle-market
firms with annual sales of $50 million or more and for small firms with annual sales of less
                                                               j
than $50 million. We label the consolidated responses by Ii,k,t   , where the superscript j = S
indicates small firms and j = M L middle-market and large firms. In most cases, banks
provide responses for both j = S and j = M L. For cases in which banks provide a response
                                            S       ML
for only one of j = S and j = M L, we set Ii,k,t = Ii,k,t when the response for j = S is missing
      ML      S
and Ii,k,t = Ii,k,t when the response for j = M L is missing. We define bank i standards in
quarter t since August 1997 as
                                               1 S      ML
                                    Ii,k,t = [Ii,k,t + Ii,k,t ].                     (1)
                                               2
Prior to August 1997, loan o cers in SLOOS were queried about lending standards for each
of large (annual sales more than $250 million), middle-market (annual sales between $50
million and $250 million), and small firms. To maximize comparability with equation (1),
we define lending standards prior to the August 1997 survey as
                                        
                                     1 S          1 M            L
                                                                   
                            Ii,k,t =      Ii,k,t + Ii,k,t + Ii,k,t  ,                (2)
                                     2            2
where M denotes middle-market firms, L large firms, and S small firms.4
  When we construct lending standards for C&I loans and consumer loans, the lending
standard questions in the SLOOS after 2010 were split into standards for "auto loans to
individuals or households" and consumer loans other than credit card and auto loans. For
the SLOOS administered prior to 2011, only a single question was asked on standards for
consumer loans other than credit cards.
  Each SLOOS generally takes place in between the second (and final) scheduled Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting of each quarter and the first scheduled FOMC
meeting of the subsequent quarter.5 We assign the SLOOSs administered early in quarter
     4If           M
      only one of Ii,k,t      L
                         and Ii,k,t                         M
                                    is not missing, we set Ii,k,t    L
                                                                  = Ii,k,t if standards for middle-market firms are
                   L        M
not reported and Ii,k,t = Ii,k,t otherwise. Prior to the August 1997 survey, Ii,k,t can be any integer multiple
     1
of   between 1 and 1.
     4
     5
    A rare exception to this timing convention was the additional mid-September 1998 SLOOS used to assess
the impact financial turbulence associated with the eect of the Long Term Capital Management crisis on
                                  CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                           5

t + 1 to quarter t and merge it with quarter t Call Report data.6 We define a composite
index of lending standards on C&I and CS loans for bank i in quarter t using the SLOOS
administered early in quarter t + 1 as
                                           X
                                    Si,t =   si,k,t  Ii,k,t                         (3)
                                                k

where si,k,t is bank i's outstanding type-k loans in the quarter t Call Report as a share of
bank i's outstanding C&I and CS loans.7 If we use lending standards on C&I loans only,
si,k,t = 1 where k refers to C&I loans only.
   To construct lending standards that are consistent with our macroeconomic model, we
estimate the fixed eects panel regression

                                        Si,t = i + 0 Zi,t + i,t                                      (4)

where i is a bank-level fixed eect and Zi,t is a vector of bank-level controls primarily
constructed from the Call Report in quarter t. The bank-level control variables included in
Zi,t are listed in Table 1 and described in Appendix A. Most of these control regressors are
self-explanatory. The stock market return and Tobin's Q regressors in Table 1 are calculated
with data from the CRSP; Tobin's Q also utilizes data from quarterly FR Y-9 financial
holding company microdata available from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.8 The
bank-level control variables constructed with first and higher-order lagged values from the
Call Report are adjusted for mergers as in BCDZ.9
   Because bank i's stock market returns are included in the panel regression, banks that are
not held by a publicly traded holding company are excluded from the regression. Following
BCDZ, we also remove banks with less than 20 quarters from the regression sample. Thus,
our unbalanced sample in our combined 1990-2017 SLOOS dataset consists of 92 distinct
banks (cf. 68 banks in BCDZ's sample from mid-1991 to mid-2012). In all but one quarter

the bank loan market. In our analysis, we drop this additional survey. An additional survey undertaken in
early March 2001 is also unutilized.
    6These data are downloaded from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's website (https://www.

chicagofed.org/banking/financial-institution-reports/commercial-bank-data) prior
to 2011 and from the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC)'s website (https:
//cdr.ffiec.gov/public/) after 2010.
    7Type k loans are not included in the sum whenever I
                                                         i,k,t is missing.
    8The holding company data is downloaded from https://www.chicagofed.org/banking/

financial-institution-reports/bhc-data and is merged with the CRSP data using the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York's 2017 CRSP-FRB Link database available at https://www.newyorkfed.
org/research/banking_research/datasets.html. The combined CRSP and holding company
data is merged with the Call Report data using a bank holding company identifier available in the Fed-
eral Reserve Bank of Chicago Call Report files through 2010 and their Commercial Bank Structure Data
files available at https://www.chicagofed.org/banking/financial-institution-reports/
commercial-bank-structure-data afterwards.
    9
      Data on mergers are downloaded from the FFIEC's National Information Center's transformations table
available at https://www.ffiec.gov/npw/FinancialReport/DataDownload.
                                   CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                             6

(1991Q3), banks in our regression sample account for 80% to 97% of total C&I loans in the
SLOOS sample.
   Controlling for the bank-level fixed eect and other bank-level variables is consistent with
most macroeconomic models (our model included) from which bank-level variables are ab-
stracted. The residual i,t is defined as lending standards for bank i in quarter t. Unlike
BCDZ, however, we do not control for Si,t 1 and other macroeconomic demand factors be-
cause our theoretical model allows these factors to influence i,t .10 One of the objectives
of using the theoretical model is to determine how various economic shocks, demand and
supply, influence the lending market as well as aggregate output.
   The aggregate series of lending standards on C&I and CS loans is defined as
                                            X
                                       st =   wi,t  i,t ,                                  (5)
                                                  i

where wi,t is bank i's share of C&I and CS loans in total C&I and CS loans made by all
banks in the fixed eects regression sample participating in the SLOOS administered early
in quarter t + 1.11 C&I and CS loans in quarter t are obtained from the Call Report and
bank i's weight only includes loan categories for which the corresponding SLOOS response
Ii,k,t is non-missing. A similar definition applies to lending standards on C&I loans alone.
   Our constructed aggregate series of lending standards abstract from the eects of banks'
current or expected balance-sheet position on their lending standards. In the next section,
we justify our methodology by showing that balance-sheet positions of banks measured by
either their book or market values, while relevant for an individual bank to tighten its credit
supply, were not a primary reason for a majority of banks to tighten their lending standards
during the Great Recession.

II.2. What do the micro and macro data say about reasons of tightening lend-
ing standards? Figure 1 plots the constructed aggregate diusion index for bank lending
standards. The series indicates that bank lending standards began to tighten in 2007 and
reached its peak in the middle of the Great Recession. Understanding the potential sources
that drive the countercyclical fluctuation of such lending standards is the key to disciplining
the theoretical model we build later in this paper. Senior loan o cers in the SLOOS are

  10We    thank an anonymous referee for making this point.
  11Up   to 60 domestically chartered U.S. commercial banks participated in each survey from 1990 to April
2012. Beginning in July 2012, the survey was expanded to as many as 80 banks. Although the list of banks
participating in the survey panel is confidential, each of the 12 Federal Reserve Districts contains between
2 and 12 surveyed domestic banks headquartered in its geographic region and the panel "selection criteria
are heavily weighted toward inclusion of the largest banks in each district that have a minimum ratio of
commercial and industrial (C&I) loans to total assets and that are not specialty banks concentrated in one
specific area of lending such as credit cards" (BCDZ). According to the online documentation for the survey
(https://www.federalreserve.gov/data/sloos/about.htm), the SLOOS panel as of March 31,
2017 included 80 domestic banks, 47 of which had assets of $20 billion or more; the aggregate assets of the
panel accounted for about 69% of total assets of all domestically chartered institutions.
                                   CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                             7

asked of the possible reasons why the bank tightened or eased the standards on C&I loans.12
The exact wording of the questions has changed somewhat over time. For example, "uncer-
tainty" about the economic outlook was not a part of the questionnaire prior to the 1998Q4
survey. The overall design of the questionnaire, however, has been consistent over time. In
the following two sections, we analyze the reasons for tightening lending standards from the
perspetives of both micro and macro data by linking the Call Report to the SLOOS.

II.2.1. Micro evidence. Table 1 reports the estimated values of  in regression (4) for lending
standards on both C&I loans and C&I and CS loans. As one can see, the estimates of
most explanatory variables are statistically significant at the 1% level. In particular, the
estimated eect of the Tier 1 capital ratio on the average bank's lending standards is highly
significant, implying that the balance-sheet position (the book value) is important for the
average bank. This result is consistent with the micro literature on significant eects of
financially constrained banks on firms that borrow from these banks (Jim´        enez, Ongena,
Peydr´ o, and Saurina, 2012, for example).
   In addition to our finding of the significance of the bank's capital position, we also find
that the market value of the average bank's assets, which is not captured by the book value
(the Tier 1 capital ratio), explains the bank's changes in lending standards. Table 2 reports
the estimated values of  in regression (4), similar to Table 1 but replacing Tobin's Q with
the bank's market leverage as proposed by BBMV. Clearly, the estimate eect of the market
leverage on the average bank's lending standards is statistically significant. When there was a
decline in the market value of bank's (illiquid) assets during the Great Recession, for example,
the bank's book value might be healthy but lending standards would nonetheless tighten.
The additional statistical power of market leverages in the regression results, as reported in
Table 2, implies that the value of a bank's capitalization may not be fully captured by its
book value.

II.2.2. Macro evidence. The significant micro-level eects reported in the previous subsection
do not necessarily translate into macro eects on aggregate bank lending and aggregate
lending standards. In this subsection, we provide new evidence on this issue by studying two
crucial factors (reasons) that influenced C&I lending standards: banks' capital positions and
macroeconomic outlooks (or aggregate uncertainty). Figure 2 displays the SLOOS response
results for banks' current or expected capital positions as a reason for tightening or easing
lending standards.13 Respondents who stated that they tightened standards are represented
by bars above zero on the y-axis (e.g., if 50% of the respondents stated that they tightened
  12The   questionnaire concerns C&I loans only.
  13Prior  to 1995Q2, the wording of survey questions was slightly dierent about the reasons for tightening
or easing lending standards. Instead of responding to whether the reasons were "very", "somewhat", or
"not" important, the respondents were asked to state whether or not economic outlook or capital position
is the main reason for tightening or easing the standards. The survey results, however, are very similar:
banks' capital position is not the main reason but economic outlook is more likely to be the main reason for
a change.
                                   CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                             8

standards, the positive portion of the bar adds up to 50). Those who stated that they
eased standards are represented by bars below zero on the y-axis.14 As revealed in Figure 2,
most respondents stated that their banks' capital positions were not an important factor in
changing their lending standards, even during the Great Recession period.15
   We link the SLOOS to the Call Report and examine how the book value of the bank's
assets is related to the SLOOS responses to current or expected capital position at the
aggregate level. The top panel of Figure 3 displays the distribution of Tier 1 capital ratios
for banks that responded how important their current or expected capital position was for
tightening C&I lending standards. We focus on the Great Recession period marked by the
second NBER recession bar in the figure. The interquartile range for the "Important" group
of banks overlaps with the "Not important" group, indicating that how important the bank's
capital position was for tightening lending standards was not influenced by the bank's book
value at the aggregate level. For the "Important" group of banks, one may have expected
that the book value would be lower, but it turns out that the book value was as healthy as
the "Not important" group of banks (i.e., the capital ratio was above 6%).16 According to
Basel II (prior to the introduction of Basel III in 2013), the minimum Tier 1 capital ratio
was 4% and thus banks with the Tier 1 capital ratio above 6% were well-capitalized by the
Basel II criterion. This aggregate result is consistent with BBMV's finding and conclusion.
   While the book value of a bank's assets had little connection with the SLOOS responses
to banks' capital positions, the top chart of Figure 4 reveals that the market value is consis-
tent with the SLOOS responses. In 2008-2009, the interquartile range of market leverages
for the "Not important" group of banks was mostly below the interquartile range for the
"Important" group. Most banks in this period reported that their capital positions were
not an important reason for tightening their lending standards (Figure 2), and as confirmed
by the top chart of Figure 4 this "Not important" group of banks was less likely to suer
market-value loss than the "Important" group of banks during the Great Recession. Both
our micro data and BBMV's empirical work reveal that neither book nor market leverage
constraints strictly bound for most banks. In contrast to the micro-level finding reported in
Table 2, therefore, the unimportance of banks' capital positions as revealed in the SLOOS
truly reflected the unimportance of both their book and market values at the aggregate level
when lending standards were tightened by banks.
   The most important factor that influenced banks' tightening of their lending standards is
aggregate uncertainty or macroeconomic outlook as shown in Figure 5. This factor is espe-
cially conspicuous during the Great Recession when nearly all banks regarded uncertainty or
  14There  are some banks that did not respond to the survey questions.
  15Bassett  and Covas (2013) show that these results are not biased, partly because respondents' answers
were confidential.
   16For some years, there are very few banks in the "Important" group. The extreme case is the year 2014

in which there is only one bank responding that capital position was an important reason for tightening
lending standards. The wide interquartile range is simply an artificial interpolation of the Matlab graphics
software. We keep such a wide range in our reporting so that the anonymity of this bank is protected.
                                   CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                            9

economic outlook as an important reason for tightening their lending standards. To examine
whether the book or market values of banks' assets, possibly aected by borrowers' real
estate collateral values during the Great Recession, might influence banks' responses to eco-
nomic uncertainty or outlook, the bottom charts of Figures 3 and 4 report the distributions
of book and market values of banks' assets corresponding to their responses to uncertainty or
economic outlook. For a precise comparison with the top chart in each figure, the sample in-
cludes only the banks selected for the top chart. The dashed lines extend from the minimum
to the maximum of the distributions conditional on the banks used in the top chart. The
diamond symbol represents the median of this conditional distribution. The boundaries of
each interquartile range in the top chart may not match exactly the corresponding minimum
and maximum values in the bottom chart because the Matlab graphics software interpolates
end points of an interquartile range. Moreover, some banks stating that capital position was
a "Not important" reason for tightening lending standards may state that uncertainty or
economic outlook was an "Important" reason for tightening lending standards. Thus, banks
in the "Not important" group and those in the "Important" group may shue around, de-
pending on whether the question of capital position or economic uncertainty (outlook) was
asked.
   For banks indicating uncertainty or economic outlook as an important reason for tightening
their lending standards, as revealed in the bottom charts of Figures 3 and 4, both the book
and market values of their assets were healthy, especially during the Great Recession. In
2009, for example, the median Tier 1 capital ratio for this group of banks was around 8%
and the median market leverage ratio was below 15. At the aggregate level, therefore,
the uncertainty or economic outlook reason given by banks would capture macroeconomic
conditions aected by shocks other than those to banks' capital positions. In the theoretical
model we build in the following section, we abstract the model from banks' capital positions
and study various economic shocks that underlie more uncertain or less favorable economic
outlook, such as shocks to bank credit supply, production technology, firms' asset values,
and loan delinquency. In particular, we introduce the frequency of state verification to the
banking sector with a stochastic monitoring technology to be linked to the fraction of banks
that tighten lending standards reported in the SLOOS.17

                                           III. The model
  The economy is inhabited by an infinitely-lived representative worker, a continuum of
entrepreneurs with unit mass, a continuum of banks with unit mass, a representative final
goods producer, and a representative capital good producer.
  In each period, entrepreneurs rent capital and labor to produce intermediate goods, as
an input into final goods production. Competitive banks provide loans to entrepreneurs
  17The  other parts of the model are standard and the costly-state-verification feature has been widely
adopted in the literature on financial frictions, from the seminal works of Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997) and
Bernanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1999) to the more recent work of Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014).
                                CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                     10

to finance the factor payment. The representative worker supplies capital and labor for
production of intermediate goods and is entitled to the profit of the capital producer. All
entrepreneurs are subject to idiosyncratic shocks to the production technology. Realizations
of these shocks are not observed and can only be verified with costs.

III.1. Technology. We specify the technology processes in dierent production sectors: the
intermediate goods sector, the final goods sector, and the capital sector.

III.1.1. Intermediate goods. There are a continuum of entrepreneurs indexed by j 2 [0, 1],
each endowed with the technology for producing intermediate goods j :
                                                    
                               Yt (j ) = At (j )zt kt (j ) h1
                                                            t
                                                                 
                                                                    (j ) ,

where kt (j ) and ht (j ) represent capital and labor used to produce intermediate goods j , and
Yt (j ) represents intermediate goods j . Since entrepreneurs producing dierent intermediate
goods are symmetric, we drop j for notational brevity whenever there is no confusion. An
aggregate technology shock, zt , has the following stochastic process:

                                   log zt = z log zt     1   +   z z,t ,

where z,t is a standard normal random variable. The idiosyncratic productivity At takes
the form At = At t , where t is a shock to idiosyncratic productivity in the form of
                            (        q
                                       1 t
                               1        t
                                            with probability t
                       t =           p t
                               1+      1 t
                                            with probability 1 t
such that the unconditional mean of this shock process is 1 and the unconditional variance
is 2 . Let
                                                #t
                                        t =          ,
                                              1 + #t
where the risk shock #t follows a stochastic process specified as

                         log #t = (1     # ) log # + # log #t          1     +   # #,t

with #,t being a normal random variable. Denote
                                             r
                                                1 t
                              A1,t = At 1           ,
                                                 t
                                             r
                                                 t
                              A2,t = At 1 +         .
                                                1 t
The subscript 1 denotes a bad state and 2 a good state for entrepreneurs. We have At =
Et (At ) = t A1,t + (1 t ) A2,t and V art (At ) = t (1 t ) (A2,t A1,t )2 . Without loss of
generality, we normalize At = 1 so that for a typical entrepreneur, the expected output of
                                            1 
intermediate goods, denoted as yt , is zt kt ht . Accordingly, variations in t drive the variance
of At while the mean of At is independent of t . Hence, the risk shock #t is essentially a
shock to delinquency.
                                CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                                         11

III.1.2. Final goods. There is a constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES) technology for pro-
ducing final goods by combining the dierentiated intermediated goods:
                                        Z 1               1
                                                          µ
                                                      µ
                                   Yt =      (Yt (j )) dj ,
                                                     0

where the elasticity of substitution is 0 < µ < 1. Given the specification of idiosyncratic
productivity, the above expression can be rewritten as
              n                                            o 1 h iµ    1
                           1  µ                       1  µ µ
        Yt = t A1,t zt kt  ht      + (1 t ) A2,t zt kt ht     = Aµ   t
                                                                               1 
                                                                         z t kt ht ,

where
                                            µ
                               Aµ
                                t  t (A1,t ) + (1                    t ) (A2,t )µ .
As in the standard model with monopolistic competitions, the final goods producer chooses
varieties of intermediate goods to maximize its profit. The first-order condition for this
maximization delivers the demand function for each intermediate good:
                                            1 µ
                                       Yt
                               Pi,t =           , i 2 {1, 2},                          (6)
                                       Yi,t
                                                                              1                     
where Pi,t is the price of intermediate goods at state i, and Yi,t  Ai,t zt kt ht                       is the output
of intermediate goods at state i.

III.1.3. Installed capital. In each period, after the final goods production takes place, the cap-
ital producer purchases investment goods It (in units of consumption goods) from the final-
goods producer (and (1         ) Kt units of physical capital from households and entrepreneurs),
and produces the new capital stock to be sold to households and entrepreneurs at the end
of the period.
   The technology to transform new investment into the installed capital involves installation
costs, S (It /It 1 ) , which increase with the rate of investment growth. Since the marginal
rate of transformation from the previously installed capital stock (after it has depreciated)
to new capital is unity, the price of new and used capital is the same. The capital producer's
period-t profit can be expressed as

               k
               t = qt [(1      ) Kt +       t   (1       S (It /It 1 )) It ]      qt (1   ) Kt   It ,

where t is a marginal e ciency shock to investment (MEI shock) as in Justiniano, Primiceri,
and Tambalotti (2011), which has the stochastic process

                                  log       t   =  log         t 1   +     ,t ,

where  ,t is a standard normal random variable. The capital producer solves the following
dynamic optimization problem:
                                     (1                )
                                       X
                                            j      k
                               maxEt           t+j t+j   ,
                                   I t +j
                                                     j =0
                                   CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                                   12

where t is the Lagrangian multiplier for the household's budget constraint. We assume
S (1) = S 0 (1) = 0 and S 00 (1) > 0. It is straightforward to show that k t = 0 at the steady
state.
  We introduce a collateral shock to the economy as an exogenous source of variation in the
value of capital, which is called a "capital quality shock" by Gertler, Kiyotaki, and Queralto
(2012). Let K  e t+1 be the aggregate capital stock "in process" for period t + 1. Capital in
process for period t + 1 is the sum of installed capital investment and the undepreciated
capital:
                           e t+1 = (1
                           K              ) Kt + t (1 S (It /It 1 )) It .                   (7)
The capital in process for period t + 1 is transformed into capital for production after the
realization of a multiplicative collateral shock, t+1 , where t+1 is realized at the end of
period t after all decisions by economic agents at period t are made. Hence, the aggregate
capital for production at period t + 1 is

                                              Kt+1 =           e
                                                           t+1 Kt+1 .                                          (8)

The collateral shock as an exogenous trigger of asset price dynamics has the stochastic
process
                                       log    t   =  log    t 1    +      ,t ,
where    ,t   is a standard normal random variable.

III.2. Workers. The representative worker has no access to the production technology, but
provides physical capital and labor to intermediate-goods producers in each period. The
household is entitled to the profit of the capital-goods producer. After the production takes
place, the household makes optimal decisions on consumption, hours to work, and investment
in physical capital. The representative worker solves the problem
                     X1      
                          t                             Ht1+
                 E0         t log ch t   $ h c h
                                               t 1    t      with 0 < < 1,
                     t=0
                                                        1+

subject to
                         ch       h
                          t + qt at+1 = [qt (1         ) + r t ] t ah             k
                                                                    t + w t H t + t ,

where aht+1 is the physical capital purchased at the end of the period t by the household, ct
                                                                                              h

and Ht denote the household's consumption and total hours supplied, and k       t is the profit
of the representative capital producer. Let t = t /t 1 , which follows a stochastic process
as
                                       log t =  log t          1   +     ,t ,

where ,t is a normal random variable. The labor supply shock                             t   also follows an AR(1)
process as
                             log   t   = (1        ) +  log            t 1   +    ,t ,
where    ,t   is a normal random variable.
                                         CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                               13

III.3. Entrepreneurs' consumption-saving problem. Consider a large entrepreneur fam-
ily with a continuum of members. Each member faces an idiosyncratic productivity shock
 . Assuming complete insurance against consumption risks, all members of the family enjoy
the same consumption ce   t.
   The resource available to the entrepreneur family at the end of period t includes the gross
return for physical capital investment and the expected net project value by all members.
The household uses these resources to finance family consumption spending ce     t , as well as
             e
transfer qt at+1 to be equally dispersed among family members as capital investment, as well
as internal funds for intermediate good production. Accordingly, the consumption-saving
problem of the entrepreneur family is to maximize
                                  1
                                  X
                             E0         ( e )t log ce
                                                    t    $ e ce
                                                              t     1   with 0 <            e
                                                                                                <1
                                  t=0

subject to                                                              Z                                  
                                                                                1
                  ce
                   t   +   q t ae
                                t+1   = [qt (1    ) + rt ]      e
                                                             t at   +               vt (j )dj   q t t ae
                                                                                                       t      ,
                                                                            0
where vt (j ) is the contract value for entrepreneur j , which will be defined in Section III.4.3.
We assume that e < , where is the representative worker's discount factor.

III.4. Financial contract between entrepreneur and bank. This section specifies the
financial contract between an entrepreneur and a bank and builds a micro foundation for
the observed aggregate index of lending standards.

III.4.1. Loan contract. Each bank is indexed by j 2 [0, 1]. Before the final goods production
takes place, entrepreneurs need to rent capital and labor. Here, the total cost of production
for the entrepreneur j is rt kt (j ) + wt ht (j ). Entrepreneurs can use both their net worth and
external borrowing to finance the factor payments. Entrepreneur j 's savings at the end of the
last period, ae                                                                                 e
               t (j ), is in the form of physical capital and entrepreneurs' net worth is qt t at (j ),
where qt is the price of capital. The gap between the cost of production and entrepreneurs'
net worth is financed by the bank, where the bank receives deposits from households.
    In each period, an entrepreneur enters into a financial contract with a bank before idiosyn-
cratic productivity shocks, t , are realized. Debt is repaid at the end of the period. Each
bank provides loans to entrepreneurs and is subject to asymmetric information regarding the
realized cash flow. Entrepreneurs self-report their productivity after the production takes
place. Since information is asymmetric, an entrepreneur who receives A2,t has incentive to
misreport the true productivity. On the other hand, an entrepreneur has no incentive to
misreport A2,t when the actual realized idiosyncratic technology is A1,t . Since the realized
idiosyncratic shock is not publicly observable, payments to the bank at the end of the period
are made according to the report submitted by the entrepreneur.
    The key assumption is that banks can choose the frequency of state verification. Each time
a bank j verifies the state, it will involve a fixed verification cost equal to the project size,
yt (j ). The symbol mt (j ) denotes the total monitoring input of the project committed by the
                                    CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                            14

bank j , and is measured in consumption goods. The frequency for state verification, denoted
as t (j ), is therefore mt (j )/yt (j ). Given the optimal choice of t , after the production takes
place and entrepreneurs report their cash flow, a lottery chooses which banks will engage in
verification. Given the nature of costly state verification, the bank will choose the frequency
of verification only when a bad state is reported.
   Once a bank verifies, it can detect misreporting with probability pt , which captures the
monitoring technology. To capture the exogenous variations in the e ciency of such lending
services, we assume pt is a function of e ciency in lending technology, denoted as "t (i.e.,
pt = p ("t ) , p ("t ) 2 [0, 1)). The stochastic process for "t takes the form

                             log "t = (1    " ) log " + " log "t   1   +   " ",t ,


where ",t is a standard normal random variable. We refer to ",t as a credit supply shock as
it aects lending e ciency directly.
   Hence, the overall probability for a bank to find misreporting by an entrepreneur who
receives A2,t but reports A1,t among all incidences of verification is an increasing function of
both the frequency of bank verification and the probability of detecting misreporting upon
verification.18 Denote such probability by P ("t , mt (j )/yt (j )) , where both P1 and P2 are
strictly positive and Px is the partial derivative of P with respect to the x-th argument.
Note that a higher frequency for verification increases the probability of finding misreport-
ing, but at the same time, requires more monitoring input, and thus a higher cost of credit
intermediation. Therefore, a bank's optimal frequency of verification is aected by the prob-
ability of identify misreporting upon verification, which, in turn, depends on the exogenous
shocks to the lending e ciency. Without loss of generality, we specify the overall probability
that the entrepreneur is found cheating as
                                               8             1
                                               >
                                               < 1 ("t mt (j )/yt (j )) < 1, > 0
                    P ("t , mt (j )/yt (j )) =      for a report t 6= 2t ,
                                               >
                                               :
                                                 0, for a report t = 2t ,
  The timing of events for a period is as follows: at the beginning of the period, the lend-
ing e ciency shock "t is realized. Then, each bank engages in a loan contract with some
entrepreneur by choosing the loan amount and overall monitoring input, which in turn deter-
mines t , the frequency of state verification. After the production takes place, entrepreneurs
report their idiosyncratic productivity. Given that an entrepreneur reports A1,t , a lottery
decides which banks will engage in verification.

III.4.2. Discussion of the credit supply shock. We provide an analysis that connects the credit
supply shock in our model to reasons for changes in lending standards in the SLOOS. We
assume that once a bank chooses to verify the state, it will observe only a noisy signal about
  18Tobe specific, with frequency of verification m/y , the overall probability of detecting the misreport is
                  m/y
P = 1 (1 p ("))       .
                                                     CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                                             15

                                                  ~t follows the random process
the realized idiosyncratic technology. The signal A
                                                                ~t = At
                                                                A                t ,                                                      (9)
where At = At t is the realized cash flow, t is i.i.d distributed and independent of At . The
noise t follows a binary distribution:
                           (
                               0 with probability p ("t )
                       t =                                             .
                               A2,t A1,t with probability 1 p ("t )
Recall that p ("t ) is an increasing function of the credit supply shock "t . Note that when
t = 0, the observed signal equals the realized productivity. Thus, p ("t )--the probability of
t = 0--measures the precision of the signal.
  The probability that an entrepreneur receives At = A2,t but is found cheating is equal to
                                                 
                        Pr A~t = A2,t | At = A2,t = Pr (t = 0) = p ("t ) ,

where the first equality follows from the assumption that t and At are independent of each
other. The probability that the entrepreneur is not caught of falsely defaulting is 1 p ("t ).
                                                      ~t ) = p ("t ) (1 p ("t )) (A2,t A1,t )2 --the
As p ("t ) is reduced from 1 to 0.5, for example, var(A
variance of the signal--increases, implying that the signal becomes noisier.
   The role a credit supply shock plays in aecting the probability of detecting misreporting
is equivalent to the fluctuation of var(A   ~t ). During a recession, signals for entrepreneurs'
cash flows become noisier as the asymmetric information problem in the lending market
worsens. Therefore, the probability for a bank to receive a strong signal for the realized cash
flow of a healthy entrepreneur becomes lower, reflecting a more uncertain or less favorable
economic outlook in the SLOOS. Banks respond by exerting more frequent verifications of
entrepreneurs' cash flows, which shows up as an observed increase of the fraction of banks
that tighten lending standards.
   In an extended cash-in-advance model that includes credit as an alternative to money as a
medium for exchange, Benk, Gillman, and Kejak (2005) construct credit shocks to the pay-
ment technology using quarterly U.S. data on key variables. Such a credit shock is related
to changes in the banking legislation during the U.S. financial deregulation era. In contrast,
our credit supply shock originated from moral hazard in lending activities exacerbates infor-
mational frictions in the model, which can be thought as reflecting an uncertain economic
outlook that leads to the cyclical fluctuation in lending standards observed in the data.

III.4.3. Optimal financial contract. Without loss of generality, we pair each individual en-
trepreneur to a specific bank. Denote the payo to bank j at state i by bit (j ) for i 2 {1, 2}.
Given the entrepreneur's value of the loan contract with her and bank j , denoted by vt (j ),
and her net worth, the optimal contract problem for bank j 2 [0, 1] is to choose the quintuple
{b1t (j ), b2t (j ), kt (j ), ht (j ), mt (j )} to maximize the bank's expected profit:
                max                         {t b1t (j ) + (1    t ) b 2t ( j )   ( rt kt ( j ) + w t h t ( j )   q t t ae
                                                                                                                        t (j ))   t mt ( j ) }
b1t (j ),b2t (j ),kt (j ),ht (j ),mt (j )
                                                                                                                                         (10)
                                                 CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                                                         16

subject to
                                                b1t (j )  P1,t A1,t zt kt (j ) ht (j )1             
                                                                                                       ,                                          (11)

                                                b2t (j )  P2,t A2,t zt kt (j ) ht (j )1             
                                                                                                       ,                                          (12)

                                                                                                                        
  [1     P ( m t ( j ) / z t kt ( j )  h t ( j ) 1   
                                                        )] P2,t A2,t zt kt (j ) ht (j )1       
                                                                                                           b 1t ( j )
                                                                                   P2,t A2,t zt kt (j ) ht (j )1                  
                                                                                                                                        b2t (j ), (13)

   1 (P1,t A1,t zt kt (j ) ht (j )1          
                                                     b1t (j )) + 2 (P2,t A2,t zt kt (j ) ht (j )1               
                                                                                                                           b2t (j )) = vt (j ),   (14)
and the demand schedule represented by (6). The loan made by bank j is

                                            Bt ( j ) = r t k t ( j ) + w t h t ( j )     q t t ae
                                                                                                t (j ).

Constraints (11) and (12) are the limited liability constraints for both states. The incentive
compatibility constraint (13) dictates that when the entrepreneur's cash flow is in a good
state, the expected benefit for her to misreport, represented by the left-hand-side term of
(13), is less than or equal to the benefit of reporting the truth. The participation constraint
(14) represents the contract value for the entrepreneur. The bank's non-negative profit
requires the entrepreneur's contract value vt (j ) to satisfy
                                                            µ
       vt (j )  Yt1      µ
                             Aµ             
                              t z t kt ( j ) h t ( j )
                                                       1
                                                                    ( rt kt ( j ) + w t h t ( j )          q t t ae
                                                                                                                  t (j ))        t mt ( j ) .     (15)

The banking sector is competitive so that in equilibrium, each bank earns zero profit and
equation (15) holds with equality.

Lemma 1. The optimal frequency of verification is the same for any two banks, i.e.,

                               mt (i)/yt (i) = mt (j )/yt (j ) = mt /yt , 8i, j 2 [0, 1] , i 6= j.                                                (16)

Proof. Since all entrepreneurs begin in period t with the same net worth qt t ae             e
                                                                               t (i) = qt t at (j ),
8i, j 2 [0, 1] , i 6= j , all banks are ex-ante homogeneous in the loan contract problem. The
optimal contract problem for any two banks, i 6= j , will have the same solution. That is

                                                xt (i) = xt (j ), 8i, j 2 [0, 1] , i 6= j,

where xt (j ) = {b1t (j ), b2t (j ), kt (j ), ht (j ), mt (j )} .                                                                                   

  Given Lemma 1, we establish the following proposition in regard to the fraction of banks
engaging in verification.

Proposition 1. In equilibrium, the fraction of banks that verify the state ex-post is t t .

Proof. Since it = jt = t , the law of large numbers holds. Hence, the fraction of banks
that ex-post verify the state when A1,t is realized equals t . Also banks will monitor the
state only when A1,t is realized, which has probability t . In each period, therefore, the
fraction of banks that verify the state ex-post is t t .                                
                                    CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                               17

  Proposition 1 maps the aggregate index of lending standards in the SLOOS, st , into our
model. In the data, st is a (net) fraction of banks that tightened lending standards and st
measures a change in the (net) fraction of banks in tightening lending standards in period t.
In our model economy, the fraction of banks that verify the state is t · t . In a recession,
the fraction of banks tightening lending standards increase ( st > 0), which corresponds to
an increase in the fraction of banks that engage in state verification in the model. That is,
                                                       t mt
                                    st = [t · t ]            ,                          (17)
                                                         yt
where mt /yt equals the frequency of verification for an individual bank by the law of large
numbers.

III.5. How various economic shocks drive the frequency of verification? The bank's
frequency of verification is aected by both demand and supply shocks. The technology, risk,
and collateral shocks, for example, influence the credit market from the demand side. In
addition to the credit supply shock, these shocks potentially change the bank's frequency of
verification. In this section, we focus on how various shocks drive the comovement between
bank loans and verification frequency. For the rest of the paper, we remove the index j for
the bank-entrepreneur problem to keep the notation tractable.

III.5.1. Joint determination of bank loans and verification frequency. Two equations charac-
terize the relationship between mt /yt and yt , where yt determines the amount of bank loans.19
The first equation derives from a combination of the incentive compatibility constraint and
the participation constraint in our model:
                                                                           1
                                          vt                               µ
                     yt =                                     ("t mt /yt )   .            (18)
                            (1 t )Yt1 µ ((A2,t )µ (A1,t )µ )
The second equation derives from the bank's first-order condition in respect to yt :
                                                                
                          1 µ µ     µ 1    y                  µ
                       µYt At (yt )      pt = t mt /yt 1 +        ,                       (19)

where py t  (rt kt + wt ht ) /yt is the unit cost of producing intermediate goods.
   For each loan amount, equation (18) reveals the cost of the frequency of verification
each bank needs to incur in order for that particular loan amount to satisfy the incentive
compatibility constraint. Given the informational asymmetry, a larger amount of bank loans
and thus a larger production scale tends to increase the entrepreneur's gain of misreporting
when the outcome is in the good state. This requires the bank to increase the frequency
of verification to discourage the entrepreneur from misreporting, which implies a positive
relationship between bank loans and verification frequency.
   Equation (19) characterizes the optimal choice of intermediate goods yt that maximizes the
contract value. The presence of intermediation costs--unlike in the frictionless economy--
drives a wedge between the marginal revenue product of yt and the unit production cost py   t.

  19See   Supplemental Appendix S1 for details of solving the optimal contract.
                               CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                    18

A more frequent verification involves a higher monitoring cost, which eventually passes onto
the entrepreneur. This leads to a higher overall marginal cost of intermediate goods (as the
sum of the production cost and the intermediation cost). As a result, the size of the project
and thus the amount of intermediate inputs have to be reduced, which leads to a negative
relationship between yt and mt /yt .
   Equations (18) and (19) together, therefore, determine the equilibrium relationship be-
tween bank loans and verification frequency. We show, in the next section, that this joint
determination allows us to identify the credit supply shock from demand shocks.



III.5.2. Identifying the credit supply shock from demand shocks. We first explore how various
shocks aect the comovement between bank loans and verification frequency. Figures 6 and
7 plot the relationship between yt and mt /yt via equations (18) and (19): one positively
sloped curve labeled as the SS curve and one negatively sloped curve labeled the DD curve.
The intersection point A represents the initial equilibrium. In our model, various shocks
aect the equilibrium outcome by shifting either the SS curve or the DD curve or both.
   Figure 6 illustrates the impact of a negative shock to credit supply. This shock shifts
the SS curve to the left as shown by the dotted line. In equilibrium, intermediate goods yt
and therefore bank loans decline while the verification frequency (or the fraction of banks
engaging in verification) increases. Intuitively, this negative shock tightens the incentive
compatibility constraint, which leads to a simultaneous increase in verification frequency
and a decline in bank loans to enforce the true reporting mechanism. The equilibrium moves
from point A to point B, implying countercyclical lending standards.
   By contrast, other shocks shift either the DD curve alone or both SS and DD curves
simultaneously. For example, a positive risk shock (i.e., a positive shock to the delinquency
rate of bank loans measured by t ) increases the marginal monitoring cost (the right-hand
side of equation (19)) and thus shifts the DD curve to the left. At the same time, this risk
shock shifts the SS curve to the right as well, further reducing the frequency of verification.
A negative technology shock or a negative collateral shock, on the other hand, shifts both
DD and SS curves (via a decrease in vt ) to the left, thus muting the eects on verification
frequency. All these shocks imply either procyclical or acyclical movements of bank lending
standards.
   In the next section, we estimate the theoretical model against several macroeconomic se-
ries, including bank loans and changes in the fraction of banks that tighten or ease their
lending standards. The model provides an economically interpretable relationship between
bank loans and lending standards (i.e., the fraction of banks engaging in verification in the
model); its estimation quantifies the dierent roles various shocks play in driving this rela-
tionship. One chief finding is that the credit supply shock accounts for most of the variation
in the frequency of verification and thus plays a dominant role in explaining countercyclical
lending standards observed in the data.
                                CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                     19

                                  IV. Empirical analysis
  We use our constructed series of lending standards, together with other standard macroe-
conomic variables, to estimate the theoretical model and provide an empirical analysis.

IV.1. Measurement. We fit the model to six quarterly U.S. time series: changes in bank
lending standards on C&I and CS loans ( sData   t  ), real per capita C&I and CS loans to the
nonfinancial sector (bt ), commercial banks' charge-o rates on bank loans (dData
                       Data
                                                                                  t   ), real per
                                           Data
capita nondurable goods consumption (ct ), real per capita investment in the nonfinancial
sector (iData
         t    ), and per capita hours worked in the nonfinancial sector (hData
                                                                            t  ).
   From the Call Report microdata, we construct C&I and CS loans to the nonfinancial
sector to be usable for our theoretical model as well as other structural models. This task
proves challenging. We first follow the FFIEC's instruction book (http://www.ffiec.
gov/pdf/FFIEC_forms/FFIEC031_FFIEC041_201503_i.pdf), which includes the
detailed instructions to banks about how to exclude loans to financial institutions from loans
secured by real estate (page 156 of the book). We then obtain C&I loans to nonfinancial
institutions excluding those secured by residential real estate. In a third step, we obtain
automobile loans and other consumer loans excluding loans outstanding on credit cards. We
sum all these components to obtain the series of C&I and CS loans to the nonfinancial sector.
We include automobile loans and consumer loans for other consumer durables to follow the
convention in the DSGE literature by treating consumer durables as a part of investment
goods in the theoretical model.
   To be also consistent with our model, we construct the nominal consumption series as the
sum of nominal nondurable goods consumption and nominal services consumption excluding
housing services, the nominal investment series as the sum of nominal equipment investment,
intellectual property products investment, and durable goods consumption, and the labor
hours series as aggregate hours in the business sector excluding those in the finance and
insurance industries. More involved eort is devoted to construction of the aggregate price
index for consumption, which is computed as the Tornqvist price index for nondurable goods
and services consumption excluding housing, and the annual capital stock consistent with
the definition of our investment series. All the nominal variables are divided by the aggregate
price index and then by the civilian noninstitutional population with ages between 25 to 64
years, so that these nominal variables are transformed to real variables per capita. The
population series is smoothed with Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003)'s band-pass filter to
eliminate seasonal fluctuations and breaks due to the Census's population controls.
   In addition to the series of bank lending standards displayed in Figure 1, Figure 8 displays
log values of real per capita bank lending, real per capita consumption, real per capita
investment, and per capita labor hours. It is evident from the top right panel of Figure 8
that bank loans experience a sharp decline at the beginning of the Great Recession and
its recovery has been slow. Consumption, investment, and labor hours, displayed in the
rest of the panels, show similar patterns but with dierent magnitudes. In particular, the
                                   CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                            20

fall of investment during the Great Recession is more severe and persistent than the fall of
consumption.
   Equilibrium conditions, a list of endogenous variables, and the log-linearized system of
equations are reported in Supplemental Appendices S2-S5. The variable x       ^t is defined as
log xt log x, where xt represents a variable of interest and x is the steady state value of xt .
Since our theoretical model is trend-stationary, we follow the DSGE literature and remove
from all (log) trend series the balanced linear trend defined by output growth. Changes in
the fraction of banks engaging in verification is measured by equation (17), which can be
rewritten as
                                 sData
                                  t    = bs [ m
                                              ^t     y
                                                     ^t +   ^t ] ,
                                                                          t m t
where bs is a scale parameter for log-linearizing the term                yt
                                                                                  in equation (17). The
measurement equation for bank loans is
                                            log bData      ^t .
                                                      = bb b
                                                 t

Because the series of bank loans includes long-term debts, the relationship between log bData
                                                                                         t
    ^t would not be exact. We estimate the parameters bb and bs jointly with the other
and b
parameters in the model. The measurement equations for the other variables are
                                             log cData
                                                  t    =c
                                                        ^t ,
                                             log iData
                                                  t    =^
                                                        it ,
                                             log hData  ^ t,
                                                       =h
                                                  t

                                             log dData  ^t ,
                                                       =#
                                                  t

where log hData
           t    and log dData
                         t    are demeaned log variables.

IV.2. Estimation method. We apply the Bayesian methodology to estimation of this log-
linearized system, using our own C/C++ code. The advantage of using our own code instead
of using the Dynare software is the flexibility and accuracy we have for finding the posterior
mode. Our Dynare code fails to converge with any of its optimization options. The failure
is partly due to the di culty of solving the steady state and partly due to the complexity of
the model the Dynare software package has yet to confront with.20
   We use the log-linearized equilibrium conditions, reported in Supplemental Appendix S4,
to form the likelihood function fit to the six quarterly U.S. time series from 1990Q2 to
2017Q4. We categorize the model's parameters in three groups. The first group consists of
those fixed at values commonly used or calibrated by the average patterns of the data: the
capital share is set to 0.35; the subjective discount factor is set to 0.995; the elasticity-of-
substitution parameter µ is set to 0.85, which implies a markup of 17.6%, consistent with
the empirical evidence provided by Morrison (1992); the steady state hours is H = 0.3; the
capital adjustment cost parameter is S 00 = 2.5 as used in much of the DSGE literature;
  20We are in the process of collaborating with Dynare developers to make our estimation procedure available

through the Dynare interface.
                                 CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                    21

the parameter for the inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply is set to  = 1.0; the
delinquency parameter is #   ¯ = 0.8% so that the model's average delinquency rate is the
same as the data average 0.78%; the leverage ratio B/Y  ~ is 0.7 calculated from our quarterly
data and consistent with the literature on financial frictions; the intermediation-cost ratio
       ~ is 0.1194 at a quarterly frequency, equal to the ratio of financially intermediated
¯ mc / Y

services in the banking system to aggregate output, where financially intermediated services
are constructed using the NIPA data by following Mehra, Piguillem, and Prescott (2011);
the ratio of output to capital is 0.125 at quarterly frequency, calculated from our quarterly
data; and the ratio of investment to capital is 0.0377 at quarterly frequency, which is also
calculated from our quarterly data.
   The second group of parameters are to be estimated. Table 3 reports the prior distribution
of each of these parameters, where "Inv-Gamma" stands for an inverse Gamma probability
density. Most of these prior settings, agnostic in nature, are used in the literature (see Liu,
Wang, and Zha (2013) for detailed discussions). We discuss the few prior settings that are
specific to our model. The unit cost of producing intermediate goods, py , is not a parameter
but an implicit function of model parameters implied by the steady state. Solving for the
steady state value py and other steady state variables requires solving a system of nonlinear
equations, which would be costly during the estimation phase. A nonlinear system may not
have a solution or its solution can be di cult to find, which is the case for our model. This
di culty is one of the main reasons that the Dynare software package has di culty in finding
the posterior mode of this model. By finding the value of py first, however, we can reverse-
engineer the value of the parameter " ¯. The steady state can then be solved recursively. This
advancement makes the estimation feasible, even though the steady state for our model is
complicated. The prior mean we set for py is around 1.0 with the .90 probability interval
between 0.5 and 1.5. We experiment with a much looser prior and our results are robust to
dierent prior settings. The prior means for bs and bb are centered at 1. We also change the
variance of the prior and the posterior results are not materially aected since the posterior
modes are similar and the impulse responses do not change much.
   The posterior modes, alongside the .90 posterior probability intervals, for the second group
of parameters are reported in Tables 4 and 5. The standard Metropolis Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm is used to simulate the posterior probability distribution.21
The price of intermediate goods is estimated to be 0.63, with the posterior distribution
skewed to higher values than the posterior mode. The estimated slope parameters in the
measurement equations for lending standards and bank loans are statistically significant.
The slope parameter for lending standards is tightly estimated around one, implying that
the dynamics generated from the model capture those of cyclical lending standards observed
in the data. The estimated habit parameter for the household's consumption is extremely
small, even judged by the .90 posterior probability interval. The estimated habit parameter
for the entrepreneur, however, is much larger.
  21Some   more sophisticated MCMC algorithms are discussed by Waggoner, Wu, and Zha (2016).
                                 CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                       22

  The persistence parameter for the credit supply shock is estimated above 0.8 according
to the .90 posterior probability interval. Its posterior mode is smaller than those of the
technology and risk shocks. The standard deviation of the credit supply shock is similar to
that of the risk shock with both estimates above 0.20. The estimated collateral shock process
has little persistence with a small standard deviation. In the section below, we discuss how
credit supply shocks are transmitted to the fluctuations of bank loans and aggregate output.
  The third group collects the remaining parameters. These parameters are obtained by
solving the steady state given the parameter values in the first two groups. Since the steady
state can be solved recursively, these parameter values can be calculated with little computing
time for each MCMC simulation of the second group of parameters.

IV.3. Findings. Figure 9 reports the estimated impulse responses to a negative shock to
bank credit supply. The frequency of verification rises on impact (top panel of the figure)
so that the fraction of banks choosing to tighten lending standards (engaging in verification
in our model) increases by almost 30% initially. A negative shock to bank credit supply
causes a deterioration of lending e ciency and an increase of monitoring costs in the bank-
ing sector. These eects result in an increase of the fraction of banks tightening lending
standards. Accordingly, both bank loans and output fall by 3% on impact (bottom two
panels of the figure) and remain negative for years. The response of bank loans, which in
turn aects output, is propagated through the so-called financial accelerator.22 An initial fall
of bank loans reduces the production scale for intermediate goods and the expected profit of
the production project. After these initial eects, both the end-of-period net worth of the
entrepreneur and the contract value of the next-period loan decline. The incentive problem
is exacerbated, which contracts bank loans further and results in the hump-shape response
of bank loans (bottom panel of Figure 9).
   Key variance decompositions attributable to a credit supply shock (relative to all other
shocks) are reported in Table 6. The credit supply shock explains over 40% of the output
fluctuation on impact and the importance of this eect on output is persistent with a 20%
contribution to the output fluctuation in four years (16 quarters). The contribution to the
loan fluctuation is over 43% on impact and this eect is also persistent with 30% of the loan
fluctuation over the four-year horizon that is explained by the shock to bank credit supply.
   As can be seen from Table 6, the credit supply shock accounts for essentially all the fluc-
tuation of the verification frequency (the fraction of banks that tighten lending standards
or engage in verification). This result indicates the importance of our data analysis on the
fraction of banks tightening lending standards in disciplining the kind of credit frictions
needed to be embedded in the model. Various economic shocks, demand or supply, drive
the fluctuation of bank lending standards in the data as well as the model's corresponding
fraction of banks that engage in verification. As discussed in Section III.5 and revealed in

  22For the implications of our model on the risk premium, see Appendix B and also Gomes, Yaron, and
Zhang (2003).
                                CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                       23

Table 6, however, only a shock to bank credit supply in the model can generate countercycli-
cal movements of the verification frequency, while shocks outside the banking sector shift the
credit demand curve and tend to produce procyclical or acyclical movements in the fraction
of banks that engage in verification.

                                        V. Conclusion
   As argued by Perri and Quadrini (2018), credit tightening in the banking sector plays
an important role in propagating the depth and duration of the Great Recession across
countries. In this paper, we not only construct a direct measure of credit tightening via
changes in bank lending standards but, more importantly, provide an extensive analysis of
the cyclical fluctuation in lending standards by using the micro and macro data merged from
the SLOOS, Call Report, and CRSP. The detailed data analysis is usable for macroeconomic
research on financial frictions in general and helps discipline the kind of credit frictions needed
to be embedded in the model in particular. By estimating the model against standard
macro variables and the series of the fraction of banks that change lending standards over
the business cycle, we are able to quantify the importance of the credit supply shock in
driving the countercyclical movements of bank lending standards as well as in generating the
significant fluctuations of bank loans and aggregate output.
                                CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                      24

                      Table 1. Panel regressions on lending standards

                                            C&I loans          C&I and CS loans
              Lending standards:          Est.     S.E.         Est.    S.E.
              Change in C&I NIM#          2.756 1.157
              Change in total NIM#                             1.6602 2.657
              Change in C&I LLP#         2.4600 0.523
              Change in total LLP#                             7.4044 0.998
              Core loan share            0.6742 0.077          0.6879 0.069
              Core deposit share          0.659 0.060           0.654 0.053
              Log real assets            0.0206 0.009          0.0361 0.008
              Stock returns               0.041 0.007           0.040 0.006
              Tobin's Q                   0.311 0.088           0.127 0.079
              Tier 1 capital ratio        2.423 0.417           1.748 0.373
              R2                             0.1143                0.1337
Note. The superscripts *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels. The superscript # denotes the series adjusted for mergers. Lending standards for quarter t
are reported early in quarter t + 1. Control variables from the Call Report, bank holding
company financial reports, and CRSP are variables at the end of quarter t.
                                CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                      25

                      Table 2. Panel regressions on lending standards

                                            C&I loans           C&I + CS loans
                                          Est.     S.E.         Est.    S.E
              Change in C&I NIM#          2.608 1.149
              Change in total NIM#                             1.1769 2.641
              Change in C&I LLP#         2.3660 0.519
              Change in total LLP#                             7.0202 0.993
              Core loan share            0.6493 0.076          0.6762 0.068
              Core deposit share          0.673 0.058           0.689 0.052
              Log real assets            0.0305 0.009          0.0431 0.008
              Stock returns               0.028 0.007           0.029 0.006
              Market leverage            0.0078 0.001          0.0060 0.001
              Tier 1 capital ratio        1.699 0.423           1.158 0.379
              R2                             0.1261                0.1444
Note. The superscripts *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels. The superscript # denotes the series adjusted for mergers. Lending standards for quarter t
are reported early in quarter t + 1. Control variables from the Call Report, bank holding
company financial reports, and CRSP are variables at the end of quarter t.
                             CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                    26

            Table 3. Prior distributions of structural and shock parameters
 Parameter          Description           Distribution       a          b         Low      High
   y
 p          Price of intermediate goods   Gamma(a,b)      9.387       9.952        0.5      1.5
    h
 $                Household habit          Beta(a,b)       1.00        2.00       0.025    0.776
    c
 $              Entrepreneur habit         Beta(a,b)       1.00        2.00       0.025    0.776
 bs         Scale for lending standards   Gamma(a,b)      9.387       9.952        0.5      1.5
 bb             Scale for bank loans      Gamma(a,b)      9.387       9.952        0.5      1.5
 z                   Technology            Beta(a,b)       1.00        2.00       0.025    0.776
                        MEI                Beta(a,b)       1.00        2.00       0.025    0.776
 #                      Risk               Beta(a,b)       1.00       2.00        0.025    0.776
                     Preference            Beta(a,b)       1.00        2.00       0.025    0.776
 "                 Credit supply           Beta(a,b)       1.00        2.00       0.025    0.776
                   Labor supply            Beta(a,b)       1.00        2.00       0.025    0.776
                      Collateral           Beta(a,b)       1.00        2.00       0.025    0.776
   z                 Technology         Inv-Gamma(a,b) 3.26e-01 1.45e-04         1.0e-04    2.0
                        MEI             Inv-Gamma(a,b) 3.26e-01 1.45e-04         1.0e-04    2.0
   #                    Risk            Inv-Gamma(a,b) 3.26e-01 1.45e-04         1.0e-04    2.0
                     Preference         Inv-Gamma(a,b) 3.26e-01 1.45e-04         1.0e-04    2.0
   "               Credit supply        Inv-Gamma(a,b) 3.26e-01 1.45e-04         1.0e-04    2.0
                   Labor supply         Inv-Gamma(a,b) 3.26e-01 1.45e-04         1.0e-04    2.0
                      Collateral        Inv-Gamma(a,b) 3.26e-01 1.45e-04         1.0e-04    2.0
Note. "Low" and "high" denotes the bounds of the 90% probability interval for   each
parameter.


               Table 4. Posterior distributions of structural parameters
                                                     Posterior estimates
             Parameter Description                   Mode Low High
               y
             p          Price of intermediate goods    0.63 0.54 1.57
                h
             $          Household habit                0.00 0.00 0.22
                c
             $          Entrepreneur habit             0.68 0.45 0.67
             bs         Slope for lending standards    1.18 0.85 1.34
             bb         Slope for bank loans           1.68 1.19 1.93
Note. "Low" and "High" denote the bounds of the 90% probability interval for each
parameter.
                             CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                              27

                 Table 5. Posterior distributions of shock parameters
                                                Posterior estimates
                 Parameter Description        Mode Low         High
                 z          Technology        0.9982 0.9927 0.9995
                            MEI               0.2216 0.0062 0.5663
                 #          Risk              0.9356 0.8887 0.9688
                            Preference        0.8545 0.8300 0.8993
                 "          Credit supply     0.8779 0.8161 0.9135
                            Labor supply     0.9377 0.8747 0.9674
                            Collateral        0.0090 0.0041 0.2022
                  z         Technology        0.0238 0.0198 0.0294
                            MEI               0.0052 0.0002 0.0255
                  #         Risk              0.2168 0.2172 0.2762
                            Preference        0.0073 0.0049 0.0080
                  "         Credit supply     0.2357 0.2279 0.3008
                            Labor supply     0.0001 0.0004 1.0286
                            Collateral        0.0052 0.0048 0.0073
Note. "Low" and "High" denote the bounds of the 90% probability interval for each
parameter.


    Table 6. Contributions of a credit supply shock to variance decompositions (%)
                 Quarters Verification frequency Bank loans Output
                    1              99.99           43.97     41.06
                    4              99.98           41.33     35.13
                    8              99.97           37.10     29.10
                   16              99.96           30.75     21.08
                                                    CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                            28



                                   0.6
Bank lending standards
                                   0.4

                                   0.2

                                     0

                                   -0.2

                                   -0.4
                                      1990   1995        2000         2005        2010         2015
Changes in lending standards (%)




                                   0.3

                                   0.2

                                   0.1

                                     0

                                   -0.1

                                   -0.2

                                   -0.3

                                     1990    1995        2000         2005        2010         2015
                              Figure 1. The constructed aggregate series of bank lending standards. The
                              shaded bars represent NBER-dated recessions.
                                                                      CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                           29

                                                                       Current or expected capital position
                                            1
                                                                                                                    Important
                                                                                                                    Not important
                                          0.8


                                          0.6
Fraction of banks: ease(-) and tight(+)




                                          0.4


                                          0.2


                                            0


                                          -0.2


                                          -0.4


                                          -0.6


                                          -0.8
                                                 1996   1998   2000    2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014   2016        2018

Figure 2. The bank's current or expected capital position as a reason for
tightening or easing lending standards. The longest shaded bars represent
NBER-dated recessions. Answer "Important" includes the "Somewhat impor-
tant" and "Very important" categories.
                         CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                    30




Figure 3. Top chart: the interquartile range of Tier 1 capital ratios for banks
responding how important their current or expected capital positions were for tight-
ening C&I lending standards. The sample only includes publicly-listed banks in
CRSP with a holding company that files the FR Y-9C report. Quarterly responses
are grouped into annual frequency such that a bank can appear up to four times
in each box-plot. The red boxes represent the interquartile response range for the
"not important" reason for tightening lending standards, and the blue boxes for the
"important" reason. The diamond symbol inside each box represents the median
of the response distribution. Bottom chart: the minimum, median, and maximum
values of Tier 1 capital ratios for banks responding how important a more uncertain
or less favorable economic outlook was for tightening C&I lending standards. For
comparison, the selected banks correspond to those in the top chart exactly.
                         CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                    31




Figure 4. Top chart: the interquartile range of market leverages for banks re-
sponding how important their current or expected capital positions were for tight-
ening C&I lending standards. The sample only includes publicly-listed banks in
CRSP with a holding company that files the FR Y-9C report. Quarterly responses
are grouped into annual frequency such that a bank can appear up to four times
in each box-plot. The red boxes represent the interquartile response range for the
"not important" reason for tightening lending standards, and the blue boxes for the
"important" reason. The diamond symbol inside each box represents the median of
the response distribution. Annual distributions with no observations are left blank.
Bottom chart: the minimum, median, and maximum values of market leverages for
banks responding how important a more uncertain or less favorable economic out-
look was for tightening C&I lending standards. For comparison, the selected banks
correspond to those in the top chart exactly.
                                                                      CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                           32

                                                                        Uncertainty or economic outlook
                                            1
                                                                                                                    Important
                                                                                                                    Not important
                                          0.8


                                          0.6
Fraction of banks: ease(-) and tight(+)




                                          0.4


                                          0.2


                                            0


                                          -0.2


                                          -0.4


                                          -0.6


                                          -0.8
                                                 1996   1998   2000    2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014   2016        2018

Figure 5. Aggregate uncertainty or macroeconomic outlook as a reason for
tightening or easing lending standards. The longest shaded bars represent
NBER-dated recessions. Answer "Important" includes the "Somewhat impor-
tant" and "Very important" categories. The survey on "Uncertainty" as a
reason for changing lending standards began in 1998Q4.
                CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                        33




Figure 6. The impact of a negative shock to bank credit supply.
              CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                     34




Figure 7. The impact of shocks outside the banking sector.
                                                        CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                                           35

                                                                                               -14.5
                             -15.9
                                                                                              -14.55




                                                                          Consumption (log)
        Bank lending (log)
                                                                                               -14.6
                              -16
                                                                                              -14.65

                                                                                               -14.7
                             -16.1
                                                                                              -14.75

                                                                                               -14.8
                             -16.2
                                                                                              -14.85

                                1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015                           1990    1995   2000   2005   2010   2015




                             -15.4                                                             -1.19

                      -15.45                                                                  -1.195
                                                                          Labor hours (log)
Investment (log)




                             -15.5                                                              -1.2

                      -15.55                                                                  -1.205

                             -15.6                                                             -1.21
                      -15.65                                                                  -1.215
                             -15.7                                                             -1.22
                      -15.75
                                                                                              -1.225
                                1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015                            1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015

                              Figure 8. The U.S. time series constructed for estimation of the structural
                              model. All variables are per capita. Loans, consumption, and investment are
                              real variables (deflated by prices of consumption goods). The shaded bars
                              represent NBER-dated recessions.
                                             CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                            36

                                   0.3


      Frequency of verification
                                  0.25

                                   0.2

                                  0.15

                                   0.1

                                  0.05




                            -0.01

                 -0.015
Output




                            -0.02

                 -0.025

                            -0.03

                 -0.035




                            -0.01

                            -0.02
   Bank loans




                            -0.03

                            -0.04

                            -0.05

                            -0.06
                                         4                8               12                  16
                                                         Quarters
             Figure 9. The impulse responses to a contractionary credit supply shock of
             one standard deviation. The star line represents the posterior model estimate.
             The dashed lines around the star lines represent the .90 posterior probability
             bands.
                              CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                    37

                            Appendix A. Data description
  The variables in Tables 1 and 2 are defined below.
     · C&I loans: industrial and commercial loans from banks.
     · CS loans: bank loans to consumers (CS) excluding credit card loans., most of which
       are used for consumer durables.
     · Change in C&I NIM: change in the ratio of net interest and fee income on C&I
       loans to the quarterly average of C&I loans.
     · Change in total NIM: total net interest income divided by the quarterly average
       of total assets.
     · Change in C&I LLP: quarterly change in the share of total outstanding C&I loans
       that are in nonaccrual status, where LLP is an abbreviation for "loan loss provisions."
     · Change in total LLP: quarterly change in the share of total outstanding loans and
       leases that are in nonaccrual status.
     · Core loan share: ratio of the sum of C&I loans, real estate (excluding HELOCs)
       loans, credit card loans, and consumer loans to total assets.
     · Core deposit share: ratio of the sum of total transaction accounts, money market
       deposit accounts, other non-transaction savings deposits, and total time deposits of
       less than $100,000 to total liabilities and minority interest.
     · Log real assets: end-of-quarter total assets divided by the GDP Deflator (converted
       to 2005 dollars).
     · Tobin's Q: sum of market capitalization and total liabilities and minority interest
       for the bank's holding company, divided by the holding company's total assets.
     · Market leverage: sum of market capitalization and total liabilities and minority in-
       terest for the bank's holding company, divided by market capitalization of the bank's
       holding company (Begenau, Bigio, Majerovitz, and Vieyra, 2019). All variables are
       at the end of the quarter.
     · Tier 1 capital ratio: ratio of Tier 1 capital to average total consolidated assets
       excluding some deductions for capital ratio calculation purposes. The ratio is re-
       ported in the Call Report from the beginning of 2001 onward. Prior to 2001, we
       proxy this ratio as the dierence between total equity capital and goodwill divided
       by the quarterly average of total assets.


                           Appendix B. Additional results
   The series of bank lending standards used for our model estimation is constructed to be
consistent with the model ingredients. In particular, investment in the model, as well as
in most macroeconomic models, includes spendings on consumer durables, and bank loans
are restricted to the nonfinancial sector. We construct bank lending standards on C&I and
CS loans and on C&I loans alone. Figure B.1 display both series of bank lending standards
and their dynamics are very similar. The Federal Reserve Board (FRB) also reports a series
                                CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                     38

of lending standards that are constructed from the micro data with a simple average. This
series applies to standards on C&I loans only and diers in some respects from our loan
weighted average series (top panel of Figure B.1).
   Our model also has implications on the risk premium, defined as the spread between the
average lending rate (the ratio of the average payo to the bank in both states to the amount
of bank loans) and the borrowing rate. Under the zero profit condition, the risk premium
can be expressed as
                               t b1t + (1 t ) b2t               t mt
                                    y            e
                                                     1= y                 ,                 (B.1)
                                  p t y t q t t at       p t y t q t t ae
                                                                        t
where py t  (rt kt + wt ht ) /yt is the unit production cost of intermediate goods. According to
equation (B.1), the risk premium increases with total verification/monitoring costs. Since
verification is costly, banks charge a higher lending rate (in the good state) when more
verification resources are needed to enforce the truth telling.
   In addition to the cyclical fluctuation of lending standards, credit supply shocks contribute
to the countercyclical fluctuation of the risk premium due to the countercyclicality of en-
dogenous verification costs mt . By contrast, Gomes, Yaron, and Zhang (2003) show that
the typical costly state verification model generates the procyclical risk premium, which is
counterfactual. Their analysis focuses only on credit demand shocks, which, similar to de-
mand shocks in our model, tend to produce the counterfactual procyclical intermediation
premium. For example, in response to a negative collateral shock in our model, the demand
for capital and thus the price of capital decrease. The decrease in the demand for capital
decreases the demand for bank loans and thus the overall verification/monitoring cost. As
a result, the risk premium increases in our model as well as in Gomes, Yaron, and Zhang
(2003).
   The credit supply shock in our model, on the other hand, generates the countercyclicality of
the frequency of state verification (or the verification cost). Figure B.2 reports the estimated
impulse responses to a negative shock to credit supply. The increase in the frequency of
verification (credit supply tightening) is associated with an increase in the risk premium (top
row of Figure B.2). Intuitively, an increase in the frequency of verification forces banks to put
in more monitoring resources, which drives up the spread between lending and borrowing
rates. Accordingly, bank loans decline on impact and continue to decline until the fifth
quarter, while output falls on impact and the fall is persistent.
                       CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                 39




Figure B.1. The constructed diusion series for bank lending standards. The
loan weighted series (solid lines) is constructed by linking the Call Report to
the SLOOS. The dashed line represents the unweighted series published by the
FRB. The FRB does not publish a lending standards series related to the sum
of C&I loans and CS loans. The shaded bars represent NBER-dated recessions.
                                                          CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                    40

                                  0.3
     Frequency of verification                                                                0.3
                                 0.25
                                                                                             0.25




                                                                              Risk premium
                                  0.2
                                                                                              0.2
                                 0.15
                                                                                             0.15
                                  0.1
                                                                                              0.1
                                 0.05
                                                                                             0.05




                                                                                        -0.01
                           -0.01
                                                                                        -0.02
                -0.015                                                     Bank loans
                                                                                        -0.03
Output




                           -0.02
                                                                                        -0.04
                -0.025

                           -0.03                                                        -0.05

                -0.035                                                                  -0.06
                                                                                                    4     8        12   16
                                                                                                        Quarters

                                   Figure B.2. The impulse responses to a contractionary credit supply shock of
                                   one standard deviation. The star line represents the posterior mode estimate.
                                   The dashed lines around the star lines represent the .90 probability bands.
                             CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                41

                                     References
Bassett, W. F., M. B. Chosak, J. C. Driscoll, and E. Zakraj         sek (2014): "Changes
 in Bank Lending Standards and the Macroeconomy," Journal of Monetary Economics,
 62(0), 23 ­ 40.
Bassett, W. F., and F. B. Covas (2013): "A New Look at the Relationship Between
 Capital Constraints and Bank Lending," Unpublished Manuscript, Federal Reserve Board.
Begenau, J., S. Bigio, J. Majerovitz, and M. Vieyra (2019): "Banks Adjust Slowly:
 Evidence and Lessons for Modeling," Unpublished Manuscript.
Benk, S., M. Gillman, and M. Kejak (2005): "Credit Shocks in the Financial Deregu-
 latory era: not the Usual Suspects," Review of Economic Dynamics, 8(3), 668­687.
Bernanke, B. S. (1983): "Nonmonetary Eects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation
 of the Great Depression," American Economic Review, 73(3), 257­276.
Bernanke, B. S., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1999): "The Financial Accelerator
 in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework," in The Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed.
 by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1C, chap. 21, pp. 1341­1393. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
 Netherlands.
Carlstrom, C. T., and T. S. Fuerst (1997): "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business
 Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis," American Economic Review,
 87(5), 893­910.
Christiano, L. J., and T. J. Fitzgerald (2003): "The Band Pass Filter," International
 Economic Review, 44(2), 435­465.
Christiano, L. J., and D. Ikeda (2013): "Leverage Restrictions in a Business Cycle
 Model," Manuscript, Northwestern University.
Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2014): "Risk Shocks," American
 Economic Review, 104(1), 27­65.
Diamond, D. W., and P. H. Dybvig (1983): "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
 Liquidity," Journal of Political Economy, 91(3), 401­419.
Gertler, M., and P. Karadi (2011): "A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy,"
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 58(1), 17­34.
Gertler, M., and N. Kiyotaki (2010): "Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in
 Business Cycle Analysis," in Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman,
 and M. Woodford, vol. 3, chap. 11, pp. 547­599. Elsevier B. V.
         (2015): "Banking, Liquidity and Bank Runs in an Infinite-Horizon Economy,"
 American Economic Review, 105(7), 2011­2043.
Gertler, M., N. Kiyotaki, and A. Queralto (2012): "Financial Crises, Bank Risk
 Exposure and Government Financial Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 59, 17­34.
Gilchrist, S., and E. Zakraj     sek (2012): "Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctua-
 tions," American Economic Review, 102(4), 1692­1720.
                            CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                               42

Gomes, J. F., A. Yaron, and L. Zhang (2003): "Asset Prices and Business Cycles With
  Costly External Finance," Review of Economic Dynamics, 6, 767­788.
Greenwood, J., J. M. Sanchez, and C. Wang (2010): "Financing Development: The
  Role of Information Costs," American Economic Review, 100(4), 1875­91.
Jermann, U., and V. Quadrini (2012): "Macroeconomic Eects of Financial Shocks,"
  American Economic Review, 102(1), 238­271.
Jime´nez, G., S. Ongena, J.-L. Peydro     ´ , and J. Saurina (2012): "Credit Supply and
  Monetary Policy: Identifying the Bank Balance-Sheet Channel with Loan Applications,"
  American Economic Review, 102(5), 2301­2326.
Justiniano, A., G. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2011): "Investment Shocks and
  the Relative Price of Investment," Review of Economic Dynamics, 14, 101­121.
Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2017): "Credit Supply and the
  Housing Boom," Unpublished Manuscript.
Liu, Z., P. Wang, and T. Zha (2013): "Land-Price Dynamics and Macroeconomic Fluc-
  tuations," Econometrica, 81(3), 1147­1184.
Mehra, R., F. Piguillem, and E. C. Prescott (2011): "Costly Financial Intermedia-
  tion in Neoclasical Growth Theory," Quantitative Economics, 2, 1­36.
Morrison, C. J. (1992): "Unravelling the Productivity Growth Slowdown in the United
  States, Canada, and Japan: The Eects of Subequilibrium, Scale Economies, and
  Markups," Review of Economics and Statistics, 74, 381­393.
Perri, F., and V. Quadrini (2018): "International Recessions," American Economic
  Review, 108(4-5), 935­984.
Quadrini, V. (2017): "Bank Liabilities Channel," Journal of Monetary Economics, 89,
  25­44.
Townsend, R. M. (1979): "Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State
  Verification," Journal of Economic Theory, 21(2), 265 ­ 293.
Waggoner, D. F., H. Wu, and T. Zha (2016): "Dynamic Striated Metropolis-Hastings
  Sampler for High-Dimensional Models," Journal of Econometrics, 192, 406­420.
Williamson, S. D. (1987): "Costly Monitoring, Loan Contracts, and Equilibrium Credit
  Rationing," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102, 135­145.
                                             CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                   43

   In the following appendices, all labels for equations, figures, tables, definitions, and propo-
sitions begin with S, standing for supplement to the main text.


                        Appendix S1. Solving the Optimal Contract
   Since capital and labor enter symmetrically into the optimal contracting problem (10),
to illustrate the intuition, we can solve this optimal contract problem in two steps: first we
solve for the expected output of intermediate goods, together with the monitoring input and
the payment to banks in each state. In the second step, we solve for the capital and labor
input. With the definition of py t and yt , the optimal contract problem (10) can be rewritten
as
                            max            {t b1t + (1    t ) b 2t    ( py
                                                                         t yt      q t t ae
                                                                                          t)   t mt }   (S1)
                        b1t ,b2t ,yt ,mt

subject to
                                                     b1t  P1,t A1,t yt ,                                (S2)

                                                     b2t  P2,t A2,t yt ,                                (S3)

                           [1       P (mt /yt )] [P2,t A2,t yt       b1t ]  P2,t A2,t yt       b 2t ,   (S4)

                          t (P1,t A1,t yt         b1t ) + (1
                                               t )(P2,t A2,t yt b2t ) = vt ,                    (S5)
                                                                      µ
Proposition S1. There is no monitoring if and only if Yt1 µ A1,t yt
                                                                  fb
                                                                             py  fb
                                                                              t yt  q t t ae
                                                                                           t , where
 fb
yt   arg maxYt1     µ
                        (t (A1,t )µ + (1           t ) (A2,t )µ ) (yt )µ        py
                                                                                 t yt .
          yt

Proof. See Appendix S1.1.                                                                                 

   The intuition behind Proposition S1 is straightforward. As the production scale increases,
if the payo in the bad state becomes larger than the amount of bank loans, then there is
no incentive for the bank to engage in costly monitoring. Proposition 1 implies that as the
firm becomes large, it relies less on bank loans to finance the input costs. Accordingly, it is
optimal for the bank to have zero monitoring if the bank loan advanced to the entrepreneur
is less than what the bank can seize in the bad state. In the analysis below, we therefore
assume that all entrepreneurs' net worth is su ciently small so that the financial constraint
is always binding.
   As in the standard costly-state-verification model, the following proposition characterizes
the optimal contract when the incentive compatibility constraint is binding.
                                              µ
                               1 µ         fb
Proposition S2. Given that Yt        A1,t yt    < py  fb
                                                   t yt    qt at , the limited liability constraint for
state 1 is binding, the limited liability constraint for state 2 is nonbinding, and the incentive
compatibility constraint is always binding.

Proof. See Appendix S1.2.                                                                                 
                                          CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                                                             44

   With Proposition S2, we can derive two equations to characterize the relationship between
mt /yt and yt . Equation (18) is obtained by plugging equation (S2) and (S5) into the incentive
compatibility constraint (S4). To obtain equation (19), we plug equations (6) and (S5)
into (S1) and rewrite the optimal contract problem as
                                            µ
                             max {Yt1           Aµ  µ
                                                 t yt       ( py
                                                               t yt        q t ae
                                                                                t)        t yt mt /yt            vt },                         (S6)
                            yt ,mt /yt

subject to equation (18). The first-order conditions then give equation (19).
  In the second stage, given the entrepreneur's expected output of intermediate goods yt , the
optimal inputs in capital and labor are obtained by solving the following cost minimization
problem
                                                      min {rt kt + wt ht }                                                                     (S7)
                                                      kt ,ht

subject to
                                                   z t ( kt )  ( h t ) 1    
                                                                                     yt ,
This gives
                                                                       1          r 
                                                yt              wt                    t
                                                                                                 1
                                           kt =                                                      ,
                                                zt          1  
                                                               
                                                y t  r t 
                                                                                          
                                                            wt
                                           ht =                                              .
                                                zt         1 
Finally, the competitiveness of the factor markets implies that the unit production cost is:
                                                      1 
                                  y   1  rt       wt
                                 pt =                       .
                                      zt        1 
S1.1. Proof of Proposition S1. We take two steps to prove Proposition S1. We first
derive the necessary condition for the monitoring cost mt = 0. We then derive its su cient
condition.
  With mt = 0, from the incentive compatibility constraint (13) , we have

                                         P2,t A2,t yt          b2,t      P2,t A2,t yt            b1,t .                                        (S8)

     Also, combining (14) with (15) , we get

        [t P1,t A1,t + (1        t ) P2,t A2,t ] yt       [t (P1,t A1,t yt             b1,t ) + (1             t ) (P2,t A2,t yt     b2,t )]     t mt
        py
         t yt   q t t ae
                       t.                                                                                                                        (S9)

Plugging (S 8) (with equality) into (S 9) , we obtain the necessary condition for mt = 0.

[t P1,t A1,t + (1      t ) P2,t A2,t ] yt (1            t ) (P2,t A2,t yt            b1,t ) t (P1,t A1,t yt b1,t )                 py            e
                                                                                                                                    t y t q t t at

or

                                 P1,t A1,t yt           P1,t A1,t yt         b1,t + py
                                                                                     t yt                 q t t ae
                                                                                                                 t

                                                        py
                                                         t yt         q t t ae
                                                                             t
                                             CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                                                               45

where the second inequality is obtained from the limited liability condition (11) . Plugging the
demand function for intermediate goods into the above inequality, we obtain the necessary
condition for mt = 0 as in Proposition S1.
  To prove the su ciency, the financial contract can be simply designed as
                                                 b1,t = b2,t = py  fb
                                                                t yt                       q t t ae
                                                                                                  t                                           (S10)
Note that the payo at the low state, P1,t A1,t yt (py t yt  q t t ae
                                                                   t ), is non-negative by assump-
tion and is thus feasible. Plugging (S 10) into the incentive compatibility constraint (13), we
have
                      h                               i                                       
                                 fb    y fb         e                  fb     y fb          e
      [1 P (mt /yt )] P2,t A2,t yt   pt yt    qt t at  P2,t A2,t yt          pt yt   q t t at .
Obviously, the above incentive compatibility constraint is always satisfied, even if no mon-
itoring resource is used such that the probability of identifying misreporting is zero (i.e,,
P = 0). Thus, the incentive compatibility constraint can be dropped from the bank problem
(10). Also, the non-negative profit condition of the bank is satisfied. Hence, it is optimal to
set mt = 0 and P = 0. Intuitively, since the bank does not monitor in either state and the
entrepreneur has an incentive to misreport, it is optimal to set the payo at both states at
the value equal to the bank's finance cost.

S1.2. Proof of Proposition S2. Using the demand function for intermediate goods (6) to
replace P1,t in the optimal contract problem (10) , we can write the Lagrangian as
         L = t b1,t + (1                    t ) b2,t         ( py
                                                                t yt           qt t ae
                                                                                     t)          t mt
                    + 1 [t (Yt1         µ
                                            (A1,t yt )µ            b1,t ) + (1             t ) (Yt1     µ
                                                                                                            (A2,t yt )µ      b2,t )    vt ]
                    + 2 [Yt1       µ
                                       (A2,t yt )µ          b2,t       (1         P (mt /yt ))(Yt1            µ
                                                                                                                  (A2,t yt )µ     b1,t )]
                    +    31 [Yt
                               1 µ
                                        (A1,t yt )µ           b1,t ] +         32 [Yt
                                                                                     1 µ
                                                                                             (A2,t yt )µ          b2,t ],
where 1 , 2 , 31 , and 32 denote the Lagrange multipliers for the entrepreneur's participation
constraint, the incentive compatibility constraint, and limited liability constraints in state 1
and 2, respectively.
  The first-order conditions are:
                       @L
                             = t (1    1 ) + 2 (1  P (mt /yt ))   31 = 0,                  (S11)
                      @ b1,t
                                     @L
                                           = (1              t ) (1              1)          2        32    = 0,                              (S12)
                                    @ b2,t
@L                                                                            µ             1
     =       py
              t +   1 µYt
                         1 µ
                                      t Aµ
                                         1,t + (1              t ) Aµ
                                                                    2,t (yt )
@ yt
                                        µ    1       @ P (mt /yt ) 1
         + 2 [µYt1       µ
                             Aµ
                              2,t (yt )          +                ( Yt                µ
                                                                                          (A2,t yt )µ        b1,t )     (1      P (mt /yt ))Yt1   µ
                                                                                                                                                      µAµ
                                                                                                                                                        2,t (yt )
                                                                                                                                                                  µ 1
                                                                                                                                                                      ]
                                                          @ yt
         +         µ
               31 A1,t   +           µ
                                 32 A2,t     Yt1     µ
                                                         µ ( yt ) µ    1
                                                                           ,
     = 0                                                                                                                                                       (S13)
                                         CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                                                  46

                         @L                        @ P (mt /yt ) 1
                              =        t +     2                ( Yt    µ
                                                                            (A2,t yt )µ        b1,t ) = 0.                       (S14)
                         @ mt                          @ mt
Proof. From the first-order conditions, we have the following results:
Result 1 : 1 2 (0, 1).
Proof: From (S12), we have 1 2 [0, 1]. Since the participation constraint is binding, 1 2
(0, 1].
  Now we turn to prove 1 6= 1.
  Suppose 1 = 1. Then from (S 11) and (S12), we have 2 = 31 = 32 = 0. Therefore,
(S14) implies that t = 0, 8t. This leads to a contradiction.

Result 2 : 31 > 0; that is, the limited liability constraint for state 1 is binding.
Proof: A combination of Result 1 and (S11) gives this result immediately.

Result 3 : 2 > 0, 32 = 0; that is, the incentive compatibility constraint is binding and
the limited liability constraint for state 2 is not binding.
Proof: Suppose 32 > 0. Then, the limited liability constraint at state 2 is binding,
b2,t = Yt1 µ (A2,t yt )µ . We thus have two cases:
Case 1: 2 = 0.
   This implies that the incentive compatibility constraint is not binding. Therefore, a com-
bination of Result 2 and the incentive compatibility constraint implies

 b2,t < Yt1   µ
                  (A2,t yt )µ     (1    P (mt /yt ))(Yt1     µ
                                                                 (A2,t yt )µ      Yt1     µ
                                                                                              (A1,t yt )µ ) < Yt1    µ
                                                                                                                         (A2,t yt )µ ,

which contradicts b2,t = Yt1 µ (A2,t yt )µ .
Case 2: 2 > 0.
   This implies that the incentive compatibility constraint is binding. Therefore, a combina-
tion of Result 2 and the incentive compatibility constraint implies

        Yt1   µ
                  (A2,t yt )µ      b2,t = (1       P (mt /yt ))(Yt1    µ
                                                                            (A2,t yt )µ        Yt1   µ
                                                                                                         (A1,t yt )µ ) > 0,

which implies Yt1 µ (A2,t yt )µ > b2,t , which again contradicts b2,t = Yt1 µ (A2,t yt )µ .
  Therefore, 32 = 0. With this result, a combination of Result 1 and equation (S12) gives
us 2 > 0.                                                                                   

                                  Appendix S2. Equilibrium conditions
  The equilibrium for the model described in Section III is characterized by the following
system of equations:
  (E1) The household's budget constraint (ch
                                           t ):

                                ch       h
                                 t + qt at+1 = [qt (1        ) + r t ] t ah            k
                                                                          t + w t Ht + t .                                        (S1)

  (E2) Intertemporal Euler equation for the household (rt ):
                                                                                                           
                  qt M Uth = Et t+1 M Uth +1 (qt+1 (1   ) + rt+1 )                                   t+1      .                   (S2)
                                 CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                                             47

 (E3) Marginal utility of consumption for the household (M Uth ):
                                                1                                   1
                           M Uth =                               $ h Et                          ,                    (S3)
                                     ch
                                      t         $ h ch
                                                     t   1                  ch
                                                                             t+1        $ h ch
                                                                                             t

 (E4) Optimal labor decision (Ht ):
                                                    
                                                 t Ht    = wt M Uth .                                                 (S4)

 (E5) Final goods (Yt ):
                                                                1
                                                 Yt = [Aµ
                                                        t ] yt .
                                                           µ                                                          (S5)
 (E6) Bank lending (Bt ):
                                           Bt = p y
                                                  t yt          q t t ae
                                                                       t.                                             (S6)
 (E7) Euler equation for the supply of credit (vt ):
                                                                                                      1
                                        vt                                                            µ
                  yt =                                     ("t mt /yt )                                   .           (S7)
                         (1 t )Yt 1 µ
                                      ((A2,t )µ (A1,t )µ )
 (E8) Euler equation for the demand of credit (mt /yt ):
                                                                                             
                                                µ 1                                      µ
                           µYt1 µ Aµ
                                   t   ( yt )            py
                                                          t   = t mt /yt 1 +                     .                    (S8)

 (E9) The production of intermediate goods by entrepreneurs (wt ):

                                          yt = zt (kt ) (ht )(1          )
                                                                             .                                        (S9)

(E10) Demand for capital (and labor) by entrepreneurs (kt ):
                                              wt
                                  kt = h t         .                                                                 (S10)
                                           (1 ) rt
(E11) Competitiveness in the intermediate goods market makes the price equal to the mar-
      ginal cost (pyt ):
                                                   (1 )
                               y   1  r t      wt
                              pt =                          .                      (S11)
                                   zt        (1 )
(E12) Intertemporal Euler equation for entrepreneurs (ae
                                                       t ):
                                                       0
                                                                    
                 qt M Ute = e Et M Ute+1 rt+1 qt+1 + vt       e
                                                         +1 at+1 t+1 .             (S12)

(E13) Definition of M Ute (M Ute ):
                                                1                                   1
                           M Ute =                              e
                                                                    $e Et                        .                   (S13)
                                     ce
                                      t         $ e ce
                                                     t   1                  ce
                                                                             t+1        $ e ce
                                                                                             t

(E14) Entrepreneurs' budget constraint (ce
                                         t ):

                                ce       e
                                 t + qt at+1 = (rt                  q t ) t ae
                                                                             t + vt .                                (S14)

(E15) The capital producer's period-t profit (k
                                              t ):

              k
              t = qt [(1       ) Kt +       t   (1       S (It /It 1 )) It ]        qt (1            ) Kt     It .   (S15)
                                    CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                                 48

(E16) Optimality condition for the capital producer (qt ):
                                                                        2
                                   M Uth
                      1 Et t+1 M U h qt+1 t+1 S 0 (It+1 /It ) ItI+1
                                        +1
                                                                      t
                                        t
                 qt =          h                                     i    .                                 (S16)
                                     0 (I /I     It
                             t   1 S           )
                                          t t 1 It 1 S   ( I  /I
                                                             t t 1 )

(E17) Labor market (ht ):
                                                   Ht = h t .                                               (S17)
(E18) Capital market (Kt+1 ):
                                                 Kt+1 = kt+1 .                                              (S18)
(E19) Asset market (ah
                     t+1 ):
                                     e t+1 =
                                     K                   ae      h
                                                   t+1    t+1 + at+1 .                                      (S19)
(E20) Aggregate capital accumulation (It ):
                Kt+1 =          e
                          t+1 Kt+1    =    t+1   [(1         ) Kt +      t   (1     S (It /It 1 )) It ] .   (S20)
(E21) Aggregate goods market (yt ):
                                                 et + t mt .
                                            Yt = Y                                                          (S21)
(E22) Aggregate consumption (Ct ):
                                              C t = ch    e
                                                     t + ct .                                               (S22)
                        et ):
(E23) Aggregate output (Y
                                                 et = Ct + It .
                                                 Y                                                          (S23)
(E24) Costs in the bad state (b1t ):
                                          b1t = Yt1      µ
                                                             (A1,t yt )µ .                                  (S24)
(E25) Charge-o rate (dt ):
                                                         Bt       b 1t
                                            d t = t.                                                        (S25)
                                               Bt
(E26) Definition of the external finance premium (St ):
                                t b1t + (1 t ) b2t                                t mt
                         St =                                    1=                          .              (S26)
                                   py
                                    t yt  q t t ae
                                                 t                       py
                                                                          t yt      q t t ae
                                                                                           t

                         Appendix S3. Endogenous variables
 (V1)   ch
         t : consumption for the household.
 (V2)   rt : the rent of capital.
 (V3)   M Uth : marginal utility of consumption for the household.
 (V4)   Ht : labor hours.
 (V5)   Yt : final goods.
 (V6)   Bt : bank lending.
 (V7)   vt : contract value for the firms.
 (V8)   mt : state verification cost.
                                      CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                              49

 (V9)   wt : wages.
(V10)   kt : capital used by the firms.
(V11)   py
         t : the cost of intermediate goods (working capital).
(V12)   ae
         t : (physical) capital held by the entrepreneur at the end of t 1.
               e
(V13)   M Ut : marginal utility of the entrepreneur's consumption.
(V14)   ce
         t : consumption of the entrepreneur.
(V15)   k  t : profit of capital producers.
(V16)   qt : the price of capital.
(V17)   ht : labor hired by the firms.
(V18)   Kt+1 : aggregate capital at the end of t.
(V19)   ah
         t+1 : physical capital owned by the household at the end of the period t.
(V20)   It : aggregate investment.
(V21)   yt : intermediate goods (working capital) for the firms.
(V22)   Ct : aggregate consumption.
(V23)   et : aggregate output.
        Y
(V24)   b1t : cost for the bankrupt firm.
(V25)   dt : the charge-o rate.
(V26)   St : external finance premium.
The number of variables listed here must match the number of equations. Some equations
in the system are simply definitions.


                                   Appendix S4. Log-linearization
(LL1) From (S1)

      ^h
   ah a         [(1   ) + r]ah ^t + a
                                    ^h    h h            ^t       ^ ke + ah q      rah r
        t+1                                ^t
                                      t +c c          wH H          t       ^t         ^t       wH w
                                                                                                   ^ t = 0,
                             k
      where ke    t
             t = e .
(LL2) From (S2)

              Et M^U h
                     t+1 + (1            ^t+1 + rEt r
                                     )Et q          ^t+1 + Et ^t+1 +      t+1    M^U h
                                                                                     t        q
                                                                                              ^t = 0.

(LL3) From (S3)

                     ^h
                  $h c                 2 h
                                 (1 + $h )^
                                          ct   (1     $h )(1     $h )M^U h + $h c
                                                                                ^h           = 0.
                       t+1                                               t        t      1


(LL4) From (S4)
                                        ^t
                                        H      M^U h  ^
                                                   t + t       w
                                                               ^ t = 0.

(LL5) From (S5)
                                             1 ^µ   ^t + y
                                              A     Y    ^t = 0.
                                             µ t
                                                CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                                                                 50

        Note
                    2
                                       r                !µ                           r                !µ
   µ               6                                                                       1      
  A    ^µ
       At   + (A)µ 6
                   4 1 +                                              1
                                            1                                                  
                                                                                                                                                3
                                      r                   2               r                !µ                         r                !µ 1 3
                                                                                                  1
                              µ                                                                                              1                 7
                                                          4 1+                                        +      1                               5 7
                               2            1                                   1                                                              5 ^t = 0.


 (LL6) From (S6)
                                       ^t            ^y
                                                py y p      e
                                                       t + a (^    ^e
                                                              qt + a                                      py y y
                                      Bb                             t + ^t )                                  ^t = 0.
 (LL7) From (S7)
    µ(A1 )µ   ^1,t             µ(A2 )µ   ^2,t + "                                                                           ^t
              A                          A      ^ t+ m
                                                     ^ t+    ^t + v
                                                                  ^t                                                   (1 µ)Y              (µ + )^
                                                                                                                                                 y t = 0.
(A2 )µ (A1 )µ              (A2 )µ (A1 )µ                  1 
        Note                               q
                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                  2
                        ^1,t =         2        1 
                                                                ^2,t =              2      1                            1 ^
                        A                       q          ^t ; A
                                                                                           q              ^t ; ^t =        #t .
                                  1                 1 
                                                                                 1+                                    1+#
                                                                                                1 

 (LL8) From (S8)
                                        µ
                        µY 1 µ A (y )µ                1
                                                               ^µ                                              py
                              µ                                At         m
                                                                          ^t         ^t                       µ                      ^y
                                                                                                                                     p t
                      µY 1 µ A (y )µ 1                    py                                   µY     1    µ A (y )µ     1       p y
                                                          µ                                           µ
                          (1 µ)µY 1 µ A (y )µ 1 ^    µ2 Y 1 µ A ( y ) µ                                           1
                                                                                                                       py
                        +          µ           Y t +           µ                                                          ^t = 0.
                                                                                                                          y
                           µY 1 µ A (y )µ 1 py       µY 1 µ A (y )µ                                               1    py
 (LL9) From (S9)
                                                (1              ^ t + k
                                                               )h     ^t                y
                                                                                        ^t + z
                                                                                             ^t = 0.
(LL10) From (S10)
                                                          ^t
                                                          h          ^t
                                                                     k         r
                                                                               ^t + w
                                                                                    ^ t = 0.
(LL11) From (S11)
                                                ^y
                                                p t           ^t
                                                              r           (1         )w
                                                                                      ^t + z
                                                                                           ^t = 0.
(LL12) From (S12)
                                  e
             ^t+1 + Et M^U                      e
                                                       ^t+1 +
                                                    Et q                   e
                                                                                   ^t+1 +
                                                                               rEt r              e 0
                                                                                                      v Et v
                                                                                                           ^t0
                                                                                                                       M^U e             q
                                                                                                                                         ^t = 0.
                           t+1                                                                                 +1          t

(LL13) From (S13)
                e
                          ^e
                    $e Et c t+1        (1 +         e    2 e
                                                        $e  ct
                                                           )^         (1             $e )(1           $e )M^U e      ^e
                                                                                                              t + $e c t             1   = 0.
(LL14) From (S14)
                ae a
                   ^e
                    t+1      (r                  ae
                                            )ae (^              ^t + (1 + )ae q
                                                               e e
                                                   t + ^t ) + c c             ^t                                  rae r
                                                                                                                      ^t         vv
                                                                                                                                  ^t = 0.
(LL15) From (S15)
                                                              I ^t        ^k
                                                                           t + Iq
                                                                                ^t = 0.
                                        CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                                                 51

(LL16) From (S16)
                                     ^t+1 + ^t
                                S 00 I                           ^t + q
                                                      (1 + )S 00 I              ^t
                                                                      ^t + S 00 I             1   = 0.
(LL17) From (S17)
                                                       ^t
                                                       H        ^ t = 0.
                                                                h
(LL18) From (S18)
                                                    ^ t+1
                                                    K             ^t+1 = 0.
                                                                  k
(LL19) From (S19)
                           ae a
                              ^et+1 + ^t+1 + a
                                               h
                                                 ^h
                                                 a t+1 + ^t+1
                                                                                      ^ t+1 = 0.
                                                                                     KK
(LL20) From (S20)
                                                    
                                ^ t+1
                              K K          ^t+1          I ^t        ^t
                                                                    II       (1          ^ t = 0.
                                                                                      )K K
(LL21) From (S21)
                                                                         eY
                                                                    ^t + Y ^
                                                                           e
                                        mm
                                         ^ t +  m^t                YY        t = 0.

(LL22) From (S22)
                                                ^t
                                               CC        ce c
                                                            ^et           ^h
                                                                       ch c t = 0.

(LL23) From (S23)
                                                ^t + I I
                                                       ^t           eY^
                                                                      e
                                               CC                   Y   t = 0.

(LL24) From (S24)                                                         
                                       ^
                                       b1t = (1            ^t + µ A
                                                        µ) Y      ^1t + y
                                                                        ^t .
(LL25) From (S25)
                                           B                 b1                          b1                   
                    ^t = 
                    d    ^t     ^t +
                                b                ^
                                                 b                     ^
                                                                       b 1t = ^t +                    ^t
                                                                                                      b    ^
                                                                                                           b1t .
                                                c t
                                       B       b1        B        b1                 B        b1
(LL26) From (S26)
           ( py y     q ae ) S^            py
                              st + py y S (^t +y
                                               ^t )             q ae S (^         ^e
                                                                        qt + ^t + a t ) = m ( m
                                                                                              ^t +^t ) .

                               Appendix S5. Log-linearized variables
 (LV1)   ^h
         c t : consumption for the household.
 (LV2)   r
         ^t : the rent of capital.
 (LV3)   M  ^U h : marginal utility of consumption for the household.
                t
 (LV4)    ^
         Ht : labor hours.
 (LV5)   ^t : final goods.
         Y
 (LV6)   ^t : bank lending.
         b
 (LV7)   v
         ^t : firm's contract value.
 (LV8)   m
         ^ t : state verification cost.
 (LV9)   w
         ^t : wages.
(LV10)   ^
         kt : capital used by the firms.
(LV11)   ^y
         p t : the cost of intermediate goods (working capital).
                               CYCLICAL LENDING STANDARDS                              52

(LV12) ^e
       a t : (physical) capital held by the entrepreneur at the end of t 1.
               e
(LV13) M  ^U : marginal utility of the entrepreneur's consumption.
               t
         e
(LV14) c
       ^t : consumption of the entrepreneur.
(LV15) ^k
          t : profit of capital producers.
(LV16) q
       ^t : the price of capital.
(LV17) ^
       ht : labor hired by the firms.
(LV18) K^ t+1 : aggregate capital at the end of t.
(LV19) ^h
       a t+1 : physical capital owned by the household at the end of the period t.
(LV20) ^t : aggregate investment.
       I
(LV21) y
       ^t : intermediate goods (working capital) for the firms.
(LV22) C^t : aggregate consumption.
       ^
       e
(LV23) Y   t : aggregate output.
       ^
(LV24) b1t : cost for the bankrupt firm.
       ^t : the charge-o rate.
(LV25) d
(LV26) ^
       st : external finance premium.
(LV27) ^t : a new defined variable.
(LV28) A^µt : a new defined variable.
        ^
(LV29) A1,t : a new defined variable.
(LV30) A^2,t : a new defined variable.
       ^c
(LV31) m   t     y
                 ^tc
                     : a new defined variable.
The number of variables listed here must match the number of equations. Variables (LV27)-
(LV31) are newly defined and thus do not belong to any original equation.

  Emory University; Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta; Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,
Emory University, and NBER
