                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             NECESSARY EVIDENCE FOR A RISK FACTOR'S RELEVANCE

                                    Alexander M. Chinco
                                    Samuel M. Hartzmark
                                     Abigail B. Sussman

                                     Working Paper 27227
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27227


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We would like to thank Elena Asparohova, Nicholas Barberis, Justin Birru, Ing-Haw Cheng,
James Choi, Tony Cookson, William Diamond, Xavier Gabaix, Stefano Giglio, Niels Gormsen,
Robin Greenwood, Arpit Gupta, Lars Hansen, Xing Huang, Alex Imas, Brian Kelly, Ralph
Koijen, Ben Matthies, Marina Niessner, Lubos Pastor, Kelly Shue, Amir Sufi, David Solomon,
Johannes Stroebel, Jessica Wachter, George Wu, Jeff Wurgler, and Anthony Zhang as well as
seminar participants at Michigan State, Michigan, Chicago Booth, TCU, Utah, Georgia State,
Yale, Rochester, and Colorado for extremely helpful comments and suggestions. We would also
like to thank Abigail Bergman, Nicholas Herzog, and Kari Greenswag for excellent research
assistance. Becky White and Jasmine Kwong provided invaluable help with data collection. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alexander M. Chinco, Samuel M. Hartzmark, and Abigail B. Sussman. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Necessary Evidence For A Risk Factor's Relevance
Alexander M. Chinco, Samuel M. Hartzmark, and Abigail B. Sussman
NBER Working Paper No. 27227
May 2020
JEL No. D81,D91,E21,G11,G12,G4

                                         ABSTRACT

Textbook finance theory assumes that investors strategically try to insure themselves against bad
future states of the world when forming portfolios. This is a testable assumption, surveys are
ideally suited to test it, and we develop a framework for doing so. Our framework combines
survey experiments with field data to test this assumption as it pertains to any candidate risk
factor. We study consumption growth to demonstrate the approach. While participants
strategically respond to changes in the mean and volatility of stock returns when forming their
portfolios, there is no evidence that investors view this canonical risk factor as relevant.


Alexander M. Chinco                             Abigail B. Sussman
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign      University of Chicago
1206 S 6th St, Rm 343J                          Booth School of Business
Champaign, IL 61820                             5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
AlexChinco@gmail.com                            Chicago, IL 60637
                                                abigail.sussman@chicagobooth.edu
Samuel M. Hartzmark
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
samuel.hartzmark@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction
The textbook explanation for why some assets have higher expected returns than others involves
"extending the principles behind fire and casualty insurance to investment portfolios" (Cochrane,
1999). Investors in standard asset-pricing models worry about not having enough money during bad
 future states of the world. So, they pay more for assets that tend to realize high returns in these
 bad future states, giving such assets high current prices and low expected returns.
     Different models argue that investors worry about different kinds of bad future states. When a
 model argues that X is a priced risk factor, it is saying that asset prices are moving because
 investors are trying to hedge the specific kind of bad future state associated with drops in X
(whatever that may be). The textbook approach to testing such a model involves looking for a purely
 econometric relationship between average returns and correlations with X . While such evidence is
 consistent with X being priced, it is not sufficient to prove the case (Lewellen et al., 2010).
     This paper proposes a new and complementary approach for testing a separate necessary
 condition of these models. Textbook models assert that asset markets are "in reality big insurance
 markets" (Cochrane, 1999). Thus, equilibrium asset prices must reflect the "strategic behavior of
 investors who wish to hedge against future adverse changes" (Campbell and Viceira, 1999) in
 particular risk factors. Such investors must worry about and value insurance against these specific
 risk factors. This represents a testable hypothesis that has been largely unexplored. We develop a
 survey-based framework for testing it.
     Survey experiments are the ideal tool for this purpose. While an asset can provide insurance
 even if investors are not initially aware of this fact, the equilibrium price of that asset can only
 contain an insurance premium if its insurance value is commonly understood ahead of time. Home
 owners can generally explain what they are paying for when they buy fire insurance. Drivers can
 typically explain what they are paying for when they buy car insurance. If investors are pricing
 assets by extending these same principles to financial markets, then they should also be able to
 explain what they are paying to insure themselves against when forming their portfolios.
     It is possible for asset prices to move for reasons that investors do not fully understand
(Friedman, 1953). However, a key insight in this paper is that a priced risk factor cannot be one of
 these hidden reasons. For X to be a relevant risk factor, asset prices must be moving because of
 something that investors do fully understand: each asset's value as insurance against X . It should
 be straightforward to find evidence that investors think about X as something to be hedged using a
well-designed survey. Yet, a purely econometric approach cannot provide such evidence. The only
way to know what investors are thinking is to ask them.
     The framework in this paper can be used to evaluate the relevance of nearly any proposed risk
 factor. We demonstrate it using a case study that focuses on the most influential risk factor in the
 academic literature: consumption growth (CCAPM; Lucas, 1978). We choose consumption growth

                                                 1
both because it is the most-studied risk factor and because " all factor models are derived as
specializations of the consumption-based model (Cochrane, 2001, p. 151; emphasis in original)." 1
While habit (Campbell and Cochrane, 1999) and long-run-risk (Bansal and Yaron, 2004) models add
state variables to the CCAPM, investors still value hedging drops in future consumption (see
Section 4.4). Similarly, in heterogeneous-agent models (e.g., Constantinides and Duffie, 1996),
investors still try to hedge consumption shocks of various kinds, and we can use our framework to
directly investigate these permutations.
     The first step in our framework examines revealed preferences. We ask each participant multiple
questions about how they would allocate an endowment between a portfolio of stocks and a
riskless bond based on data describing stock returns and consumption growth. We show each
participant the actual historic time series of consumption growth. Each participant sees the same
consumption-growth time series in every question they answer. However, we present different
simulated stock returns in each question. We vary the mean, volatility, and correlation between
stock returns and consumption growth across simulations. Participants see numeric values for the
mean, volatility, and correlation as well as cumulative graphs of both time series.
     We survey a wide range of investor types: finance professionals (including some professional
traders), Mechanical Turkers, Booth MBA students, and clients at a meeting of a large asset
manager. We designed our survey experiment to make it as easy as possible for all participants to
follow the textbook asset-pricing logic. We gave them intuitive instructions, removed all superfluous
information, and presented difficult-to-find data in a straightforward manner. In online versions, all
participants included in our analysis also had to pass a comprehension test demonstrating that they
understood the definitions of all statistical and economic concepts.
     The resulting data strongly suggests that participants adjust their demand for stocks based on
their perceptions of future market conditions. Participants invest more in stocks when average stock
returns are higher (p-value < 0.01%), and they invest less when stock returns are more volatile
(p-value < 0.01%). Our survey participants demonstrate that they are thinking about risk and
return as captured by the mean and volatility when investing. Moreover, their reactions to changes
in these two parameters are consistent with textbook logic. In short, participants understand their
investment task and respond to some parameters in our experimental setup exactly as expected.
     However, participants do not respond to changes in the correlation between stock returns and
consumption growth when forming their portfolios (p-value = 99.9%). Textbook theory assumes that
investors view this correlation as having primary importance. Yet, in our setting, there is no change
in their demand when stock returns move from being uncorrelated with consumption growth,
1
    The quote continues: "Many authors of factor-model papers disparage the consumption-based model [i.e., the
    consumption capital asset-pricing model, CCAPM], forgetting that their factor model is the consumption-based
    model plus extra assumptions that allow one to proxy for marginal-utility growth from some other variables."



                                                        2
  = 0.00, to having a correlation of  = 0.45. Standard calibrations suggest a CCAPM investor would
 demand an 11% risk premium to accommodate this increase.
     A key benefit of running survey experiments is that it is straightforward to conduct robustness
 checks. There could be confusion as to what words a lay person would use to describe consumption
 growth. We use the term `economic growth' in our baseline version, but we find the same null
 response to changes in correlations when presenting participants with variables called `personal
 income', `personal wealth', `house prices', or `industrial production'. Participants could be confused
 about how to interpret the numeric value of a correlation (even though a definition is provided,
 participants passed a comprehension check, and some of them are professional traders). Yet, we find
 similar results when we include additional details on the scale of correlation, when we show
 participants a scatterplot rather than time-series charts, and when we use words (`high', `medium',
`low', or `none' ) rather than numbers. The graph of cumulative stock returns and consumption may
 be confusing rather than helpful, but we find similar results in a treatment where no graph is
 provided. If anything, participants' investment decisions are even harder to square with textbook
 finance theory when we do things, such as using a scatterplot or only providing participants with
 the numbers, to further emphasize and clarify consumption-growth correlations.
     While these revealed-preference results suggest that participants ignore an asset's correlation
 with consumption growth when investing, it is possible they are thinking about this parameter in a
 manner not captured by our various empirical setups. To address this concern, the second
 component of our framework directly asks participants how they made their investment decisions
 using a two-stage procedure. First, we asked participants whether they consider mean stock returns,
 stock-return volatility, and/or the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth when
 investing. Then, whenever a participant said that they did consider a given parameter, we followed
 up by asking them how they used this parameter when forming their portfolio.
     Participants reported caring about the mean and volatility of stock returns, but most
 participants (57%) stated that the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth did
 not play any role in their decision making. Furthermore, among the 43% of participants who did
 report thinking about correlations, roughly 3 out of 4 reported increasing their demand for stocks
 when stock returns were more correlated with consumption growth--the opposite of what a
 textbook investor is assumed to do. Across all participants, only 11% reported thinking about
 consumption-growth correlations in a manner consistent with textbook theory.
     The fact that the Wall Street Journal does not routinely announce or discuss an asset's
 correlation with consumption growth should already give us pause. If investors were interested in
 insuring themselves against drops in consumption, it would be trivial for financial news outlets to
 report this statistic. It is possible that investors may already know these numbers, leaving no need
 to report them. To explore this possibility, we examine mutual-fund prospectuses to see what these


                                                   3
funds list as their key risks and objectives. Even if everyone is aware of a fund's risk-factor
correlations, a fund must still include them in its prospectus for legal reasons. Presumably most
investors are aware that the market can go up or down, yet every prospectus discusses this risk. By
contrast, not a single fund lists a correlation with any aggregate risk factor in its prospectus.
     The aim of this paper is to change the standard of evidence that economists demand of factor
models. To explain why one restaurant is more popular than another, you could model diners who
prefer nutrients that are more prevalent in the first restaurant's dishes (Ang, 2014, §6.2). But, if you
asked people, you would realize that nutrient content is not a good basis for understanding why
diners choose. In essence, we are asking people about their investment decisions and realizing that
consumption-growth correlations are not a good basis for understanding why markets move.
     Our results underscore the importance of understanding not only whether a model is empirically
successful but also why. When an asset's correlation with X does not explain average returns, there
are two possibilities to consider. It could be that X is not a relevant risk factor, or it could be that
X is a relevant risk factor in spite of its empirical shortcomings. Researchers can use our framework
to figure out which possibility is correct. If investors are not actively considering X , a researcher
should discard it. Whereas, if investors are actively considering X , a researcher should add features
to his model to accommodate X as a priced risk factor.
     A researcher proposing that X is a priced risk factor can use our framework to strengthen their
claim by showing that investors think about correlations with X as dictated by their model and
make investment decisions based on this reasoning. Further, researchers can use our survey-based
framework to generate and test new models for which empirical datasets may not be readily available.
Researchers promoting a behavioral bias or trading friction can apply our framework to address
concerns about competing risk-based explanations. Seminar audiences, conference discussants, and
journal editors can and should be asking for this necessary evidence of risk-factor relevance. Without
it, they should be much more skeptical that any proposed X is a priced risk factor.

1.1        Contribution to the Literature
This paper adds to a large literature testing factor models of asset prices.2 Many empirical patterns
in returns have been documented in both the time series (see Cochrane, 2017, for a recent
review) and the cross-section (see McLean and Pontiff, 2016, for a recent review). Often multiple
risk-factor-based explanations are proposed for the same pattern in returns, even though the
explanations "have little in common economically with each other" (Lewellen et al., 2010). For
example, there are more than ten different macro-finance modeling paradigms that attempt to
explain the same aggregate market moments (Cochrane, 2017). The standard approach to
2
    When we refer to X as a risk factor, we mean that asset prices reflect investors' "intertemporal hedging demand" for
    X (Merton, 1969, 1971, 1973). While the term risk factor is sometimes colloquially used to mean any form of return
    predictability, this is not the intended meaning of in this paper.


                                                            4
disentangling these models is to use advanced econometrics (Chinco et al., 2020; Feng et al., 2020;
Freyberger et al., 2020; Harvey and Liu, 2020; Bryzgalova, 2017; Kozak et al., 2018). This paper
takes a different tack. Instead of re-examining market data in a new way, we test whether investors
are following the core economic logic underpinning a proposed model.
    Our paper contributes to the literature that examines how people use and perceive correlations.
A number of papers examine biases in how correlations are perceived (Jennings et al., 1982;
Matthies, 2018; Ungeheuer and Weber, 2019; Laudenbach et al., 2019). Our setting removes the
influence of such a channel by providing the specific value of a correlation. Researchers have
examined how misunderstanding correlations can lead to biased decision making in non-financial
settings (Enke and Zimmermann, 2017; Levy and Razin, 2015) and have also demonstrated that
when combining risky assets into a portfolio, participants do not appropriately account for the
correlation structure between the assets (Eyster and Weizsacker, 2016; Kallir and Sonsino, 2009;
Matthies, 2018). Our paper adds to this literature by demonstrating that examining how investors
utilize risk-factor correlations can be used to test a proposed factor model.
    This paper complements a literature examining decision making in experimental settings and
how this decision making relates to rational expectations and market outcomes (e.g., Plott and
Sunder, 1988; Smith et al., 1988). A number of papers examine whether people behave like classic
mean-variance investors (Bossaerts and Plott, 2004; Huber et al., 2019; Kroll et al., 1988; Kroll and
Levy, 1992) and recent work studies the Lucas (1978) model in laboratory settings (Asparouhova
et al., 2016; Crockett et al., 2019). While some of these experiments find support for the predictions
of the CCAPM in lab settings, they focus on empirically analyzing outcomes. While these papers
represent important contributions to the literature, similar to the literature that tests asset pricing
models, they examine a separate necessary condition of this model's relevance.3 We contribute to
this literature by presenting a framework to directly evaluate the economic reasoning that investors
use and whether this reasoning is consistent with a proposed model.
    Prior work has looked at how people frame financial decisions--e.g., over individual positions
(Odean, 1998), across positions (Frydman et al., 2017), and over portfolios (Hartzmark, 2014)--and
how this framing influences portfolio decisions. Other research has examined which attributes
investors are drawn to--e.g., saliency (Barber and Odean, 2007), sustainability (Hartzmark and
Sussman, 2019), and dividend payments (Harris et al., 2015; Hartzmark and Solomon, 2017). A
separate line of survey papers examines more macro questions about consumption (Di Maggio et al.,
2020) and investors' agreement with particular lines of economic reasoning (Choi and Robertson,
2019; Giglio et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020). There is also a literature exploring investor inattention to
key asset-pricing quantities (Gabaix, 2014, 2016). This paper contributes by showing that investors
3
    For example, Gode and Sunder (1993) provides an experimental setting where the "allocative efficiency of a double
    auction derives largely from its structure, independent of traders' motivation."



                                                           5
do not frame investment decisions in a manner that utilizes correlations with consumption growth as
an input.


2     Survey Design
Textbook asset-pricing models make a core claim about investors' economic reasoning. Investors in
these models are worried about not having enough money during particular kinds of bad future
states of the world. So, they are willing to pay more for assets that tend to realize high returns in
these bad future states, giving such assets low expected future returns going forward. These models
are specifically arguing that asset prices are moving because of something that investors understand:
each asset's value as insurance against key risk factors. Because the insurance value of an asset must
be generally understood by investors for it to be priced, survey experiments are the ideal tool for
evaluating the necessary conditions for risk-factor relevance. This section describes the survey
experiment we developed to do so.

2.1    Instructions
We designed the experiment to use the bare minimum of mathematical and statistical concepts, and
we provided definitions for every concept that we referenced. These definitions were not meant to be
technical. We used plain language and intuitive concepts so participants could easily understand
them. The following describes our baseline online treatment. We discuss the minor modifications we
made for different participant populations and robustness treatments below.
    Upon entering the survey and completing a consent form, participants were given instructions
explaining that they will be making investment decisions based on economic growth and stock
market performance. The instructions included intuitive and straightforward definitions of key terms:

      Economic growth refers to how well the economy as a whole is doing. It is commonly
      reported as Gross Domestic Product (GDP) which is a measure of the goods and
      services produced in the US economy. The information about the stock market is for a
      mutual fund that passively invests in a broad blue-chip stock market index, such as the
      S&P 500 or the Dow Jones Index. The value of the mutual fund reflects the value of its
      investments, so when the stocks it invests in have a higher price, the value of the
      mutual fund will be higher.

    Each participant was informed that they would be seeing annualized numeric values for the mean,
volatility, and correlation between the two time series as well as a graph showing the cumulative
performance of both stock returns and the economy as a whole. To make sure that it was clear what
this meant, we provided each participant with the definition of mean, volatility, and correlation:

      When the average per year is higher you should expect greater increases in value in a
      given year, corresponding to steeper increases in the line displayed. When uncertainty is

                                                  6
          higher, you should expect greater swings, for example higher highs and lower lows are
          more likely than if uncertainty is low. When a correlation is higher, this means that if
          one series goes up, the other is more likely to go up too, and if it goes down, the other
          is also more likely to go down.

    To ensure that participants understood the concepts, they answered several multiple-choice
comprehension questions about the definitions of economic growth, average growth, uncertainty, and
correlation. We only included data from the subset of people who correctly answered these questions
on their first try in our empirical analysis.4
    The first portion of our survey experiment asks participants to allocate an $1,000 endowment
between stocks and bonds based on information about both economic growth and stock returns.
Specifically, we ask them to allocate money between a "mutual fund that passively invests in a broad
blue-chip stock market index, such as the S&P 500 or the Dow Jones Index," and "a bond earning
2%." See Figure 1a for a sample question. Participants in the online versions see 10 questions of this
type. Questions are randomly selected from a larger set of 36 possible questions.
    For each question, a participant observes a time series of cumulative stock returns and a time
series of aggregate consumption as well as summary statistics describing the mean, volatility, and
correlation between these two time series. Participants are told that the numeric values provided to
them are stable predictors of future returns for that particular fund. We also tell participants that
each round of questioning is unrelated to the last. After participants finished this first set of
questions, we asked them a set of follow-up questions about the economic reasoning behind their
portfolio decisions using a two-stage procedure.

2.2         Design Choices
Our goal is to develop the best way to ask investors whether they view a proposed risk factor as
relevant. While seemingly simple, there are multiple ways that one could pose such a question. As
with any tool, there are better and worse ways to implement a survey design. Poor econometric
technique can lead to erroneous conclusions from data; whereas, a well-defined analysis can lead to
meaningful insights. The same is true of surveys. In this section, we discuss why we designed the
survey as we did and why we think this design provides the most accurate and interpretable
responses.
    We examine a simplified and stylized setting so that we can get the most information out of our
participants while avoiding a number of potential pitfalls. In our stylized setting, we can define all
relevant terms to make sure the concepts are understood. Further, in this setting we can capture
4
    Finance professionals continued the experiment only if they correctly answered all of the comprehension questions
    correctly on the first try (493 participants). MTurkers completed the full survey irrespective of their responses to the
    comprehension check, but we only included data from the 322 participants who passed the comprehension test in our
    empirical results.


                                                              7
behavior that an economist would describe as consumption hedging irrespective of how the
participant would describe it. An alternative method would be to directly ask participants about the
strategy they use in their own personal portfolio. While it may sound simple to an economist,
personal-portfolio strategy is an intricate problem involving many variables (e.g., intra-household
decision-making, preferences over non-financial aspects of assets, biases favoring certain stocks over
others). It would likely be difficult for most people to answer this question in practice.
     A common concern in survey design is attribute substitution (Kahneman and Frederick, 2002)
whereby participants do not respond to the complicated question that they are asked, but rather
answer a related question that is easier to answer. Participants faced with a difficult question, such
as a question about how important a particular strategy is for their own personal investment
decisions, may instead respond to a simpler question, such as a question about whether that
strategy sounds reasonable. By designing a simple, concrete task, our setting leaves little ambiguity
about what question the respondents are answering.
     We were careful not to ask leading questions, which can produce experimenter-demand effects
(Schwarz, 1999). Experimenter demand can bias survey results when a researcher's choice of survey
questions influences participants' answers to these questions. Suppose a participant does not actually
try to hedge consumption and has never thought about doing so. When asked about such a strategy
in a survey experiment, a participant might anticipate that a researcher would not be asking this
question unless it was widely used or recommended. As a result, he might falsely claim that this is
how he invests.
     This is why, when we follow up and ask participants about their economic reasoning, we use a
two-stage question. In the first stage, we ask whether participants considered a parameter--e.g.,
"Did you think about mean stock returns when investing?" Then, in the second stage, we ask about
how they invested based on this parameter--e.g., "When mean stock returns were higher, did you
try to hold more or less stock?" This design choice sidesteps experimenter-demand effects because,
even if participants believe the researcher would like them to report caring about a given parameter,
it is not clear which direction they should report desiring. Thus, we jointly examine consideration
and direction of each parameter as our main outcome variables. If participants say they consider a
given variable, but utilize it in inconsistent ways, it is suggestive that participants' responses are the
result of experimenter demand.
     Our survey experiment allows us to cross validate participants' answers across multiple question
types to provide converging evidence towards the answer. By using multiple methods, the intention
is for the cross-validation to ameliorate concerns about using any single technique. Consistent
evidence across question types and within participants suggests that our survey experiment produces
valid responses to the questions being asked.
     We use consumption growth as a case study in this paper to demonstrate our framework, but


                                                    8
our survey design can evaluate the relevance of almost any candidate risk factor. For most candidate
risk factors, a researcher should simply be able to take our framework, replace consumption growth
with a new risk factor, and run the same survey experiments. In supplemental material, we provide
a step-by-step guide that researchers can use to run their own online survey experiments (Bergman
et al., 2020). However, we recognize that some risk factors might have idiosyncrasies requiring
further tailoring of our approach. There is an active literature studying how to design surveys which
we cannot do justice to here. As such, we emphasize that researchers should abide by current best
practices in survey design when deviating from our benchmark survey.5

2.3        Participant Populations
We surveyed four participant populations. The goal was to solicit responses from a broad swath of
the investing population and minimize the possibility that there was an important investor type we
did not reach. As such, we examined a range of investors in terms of sophistication and wealth.
Specific investor types might play a special role in markets, but they do not play such a role in
textbook asset-pricing models. The CCAPM (Lucas, 1978) studies a representative investor as do
popular models built on top of the CCAPM framework (e.g., Bansal and Yaron, 2004; Campbell and
Cochrane, 1999). These models do not give any guidance as to which specific investor populations
we should survey.
    The first participant pool is comprised of people who work in the finance or banking industries.
We used CloudResearch, a service that specializes in connecting researchers with unique and
hard-to-reach sample populations,6 to recruit these participants. CloudResearch has access to more
than 50 million online panelists worldwide. We present summary statistics for the 493 finance
professionals who completed our survey in panel (a) of Table 1. This participant pool was fairly
wealthy, with 56% earning more than $100k per year. 45% of the finance professionals we surveyed
were under the age of 40. Furthermore, these participants tended to invest their own money, with
90% reporting that they owned either individual stocks or mutual funds. We also asked participants
about their job function, and 28% of this population stated that their job involved investing in
financial securities.
    The second population we examined is drawn from Amazon's Mechanical Turk (MTurk)
marketplace. Research examining this platform finds that participants recruited through MTurk,
who are commonly referred to as `MTurkers', tend to perform similarly on tasks (Casler et al., 2013)
and perform better on attention checks (Hauser and Schwarz, 2016) than traditional participant
pools recruited in labs. MTurkers also represent a more diverse set of participants (Paolacci and
Chandler, 2014). We present summary statistics for the 322 MTurkers who completed our survey in
panel (b) of Table 1. MTurkers have lower incomes when compared to the finance professionals, with
5
    We strongly encourage economists to consult colleagues who are well versed in survey design.
6
    See https://www.cloudresearch.com/products/prime-panels/.

                                                       9
only 13% of MTurkers earning more than $100k per year. MTurkers also tended to be younger than
the finance professionals, with 72% being under 40 years of age. A lower fraction of MTurkers owned
financial securities, but even in this sample 65% reported owning either stocks or a mutual fund.
    The third population we examined is drawn from MBA students at the University of Chicago
Booth School of Business. Our sample consisted of 308 participants, of which 38% reported having
previously worked in the finance industry. We gave our survey to students enrolled in various MBA
courses at the business school, including sections of a core `investments' class. Panel (c) of Table 1
contains summary statistics for this participant pool.
    The fourth population we examined represents clients attending a conference of a large asset
manager. Conference attendees were mostly wealthy investors and portfolio managers. This sample
consists of 93 participants who completed our survey. A condition of the survey was that we cannot
disclose the name of the asset manager or their clients, but we can safely assume that conference
attendees fit the textbook description of a sophisticated investor and generally manage large sums of
money on their clients behalf. Panel (d) of Table 1 contains summary statistics for this final
participant pool.

2.4    Survey Variations
The above description applies to the online version of our survey experiment we gave to the
finance-professionals and MTurker participant pools. We administered the MBA-student survey
using pen and paper during a class break. We surveyed clients at the asset-manager conference using
tablets at a designated booth.
    We presented the MBA-student and asset-manager samples with abbreviated instructions and
definitions. We did not ask comprehension checks due to time constraints and because both groups
are likely to be familiar with the basic concepts. The goal of the design was to parsimoniously
present the same information as in the online survey experiment to a group of people that have
more knowledge of financial markets. The internet appendix includes examples of instructions from
each of these versions of the survey experiment.
    For the MBA-student and asset-manager participant pools, we also reduced the number of
questions to fit page limits and time constraints. The MBA students saw 5 investment-decision
questions. The asset-manager sample saw 4 investment-decision questions. Half of the investors at
the asset managers' conference were asked a percent-allocation question, dividing a 100% allocation
across the two options. The results were materially similar.

2.5    Data Simulation
Our experiment involves time-series data on economic growth and stock returns.
   The economic-growth time series each participant sees is always the same across all questions. This
time series represents seasonally-adjusted quarterly US GDP,  log Ct = log(GDP t ) - log(GDP t-1 ),
                                                                      def




                                                 10
from 1980Q1 to 2018Q4 (i.e., T = 156 observations in total). Average annualized GDP growth
during this sample period is µ log C = 5.2% while the annualized volatility of GDP growth is
 log C = 1.6%.
   We simulate stock returns using some combination of the following parameter values:

                                           µR  {4%, 6%, 8%}
                                           R  {10%, 15%, 20%}
                                                  {0.00, 0.15, 0.30, 0.45}

where µR denotes the mean annualized stock return, R denotes annualized stock-return volatility,
and  denotes the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth.
   The typical stock-market return is 6% per year, and annualized return volatility is roughly 15%
(Cochrane, 2001). The CCAPM says an asset's expected excess return should be

                                            µR =  × (   R   log C )

where  denotes investors' coefficient of relative risk aversion. To match the equity premium, we
need to assume   100 (Campbell, 2003), and the annualized volatility of consumption is about
 log C = 1.6% in our sample period. So, according to the CCAPM, investors should view a mutual
fund with a 6% per year average returns as underpriced and have high demand for its shares when
 = 0.00; whereas, they should see this same 6%-per-year fund as overpriced when  = 0.45:

     100 × 0.00  15%  1.6% = 0% < 6% per year < 10.8% = 100 × 0.45  15%  1.6%
     CCAPM-implied expected excess return                              CCAPM-implied expected excess return
     in low correlation setting (underpriced)                          in high correlation setting (overpriced)


In other words, moving from  = 0.00 to  = 0.45 should cause a CCAPM investor to increase the
expected excess return he would demand for holding an asset from zero to roughly double the
sample average that we observe.
    For each set of parameter values, we first draw T = 156 iid realizations  log Zt  N(0, 1).
                                                                                             iid



Then, we orthogonalize these 156 random draws with respect to the realized set of 156
consumption growth shocks,  log Z t =  log Zt - E
                                       def
                                                       [ log Zt  log C t ] Sd[ log Zt  log C t ],
where  log C t =  log Ct - E
               def
                                [ log Ct ] Sd[ log Ct ] denotes the consumption-growth shocks.
We do this to avoid the error-in-variables problem caused by our finite sample period, which
contains 156 quarters. If we skip this step, the resulting error-in-variables problem is not large, but
since we can control everything about our experimental setting, we try to remove all avoidable
sources of error from our results.



                                                          11
      We simulate stock returns using the formula below:

                            Rt = µR + R ×    log C t +           1 - 2   log Z t

Because of the orthogonalization step, the resulting stock-return time series has a mean of exactly
µR , a volatility of exactly R , and a correlation with consumption growth of exactly . We show
participants a line labeled `stock market' representing the cumulative returns to investing $1 in this
portfolio in 1980 on a log scale. See Figure 1a. For each set of parameter values, we run the
simulation using 5 different random-number seeds.
    Finally, the realized consumption-growth time series is quite smooth. So, for a subset of
participants, we added orthogonalized noise to the consumption to make it easier to see comovement
between the time series and stock returns. See Figure 1b. Our results for all tests are nearly
identical when we add noise, so we combine both samples in our analysis.7


3        Main Results
According to textbook finance theory, markets fluctuate because intelligent forward-looking investors
are worried about not having enough money during certain kinds of bad future states of the world.
If an asset's returns are less correlated with the associated risk factors, then the asset is more likely
to have positive returns during these specific bad future states. As a result, investors should be
willing to pay more for the asset today, and the asset should have lower expected returns going
forward because investors recognize the risk-factor correlations and adjust their demand accordingly.
    For such a model to explain why markets actually fluctuate, investors must be following this
logic. People must prefer assets that have lower risk-factor correlations and adjust their demand
based on this information. This is not what we find for consumption growth. We find no evidence
that people trade the way textbook investors are assumed to trade or think the way textbook
investors are assumed to think.

3.1        Investment Decisions
We begin by exploring how participants' investment decisions change as we vary mean stock returns,
stock-return volatility, and the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth. We
estimate regressions of the following form:

              stockFraci,q = ^+^  meani,q + ^  volatilityi,q + ^  correlationi,q + ^i,q

The dependent variable, stockFraci,q , is the fraction of the endowment that the ith participant
invests in stocks when answering the question in round q . The variables meani,q , volatilityi,q ,
7
    See Internet Appendix for the results presented separately for each sample.

                                                       12
and correlationi,q represent the mean, volatility, and correlation with consumption growth used
to simulate the stock returns for that question. We estimate all t-statistics and p-values for the
investment-decision regressions using standard errors clustered by participant.
    Table 2 reports the results of these regressions. Column (1) regresses the fraction invested in the
stock market on only the mean stock return. We estimate a slope coefficient of 3.24, which is
statistically significant at the 1% level. This coefficient implies that participants increased the
fraction invested in stocks by 12.96% = (8% - 4%) × 3.24 in response to a move from the lowest
mean return, 4%, to the highest mean return, 8%. Across our four participant pools, people invested
60% of their endowment in stocks on average. Thus, a 4% change in expected returns increased the
proportion allocated to stocks by about 20%.
    Column (2) repeats the regression using stock-return volatility rather than mean stock returns
as the sole right-hand-side variable. We estimate a slope coefficient of -0.61, which is again
statistically significant at the 1% level. This coefficient implies that a 10% drop in stock-return
volatility--i.e., a move from the highest volatility, 20%, to the lowest, 10%--results in a 6.1%
increase in stock investment. The results in columns (1) and (2) of Table 2 suggest that participants
respond to changes in the mean and volatility of stock returns. Moreover, they do so consistent with
a textbook investor who likes higher means and dislikes higher volatilities.
    The results are quite different when examining correlations in column (3). This column repeats
the regression using correlation with consumption growth as the sole right-hand-side variable. We
find no measurable change in participants' behavior in response to a change in the correlation
between stock returns and consumption growth. The estimated coefficient is -0.0000235 (rounded to
0.00) with a t-statistic of 0.00 and a p-value of 99.9%. In addition to being statistically insignificant,
this point estimate is also economically small. In response to an increase in correlation of
0.45, the regression implies that participants would only decrease their allocation to stocks by
0.001% = (0.45 - 0) × 0.0000235. This is one tenth of one basis point. Our participants simply do
not adjust their demand in response to changes in the correlation between stock returns and
consumption growth, the canonical risk factor in textbook finance theory.
    In column (4) of Table 2, we include all three of these right-hand-side variables in the same
regression and find nearly identical results. Participants adjust their demand in response to changes
in the mean and volatility of stock returns but not in response to changes in the correlation between
stock returns and consumption growth. This is expected since we randomly chose the mean,
volatility, and correlation parameters used to simulate the stock returns for each question.
    To examine whether these results are driven by participant-specific attributes, we add
participant fixed effects in column (5). The coefficient on the correlation parameter hardly changes
from column (3). Another concern is that participants might change their behavior over the course
of the experiment. To account for this, we introduce question-order fixed effects in column (6) and


                                                   13
find similar results. Finally, column (7) adds both participant and question-order fixed effects which
again results in unchanged point estimates.
    The results in Table 2 show that, on average, participants strongly respond to changes in the
mean and volatility of stock returns but ignore changes in the correlation between stock returns and
consumption growth. It remains possible, however, that these pooled results hide the behavior of a
subset of participants who act differently. To address this concern, we re-estimate the coefficients in
column (3) of Table 2 on each participant pool. We report these investment-decision results by
participant pool in Table 3. Column (2) in this table adds participant-pool fixed effects to the
specification in column (3) of Table 2 to capture that fact that there are differences in the average
fraction invested in the stock market across participant pools. The estimated slope coefficient of 0.00,
which is identical to column (3) of Table 2, reveals that these differences are not driving our results.
    In columns (3)-(6) of Table 3, we re-estimate the regression separately for each participant pool.
We find a coefficient on the correlation parameter of 0.00 for the finance professionals, 0.00 for the
MTurkers, 0.07 for MBA students, and -0.03 for the asset-manager sample. The MBA students
have the only point estimate that is marginally statistically significant, but it has a positive sign
rather than the negative sign predicted by theory. In addition to being generally statistically
insignificant, these point estimates are all at least two orders-of-magnitude smaller than the point
estimate on mean returns in column (1) of Table 2.
    We also examine our results based on participant characteristics. Figure 2 graphs regression
coefficients estimated over various subgroups of our participant pools. Every subgroup of
participants we examine exhibits similar behavior. Old and young participants; male and female
participants; participants with incomes greater than $100k and those with incomes less than $100k ;
participants who think they invest wisely and those who do not think they invest wisely all ignore
changes in correlation. We repeat the analysis for all participants who state that they own either
stocks or mutual funds. We repeat the analysis for the subset of 136 finance professionals in our
sample who stated that their job involved trading financial securities. Financial professionals who
trade securities for a living do not adjust their demand in response to changes in correlations. In
every sub-sample, participants react to changes in means; they react to changes in volatilities; they
ignore changes in correlations.
    We would like to emphasize that the correlation changes we explore in this paper, from  = 0.00
to 0.45, should be sufficient to generate large differences in investor behavior. While it would be
possible to further extend the range of correlations in our study, to our knowledge, there is not a
general belief that stock returns and consumption growth have a correlation close to one or that
they are negatively correlated. As discussed earlier, investors should view a mutual fund with a 6%
per year average return as underpriced and have high demand for its shares when  = 0.00; whereas,
they should see this same 6%-per-year fund as overpriced and have low demand when  = 0.45.


                                                  14
Moving from  = 0.00 to 0.45 should cause a CCAPM investor to demand an additional 11% per
year risk premium--a change that is roughly double the average excess return on the market,
µR = 6% per year. Our experiment suggests that, in response to an 11% increase in mean return, a
participant would increase their stock allocation by 35.64% = 11% × 3.24, but they do not respond to
a shift in consumption-growth correlations as our models would suggest.
    Another benchmark worth considering is the magnitude of the shift in correlations required to
solve the well-known equity-premium puzzle (Mehra and Prescott, 1985). Standard measures of
consumption growth based on nondurables and services have a correlation with the excess market
returns of about 0.38. Savov (2011) measures consumption growth using garbage and finds a
correlation of 0.54. This shift in correlations of 0.16 is large enough "to formally resolve the joint
equity premium-risk-free rate puzzle." We show that participants are not adjusting their demand in
response to a change in correlations that is roughly 3 times as large. Thus, investors in a textbook
asset-pricing model should view these changes in correlations as economically significant.
    We describe the variable of interest as `economic growth' in our baseline experiment. We do so
because we think it is an intuitive concept that most participants should understand. Further, it
closely maps to the relevant variable described by textbook theory. With that said, it could be that
participants are trying to hedge something similar to economic growth but think of it in different
terms. If such a channel was at work, we would be wrongly rejecting consumption growth as a
priced risk factor due to labeling.
    Table 4 shows that this is not the case. The results in each column are analogous to column (4)
in Table 2, but `economic growth' is relabeled as `personal income', `personal wealth', `house prices',
or `industrial production'. We use the same underlying data and the same simulated series for each
of these. The only change is to relabel the variable from `economic growth' to the alternative term
and to change the definition in the instructions. The coefficient on correlationi,q is statistically
indistinguishable from zero in every column. The wording we use to describe the risk factor does not
affect our results.
    In Table 5, we explore concerns related to the display format of correlations and show that these
concerns are unlikely to explain our findings. Maybe participants are unable to interpret a numeric
value for a correlation? There are a priori reasons to doubt that a lack of numerical savvy explains
our results. Participants passed a comprehension test and reacted to numerical changes in the mean
and volatility of stock returns. Nevertheless, column (1) in Table 5 shows that our results
do not change if we replace the numerical values of   {0.00, 0.15, 0.30, 0.45} with the text
  {`none', `low', `medium', `high'}.
    Another concern could be that the scale of the correlation statistic is confusing. If participants
are unaware that correlations fall in a range between negative one and one,   [-1, 1], perhaps they
are unaware that the changes in correlation in our experiment are quite large. In column (4) of


                                                  15
Table 5, we show results for our investment-decision questions when we include additional
information about the range of the correlation and how to interpret it. Again, nothing changes
about our results. The coefficient on correlationi,q is still almost zero (p-value = 85.35%). Our
findings are not driven by participants failing to understand the scale of correlations.
    But, maybe this result is specific to time-series plots? Scatterplots do more to visually highlight
a correlation, so we run the experiment displaying such a plot instead of a time series graph. The
fact that media outlets do not generally choose this graphical format, which accentuates correlations,
already suggests that this statistic is less likely to be relevant to investors. Column (3) in Table 5
shows that, if we present participants with questions containing scatterplots rather than time-series
graphs, they are even more likely to behave in the opposite way from a textbook investor. The
coefficient on correlationi,q is positive (0.15) and statistically significant at the 1% level.
    While the time-series graph was included as it seemed the closest to standard displays of
information in the financial press, it could be that participants were mislead by the graph altogether.
Column (2) in Table 5 shows that, if we ask participants the same investment-decision questions as
before but remove the time-series graph, participants are again even less likely to follow textbook
asset-pricing logic. The coefficient on correlationi,q in column (2) of Table 5 is 0.18 and
statistically significant at the 1% level. So, instead of investing less in stocks when stock returns are
more correlated with consumption growth as a textbook investor would do, participants invest more
in stocks when stock returns are more correlated. If anything, participants' investment decisions are
even harder to square with textbook theory when we remove the graph.
    We go to great lengths to clearly communicate the correlation between stock returns and
consumption growth to our participants. Every survey variant we study delivers the same result:
participants do not respond to changes in consumption-growth correlations the way a textbook
investor should. The textbook explanation for why asset prices move starts with the assumption
that investors are trying to insure themselves against drops in future consumption (Merton, 1973). If
investors are actually trying to do so, it should be fairly straightforward to find evidence that
investors are trying to accomplish this goal. For example, participants in every pool strongly
respond to the mean and volatility of stock returns in all survey variations. If hedging consumption
growth is a core determinant of their investment strategy, it seems unlikely that subtle differences in
the framing of exactly what is being hedged should lead to such dramatically different results.
    We think our robustness checks span most reasonable variations in terms describing both
aggregate and idiosyncratic consumption growth. It is possible, though, that a future researcher
might use our survey experiment to show that participants respond to changes in the correlation
between stock returns and some other variable X , which is a slight variant of consumption growth
empirically. However, finding that participants try to insure themselves against negative shocks to
consumption growth when it is described as X but not when it is described as economic growth,


                                                  16
income growth, wealth growth, house-price appreciation, or changes in industrial production would
only underscore the importance of using a well-designed survey experiment to test investors'
economic reasoning. It would suggest that, even though consumption growth and X look
econometrically similar, investors view these two variables quite differently. Such a result would
highlight the value of our framework. It would point to an important distinction that investors are
drawing when pricing assets that existing econometric methods are blind to.

3.2    Economic Reasoning
The results above suggest that participants do not adjust their demand for stocks in response to
changes in the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth, the canonical risk
factor in textbook asset-pricing models. With that said, perhaps participants are considering
consumption-growth correlations in a manner that is not captured by our regressions. To address
this concern, we follow-up the investment-decisions questions by asking participants about the
economic reasoning for their choices using a two-stage procedure.
    We first ask participants whether they considered mean stock returns, stock-return volatility,
and the correlation between consumption growth and stock returns when making their investment
decisions. Let consideri be an indicator variable which is equal to one if the ith participant
reported thinking about a parameter when making their investment decisions. The first row of Table
6 shows that 77% of participants considered average stock returns when making their investment
decisions, 59% of participants considered stock-return volatility, but only 43% of participants
considered the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth. Correlations are the least
likely to be considered.
    In the second stage, we ask participants who said they considered a given parameter about the
direction in which they used this information. Let textbookLogici be an indicator variable that is
equal to one if the ith participant reported thinking about a parameter using textbook asset-pricing
logic. This variable equals zero if a participant does not consider the variable at all. The third row
of Table 6 examines whether the participants that considered a variable did so in a manner
consistent with textbook theory. It shows that 76% of the participants who considered average stock
returns when making their investment decisions tried to buy more stocks when average stock returns
were higher. Likewise, 72% of the participants who considered stock-return volatility tried to buy
more stocks when this parameter was lower. In short, 3 out of 4 participants who considered the
mean and volatility of stock returns when investing did so in the textbook direction.
    The opposite is true for consumption-growth correlations. The right-most number in the third
row of Table 6 shows that only 24% of the participants who considered consumption-growth
correlations tried to buy more stocks when this correlation dropped. Even the participants who
considered consumption-growth correlations stated that they did so in the opposite direction posited
by textbook explanations.

                                                 17
    The difference between these findings and the intuition of textbook asset-pricing theory is stark.
Most participants did not consider the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth,
even after being given its numeric value and being asked directly about it. Theory suggests this
should be a central parameter of interest, yet it was not considered as important by 57% of
participants. Moreover, of the participants who did consider this correlation, most did so in the
opposite direction of what standard models would suggest--3 out of 4 participants who considered
consumption-growth correlations tried to buy more stocks when stock returns were more correlated
with consumption growth. This means that 3 out of 4 participants who claimed they were thinking
about the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth were trying to hold more
stocks when stock returns were a worse hedge against bad economic times. The results suggest the
non-responsiveness of participants' demand to changes in risk-factor correlations in the first portion
of our experiment simply reflects how participants think about their investment decisions.
    Table 7 repeats the analysis in Table 6 separately for each participant pool to show that the
results are not driven by the less financially sophisticated participants in our sample. Column (3)
shows that only 35% of the investors at the asset manager's conference (33 out of 93 participants)
said that they considered the stock market's correlation with consumption growth when making
their investment decisions. Column (9) shows that less than half of those 33 investors (48% or 16
participants) said that they tried to invest more when holding stocks was a better hedge against
drops in consumption. Across all participant pools, investors tended to not think about correlations
or to do so in a manner inconsistent with textbook theory, mirroring the results from the first
portion of the experiment.
    One of the benefits of using converging evidence across multiple question types is that we can
use this structure to cross-validate question responses. We find that 11% of participants report
thinking about consumption-growth correlations like a textbook investor should. One possibility is
that these participants strongly follow the textbook logic and perhaps are particularly important for
driving asset prices. Another possibility is that this 11% is largely noise.
    Table 8 examines participants' investment decisions based on their answers to the economic-
reasoning questions in the second part of the experiment. The findings indicate that the 11% of
participants who followed textbook logic are likely explained by noise. Each entry in Table 8 is a
regression of the fraction invested in stocks on the indicated parameter using data on a specific
subpopulation. The first and second rows report results only for those participants who said they
either did not consider or did consider a particular parameter. The first row of columns (1) and (2)
shows that participants adjusted their demand for stocks in response to changes in the mean and
volatility of stock returns even when they said they were not explicitly considering these parameters.
When participants did report thinking about either the mean or volatility of stock returns, their
portfolio response was even stronger as shown in the second row of those two columns. In contrast,


                                                 18
 the first two rows of column (3) in Table 8 show that there was no change in participants' demand
 in response to changes in consumption-growth correlations regardless of whether they reported
 thinking about the parameter.
     The third and fourth rows of Table 8 report results only for participants who said they
 considered a given parameter. The third row reports results for participants who stated they did not
 think about the parameter using textbook logic. The fourth row reports results for those who told
 us they thought about the parameter like a textbook investor would. In columns (1) and (2), the
 demand responsiveness to the mean and volatility of stock returns is stronger when participants told
 us that they were using textbook logic. Participants who said they were thinking about mean stock
 returns and trying to buy more stocks when this mean was higher did so, 4.06%  1.18%. Likewise,
 participants who said they were thinking about stock-return volatility and trying to buy less stock
 when this volatility was higher again followed through on their reported aims, -1.17%  0.05%. By
 contrast, the demand responsiveness to correlation changes is nearly zero for all participants who
 told us they considered the parameter. The participants who told us they were trying to use
 textbook logic have demand that is indistinguishable from those who told us they were trying to
 take the opposite approach.
     Table 9 further shows that the results are the same when we relabel `economic growth' as
`personal income', `personal wealth', `house prices', and `industrial production'. In every case,
 participants were more likely to report thinking about the mean and volatility of stock returns when
 forming their portfolio. Conditional on doing so, they were more likely to think about the mean and
 volatility of stock returns like a textbook investor should. Just like before, among the roughly 1 3 of
 participants who reported thinking about the risk-factor correlation at all, most did so using the
 opposite of textbook logic. Of the participants who thought about a risk-factor correlation at all, it
 was never the case that more than 20% thought about it using textbook logic. Put differently, 4 out
 of 5 participants who reported thinking about the correlation between stock returns and their
 income, wealth, house prices, or production when investing tried to buy more stocks when they were
 more correlated with this risk factor.

3.3     Reporting Correlations
If an investor from your favorite asset-pricing model were to peruse a popular financial-news source,
he would be puzzled by the lack of information related to correlations with macroeconomic variables.
An investor who cared about risk-factor correlations would presumably like this information to be
presented as clearly as possible. Suppose that investors did not care only about correlations with
consumption growth, but instead cared about both correlations with consumption growth as well as
correlations with slow moving habit or with estimates of long-run risks. There is no reason why such
correlations could not also be widely reported. From a revealed-preference perspective, it seems
likely that real-world investors do not demand this information.

                                                  19
     While puzzling, it could be that real-world investors do care about risk-factor correlations in
spite of the fact that they are not widely reported. To examine whether this is plausible, we
examined a variety of news sources to search for evidence that investors view risk-factor correlations
as an important component of their investment decisions. Financial authorities provide educational
documents to investors describing the risks that investors might consider relevant for their
investments. We examined such documents from FINRA, the SEC, the Financial Conduct Authority,
and the Ontario Security Commision.8 While these documents list many specific risks, we were not
able to identify any discussion about how correlations with potential risk factors were relevant. For
example, in `Investment Risk, Explained' provided by FINRA, there are nine specific sources of risks
listed for investors to consider. The discussions surrounding each of these risks pertain to
uncertainty and volatility. There is no discussion of hedging, correlations, or risk factors.
     If the more relevant group is professional investors, it is possible that such documents simply
reflect the viewpoints of uneducated investors. Professional investors use a variety of risk assessment
tools, such as those included in Bloomberg. While these products contain a number of options to
assess various aspects of portfolio risk, none calculates correlations with macro risk factors as a
default input.9 If professional investors viewed such correlations as an important aspect of how they
form their own portfolios or their clients' portfolios, it would be quite surprising that the tools they
used lacked this basic feature.
     To analyze a more systematic source of information, we examined mutual-fund prospectuses. A
fund is required to report its investment objectives and risks regardless of how newsworthy these
objectives and risks are. Funds also have discretion to highlight a variety of other potential aspects
of the fund. For example, each Vanguard fund includes a `plain talk' section in its prospectus that
attempts to explain investing concepts or strategies using straightforward language. Thus, if a fund
thought that its correlation with an aggregate risk factor was an important component of investors'
decision making, it could and should present information about this statistic in its prospectus. If a
fund had correlations with macroeconomic risks that would make investors want to buy more of the
fund, then it would likely say so in its prospectus to drive flows. If a fund's legal department
believed that there was some possibility of being sued by an investor who viewed a correlation with
a risk factor as a relevant risk, then including it in the list of potential risks would be an obvious
8
  For an example from each agency, see Investment Risk, Explained provided by FINRA (https://www.finra.
  org/investors/insights/investment-risk), What is Risk provided by the SEC (www.investor.gov/
  introduction-investing/investing-basics/what-risk), Assessing suitability: Establishing the risk a
 customer is willing and able to take and making a suitable investment selection provided by the FCA (www.fca.org.
  uk/publication/finalised-guidance/fsa-fg11-05.pdf), and 9 types of investment risk from the Ontario
  Security Commission (www.getsmarteraboutmoney.ca/invest/investing-basics/understanding-risk/
  types-of-investment-risk/).
9
  We examined documentation from Bloomberg and Factset. We also discussed the details of these tools with a number
  of industry participants at a variety of different large financial firms. None reported any standard option in any of
  the available tools which would be relevant for hedging macro risk factors, such as aggregate consumption growth.


                                                         20
step to minimize liabilities from such a suit.
    Mutual funds do not report these numbers or discuss their correlations with macro risk factors
in their prospectuses. For example, the Vanguard 500 (VFIAX), which has nearly $500b in assets
under management, stated its investment objective as tracking a benchmark index. It did not
discuss any aggregate risk factors or its correlation with such variables. Under principle risks, the
fund lists stock-market risk, "which is the chance that stock prices overall will decline," as well as
investment-style risk, "which is the chance that returns from large-capitalization stocks will trail
returns from the overall stock market," but it never talks about exposure to aggregate risk factors.
There is a further discussion of risks later in the prospectus, but this is largely related to volatility:
"stock markets tend to move in cycles, with periods of rising prices and periods of falling prices."
Funds report a variety of statistics about their past performance such as fees, taxes, distributions,
and performance. The Vanguard 500 fund's prospectus reports 171 numeric values in tables and
figures, with even more values in the text. None of these numbers corresponds to the correlation
between the fund's returns and a macro risk factor.
    We systematically reviewed the mutual-fund prospectuses of the largest 25 US mutual funds,
which jointly held about $3.7t at the time. Table 10 summarizes the results. We ranked US
open-ended funds listed on Morningstar Direct as of July 30, 2019 based on their share-class asset
value. We examined each fund's prospectus for five characteristics related to risk-factor correlations.
Did a fund report a numerical value for the correlation between the fund's performance and any
macroeconomic variable? Did a fund graph its performance with any macroeconomic variable? In
the section on risks, did a fund list its return correlation with any macroeconomic variable other
than the stock market itself? In the section on objectives, did a fund list an objective related to its
correlation with a macroeconomic variable, such as exposure to an aggregate risk? Finally, we
searched the text of each prospectus for the words `covary', `covariance', `correlate', and `correlation',
counting the number of times these words appear in the document.
    Mutual-fund prospectuses lack information about how a fund's returns covary with aggregate
risk factors. None of the funds report numeric or graphical information relating their performance to
macroeconomic fundamentals. No fund lists its correlation with macroeconomic outcomes as an
investment risk, and no fund lists hedging an aggregate risk factor as an investment objective.
Perhaps the closest thing we find is that some funds list reasons why the market may be volatile.
For example, the Fidelity Contra Fund (FCNTX) warns its investors that "stock markets are volatile
and can decline significantly in response to adverse issuer, political, regulatory, market, or economic
developments." Notably, these are descriptions of why there may be volatility in returns not of how
the fund's returns might be correlated with such variables. Our word search reveals that 22 of 25
funds fail to use any word related to correlation or covariance in their prospectus. The 3 prospectuses
that do contain one of these words use them in a way that is unrelated to macroeconomic risk, as


                                                   21
they reference the fund's tracking error or its relationship to derivative securities.
    The underlying assumption in textbook finance theory is that investor are using assets'
correlations with various risk factors to construct insurance against bad future states of the world.
However, risk-factor correlations almost never get reported in the financial news, are not discussed
in important fund documents, and are not used as the default settings in professional risk-analysis
tools. It would be trivial for any of these sources to include such a factor, so their absence suggests
that investors do not demand this information. It suggests that correlations are unlikely to represent
a central explanation for asset-pricing movements as real world investors do not view them as
relevant to their investment decisions.


4     Discussion
Textbook asset-pricing models make a core claim about investors' economic reasoning, and surveys
are the ideal tool for evaluating this claim. Our results suggest that the canonical risk factor,
consumption growth, is not relevant to investors' portfolio decisions. In this section, we aim to put
this finding into the appropriate context. We address several potential concerns that naturally arise
when using survey experiments to study financial markets. We outline the connection between our
results and the existing finance survey literature. We describe how our results connect to the existing
theoretical literature, and we describe what they imply for model development going forward.

4.1    Potential Concerns with Survey Experiments
There are several common concerns about using survey evidence to study financial markets. We
have carefully designed our survey experiment with these concerns in mind. We outline and address
these concerns in this section.
     Are participants behaving differently in the experiment than they would in the real world? Yes.
But, this concern is unlikely to explain our findings. First, we made it as easy as possible for
participants to follow textbook asset-pricing logic. We removed any superfluous information. We
presented difficult-to-find information about correlations in a straightforward manner. When using
an online platform to survey finance professionals and MTurkers, we only examined participants who
passed a multi-question comprehension test on the first try. Second, our participants consistently
followed the textbook asset-pricing logic when responding to changes in the mean and volatility of
stock returns. They only deviated from this logic for questions about the correlation between stock
returns and consumption growth. While our experimental setting is different from the real world, for
this to explain our findings it would have to impact only participants' responses to questions about
correlations and not their responses to questions about means and volatilities. If anything, our
straightforward provision of information about correlations should lead participants to be more
likely to incorporate this parameter in their decision making.


                                                 22
     Were participants simply confused? No. This explanation is unlikely to explain our results given
that we provided participants with intuitive definitions of the mean stock return, stock-return
volatility, and the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth. We then followed up
on these definitions with a test for comprehension, eliminating any participants who did not get all
questions correct on the first try. While we designed our experiment to be as straightforward as
possible, there are clearly alternative ways one could present information that might lead to different
results. The results in Tables 4, 5, and 9 suggest that slight changes to the question wording or the
information display do not qualitatively affect our results.
     Don't people form expectations in a biased way? Yes. But, our experiment purposefully removes
this channel. There is a growing literature that uses surveys to examine how investors form beliefs
about various economic parameters (see Section 4.2). Our survey design abstracts from such issues
because we directly give participants the exact consumption-growth-correlation parameter value,
leaving no need for them to form expectations. While the question of how people form expectations
is important, the results of our survey experiment are not influenced by the answer to this question.
     Do participants have the right incentives? Yes. Participants consistently act on and think about
changes in the mean and volatility of stock returns in every part of our survey experiment. It is
certainly true that the stakes are much higher in real-world markets than in our survey experiment.
With that said, if the lack of financial incentives was distorting participant responses, then why is
there no distortion in their answers to the questions about the mean and volatility of stock returns?
     Are we surveying the right people? Probably. While our participant pools could be missing some
important investors, they do capture a broad swath of the investing public. It is true that specific
investor types might play a special role in financial markets. But, it is also true that these
investors play no such role in textbook asset-pricing models. The CCAPM (Lucas, 1978) studies a
representative investor as do popular models built on top of the CCAPM framework (Bansal and
Yaron, 2004; Campbell and Cochrane, 1999). Every one of our participant pools yields identical
results, and standard finance theory offers no explanation for why each of these participant pools
should be ignored. If we are not surveying the right subset of investors, then economists are not
modeling the right subset of investors, either.
     Can we ignore the findings due to the Friedman critique? No. In its original form, the Friedman
critique was not a critique at all. It was an explanation for why markets might move in ways that are
more complicated than the ones captured by researchers' current models.10 However, this logic has
10
     He states: "Consider the problem of predicting the shots made by an expert billiard player. It seems not at all
     unreasonable that excellent predictions would be yielded by the hypothesis that the billiard player made his shots
     as if he knew the complicated mathematical formulas. . . It is only a short step from these examples to the
     economic hypothesis that under a wide range of circumstances individual firm behave as if they were seeking
     rationally to maximize their expected returns." That being said, when you actually ask an advanced billiard player
     about what they are doing, you tend to get very complicated mathematical responses. e.g., there is a popular 1995
     book on the subject called The Science of Pocket Billiards (Koehler, 1995). There is simply no substitute for asking


                                                            23
been broadly interpreted by some to imply that researchers can ignore investors' economic reasoning.
     This reinterpretation goes too far. The central purpose of writing down an asset-pricing model is
to explain why investors think asset A's price should be low while asset B 's price should be high.
Textbook models make a core claim about what investors are trying to do. It is the economic
restrictions imposed by a model's preference specification, information structure, and budget
constraint that make a model useful. These are the things that allow researchers to perform
counterfactual analyses--i.e., to know what the prices of each asset would have been had market
conditions been different. It is essential to accurately model the problem investors are trying to solve.
     We fully recognize that all models require simplifying assumptions. A model as detailed as the
thing being modeled would be useless.11 With that said, if a model states that equilibrium asset
prices are moving today because investors are trying to hedge their future exposure to X , the
answer to the question `Are investors trying to hedge their exposure to X ?' is not a nuance that can
be ignored. It represents the core strategy that investors are supposed to be following. It is the very
thing we are modeling; it is the thing we need a map to navigate in the first place.
     Can we ignore the results because you can get survey respondents to say anything? No. While it
is possible to generate spurious results using surveys, this is also true of other forms of empirical
analysis and of theoretical models. You can support any result by pointing to bad research. You can
lie with data, but that does not mean there are no reliable econometric results. It is possible to
make vacuous theoretical arguments, but that does not mean all of theory is without merit. Surveys
are no different. They are one more approach to learning about financial markets. There is an active
literature studying how to design surveys which we cannot do justice to here. We have discussed at
length the reasoning behind the survey design choices we make (see Section 2.2). A reader who
disagrees with the design can and should use our framework to implement a different design (within
the best practices of survey design) to demonstrate the merit of the concern.
     Are surveys the right tool to examine risk-factor relevance? Yes. Survey experiments are an ideal
tool for asking questions about risk-factor relevance. This is because, according to the logic of
textbook asset-pricing models, a priced risk factor must be generally understood by investors. Priced
risk factors cannot be a surprise to everyone in the market. An asset's equilibrium price can only
contain an insurance premium if investors generally agree that it provides an insurance value worth
paying for. If asset prices are moving because investors are trying to hedge their future exposure to
X , then investors must be aware of each asset's exposure to X , and they should be able to explain
this reasoning to researchers.
     people what they are doing; this is true of both investors and pool sharks.
11
     Lewis Carroll highlighted the problem in his 1894 novel, Sylvie And Bruno Concluded, when he described the
     obvious problem with using an ultimate map, representing the world on a unitary scale, a mile to a mile: "It has
     never been spread out, yet. The farmers objected. They said it would cover the whole country, and shut out the
     sunlight."



                                                          24
    There are clearly cases in financial markets where this is exactly what is going on. For example,
"commodity futures markets have had a long history of assisting commodity producers to hedge their
commodity-price risks (Cheng and Xiong, 2014)." Further, "exchange rates are a major source of
uncertainty for multinationals (Jorion, 1990)" and FX forward markets exist so firms can hedge this
risk. Likewise, "sovereign CDS contracts function as insurance contracts that allow investors to buy
protection against the event that a sovereign defaults (Longstaff et al., 2011)." In all these examples,
changes in risk-factor exposure affect the equilibrium price of a contract.
    If someone were to ask a commodity-futures trader or FX-market investor about his decision, the
investor would likely be able to state the relevant risk in a way that was consistent with textbook
asset-pricing logic. For example, investors trading oil-futures are aware that today's price is likely
determined by exposure to future oil shocks. When the CEO of Southwest airlines was asked about
why they were active in the oil-futures market, he stated that the company "loaded up years ago on
hedges against higher fuel prices." 12 This risk is commonly understood, which is why it is priced.

4.2        Survey Evidence
This paper was inspired by a burgeoning literature that uses survey evidence to study financial
markets. We contribute to this literature by showing how to use such evidence in a new way. Rather
than using surveys to estimate investors' beliefs about a particular parameter that researchers
already know to be important, we use surveys to test whether investors view a parameter as relevant
to their portfolio decisions in the first place.
    As pointed out by Adam et al. (2020), survey evidence "allows researchers to consider
alternatives to the rational-expectations assumption in an empirically disciplined way." Amromin
and Sharpe (2013) explores how investors use current economic conditions to inform their
stock-market expectations. Armona et al. (2018) looks at how home buyers form expectations about
future house-price appreciation. Greenwood and Shleifer (2014) give evidence that investors form
expectations by over-extrapolating. Giglio et al. (2019) studies how the trading behavior of
institutional investors is related to their return expectations and past market experience. And, Liu
et al. (2020) uses survey evidence to study the reasons for excess trading in the stock market.
    Although clearly related, we are using surveys with a slightly different goal in mind. We are not
trying to estimate investors' beliefs about a particular parameter, such as expected returns. In fact,
we are providing our survey participants with all relevant information so there is no need for them
to construct such expectations. Instead, we are looking for evidence that a particular parameter--an
asset's correlation with consumption growth--plays any role in investors' decisions.
    Choi and Robertson (2019) examine a related, though distinct, question. The authors asked
investors whether they considered a wide range of theories to be important for their own financial
12
     Bailey, J. "Southwest Airlines gains advantage by hedging long-term oil contracts." New York Times. Nov 28, 2007.


                                                           25
decision making. This is an important and generative idea that has garnered substantial interest in
the field. However, their survey design does not aim to estimate the zero effect needed to test a
specific risk factor's relevance. Our approach does, using multiple methods to provide converging
evidence for a specific risk-factor's relevance.
    To illustrate, when we asked participants about their economic reasoning, we found that 43%
reported thinking about the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth. This
number is qualitatively similar to the 29% of participants in the Choi and Robertson (2019) study
who stated that the return covariance with consumption was `very important' or `extremely
important'. However, when we asked our participants a follow-up question about how they used this
information, we found that roughly 3 out of 4 people who considered consumption-growth
correlations were trying to buy more stocks when this correlation was higher, inconsistent with the
logic of the CCAPM. Furthermore, when we examined the 11% of participants who reported using
textbook logic, we found no evidence that their portfolio decisions reflected this economic reasoning.

4.3     Centrality of Consumption Hedging
The framework we develop in this paper can be used to evaluate the relevance of any proposed risk
factor. To demonstrate the framework, however, we had to select a specific risk factor for our case
study. We chose consumption growth as our main variable of interest. In this section, we discuss why
our results pertaining to this specific variable also have implications for most other textbook models.
    Consumption growth is the sole state variable of the CCAPM. The current approach to
addressing the empirical failings of the CCAPM is to introduce new risk factors to this model. The
idea is that, if exposure to consumption growth cannot entirely explain why markets fluctuate,
then exposure to consumption growth and additional state variables can. These theories work
by amplifying the importance of differences in risk-factor correlations. As discussed below,
even though these models introduce additional state variables to downplay the importance of
consumption-hedging motives, it is still crucial to these models that investors are trying to insure
themselves against future negative shocks to consumption. Contrary to what we find, an agent in
these models should still respond to our framework in a manner consistent with textbook logic.

4.3.1    External Habit
To illustrate, consider how the results in this paper apply to the Campbell and Cochrane (1999)
external-habit model. This model studies a representative investor trying to maximize a modified
                                1- -1
utility function, Ut = (Ct -H
                     def      t)
                            1-        . In this model, investors have power utility over consumption
in excess of a slow-moving benchmark, Ht , which represents the level of consumption that
investors have become accustomed to--i.e., habit. Formally, log Ht =             =0   log Ct- where
                                                                        def



 > 0,   (0, 1). Thus, drops in consumption following booms are more painful for investors in this
model.

                                                 26
    The key new state variable in this model is an investors' surplus consumption ratio given by
Xt = CtC
      def
        -Ht
         t
            . Growth in the model-implied stochastic discount factor (SDF) is then given by
 log Mt+1 = log  -    log Ct+1 -    log Xt+1 . In what initially looks like a nod to Merton
(1973) ICAPM logic, the model seems to say that average stock returns could be high either
because they covary with consumption growth or because they covary with growth in the
surplus-consumption ratio:

                  E[Rt+1 ] - Rf   × Cov[ log Ct+1 , Rt+1 ] +  × Cov[ log Xt+1 , Rt+1 ]

But, notice that `either/or' is not actually the right conjunction to use here though. The second
term on the right hand side is not independent of the first. If investors are not trying to insure
themselves against drops in consumption (if the first term is zero), they cannot be trying to insure
themselves against drops in the surplus-consumption ratio either (the second term must be zero).13
    This means that surplus consumption is not a separate risk factor. It is a way of amplifying
investors' desire to hedge consumption-growth shocks. Note expected returns in Campbell and
Cochrane (1999) can be rewritten as:

                                   E[Rt+1 ] - Rf      
                                                      Xt   × Cov[ log Ct+1 , Rt+1 ]

In other words, habit is a model where investors have time-varying risk aversion with respect to
consumption shocks. Since the average surplus-consumption ratio is E[Xt ]  0.5, this means that
variation in risk aversion due to habit roughly doubles the risk premium investors demand for their
exposure to consumption shocks. Investors in a habit model must still want to insure themselves
against shocks to consumption otherwise the model will not work.
4.3.2        Long-Run Risk
The Bansal and Yaron (2004) long-run-risk model uses a different preference specification and state
variable, but the result is the same. The effects of shocks to the new state variable on asset prices
cannot exist if investors do not try to hedge their exposure to consumption-growth shocks.
    The long-run-risk model assumes that investors have Epstein and Zin (1989) recursive
preferences over current and future consumption. These preferences introduce an additional
slow-moving state variable just like in the habit model. It is again the case that, if investors are
not trying to insure themselves against future drops in consumption, then they cannot be
trying to insure themselves against the new risk factor either. If there is no desire to hedge
13
     To see why, consider rewriting the first term as  × Cov[ log Ct+1 , Rt+1 ] =  × (   log C  R ). For changes in
      to have no effect on expected returns via this first term,   ×    log C  R = 0, it must be that at least one
     of the following conditions holds:  = 0,  log C = 0, or R = 0. But, when you inspect the definition of habit, Ht ,
     it is clear that  log C = 0 implies that  log X = 0. So, if any of these three conditions holds, the second term
     must be zero as well,  × Cov[ log Xt+1 , Rt+1 ] =  × (   log X  R ) = 0.

                                                            27
consumption-growth shocks, then there is no long-run risk either (Epstein et al., 2014). Another way
of making this same point is to notice that the long-run-risk model is formally equivalent to a model
where investors are ambiguity averse with respect to parameters of the consumption-growth process
(Hansen and Sargent, 2008; Epstein and Schneider, 2010; Bidder and Dew-Becker, 2016).

4.3.3    Rare Disasters
There is a class of models built on top of the CCAPM framework that our results do not directly
speak to: rare-disaster models à la Rietz (1988), Barro (2006), and Gabaix (2012). We find that
investors are not trying to insure themselves against normal-times variation in consumption growth,
but this is not a direct test of whether asset prices are moving because investors want to insure
themselves against extreme shocks to consumption.
    That being said, even if a rare-disasters model fits the data, it is not obvious that real-world
investors think along these lines. For example, Giglio et al. (2019) finds that investors who believe a
future disaster is more likely do not believe that average returns will be higher to compensate for
this additional risk--i.e., they do not believe in a disaster risk premium. The assumption that
investors are trying to insure themselves against rare disasters is testable, and researchers should use
the framework we develop in this paper to test it.

4.3.4    Heterogeneous Agents
Most of the discussion in our paper (and in the literature) relates to representative-agent
models, but our paper also has implications for heterogeneous-agent models. For example, in the
Constantinides and Duffie (1996) model, heterogeneous investors try to hedge shocks to their own
personal income. When this hedging demand is aggregated, the model predicts that aggregate
consumption growth looks like a priced risk factor. We directly show in Tables 4 and 9 that
participants are not trying to hedge shocks to their own personal income.
    But, suppose we had found the opposite results. Would such a finding suggest that consumption
growth is a relevant risk factor? No. It would suggest that shocks to personal income are relevant.
Shocks to aggregate consumption and shocks to personal income are two different things. Even if
these two kinds of shocks sometimes coincide, researchers can still imagine future scenarios where
they do not. Economists should care about economic mechanism behind a link between average
returns and correlations with X for the same reasons that labor economists care about which
economic mechanism explains the link between going to college and earning more money.
    Further, investors likely differ along a variety of dimensions, whether it be preferences, wealth,
expectations, or any number of alternatives. While models that focus on these various dimensions
have been proposed, most heterogeneous agent models retain risk-factor hedging, be it aggregate or
personal, as the core strategy that investors pursue. Our results test this mechanism and suggest it
is unlikely to accurately represent how investors approach portfolio decisions.


                                                  28
4.4    Model Development
The results in this paper shed light on how researchers can both test new models and respond to the
empirical shortcomings of existing models. First, researchers can use our survey-based framework to
generate and test new models for which empirical datasets may not be readily available. e.g.,
researchers promoting a behavioral bias or trading friction can apply our framework to address
concerns about competing risk-based explanations.
    In addition, the uniform results across the various survey questions and participant pools suggest
that investors' desire to insure themselves against consumption shocks is unlikely to explain why
asset prices move. This suggests subsequent models that add complexity to this foundation are also
unlikely to do so. Suppose our results had suggested otherwise. Suppose they indicated that
participants strongly responded to the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth
consistent with textbook models. Further suppose they showed that participants reported thinking
about an asset's correlation with consumption growth as suggested by the CCAPM. Such results
would not solve the CCAPM's empirical shortcomings, but they would support the current approach
to solving them. The results would have implied that investors cared about consumption-growth
correlations in a more complicated way than is captured by the CCAPM. Thus, models introducing
new risk-factor correlations to the CCAPM, such as habit (Campbell and Cochrane, 1999) and
long-run risk (Bansal and Yaron, 2004), would have a strong foundation to build on. This is not
what we find, though.
    This does not mean that the CCAPM is a bad model. Even if a factor model does not explain
how the world actually works, it can still make important normative prescriptions. For example, it
could be that more people should be hedging shocks to consumption growth even if they currently
are not doing so. Demonstrating to investors a behavior that they should adopt could have
important welfare implications.
    Finally, our results do not suggest that investors are irrational. They suggest that investors are
not trying to hedge shocks to consumption growth. Even though the CCAPM is the starting point
for textbook asset-pricing theory, real-world investors are not irrational for not following the
CCAPM's logic. If investors at a conference run by a large asset manager are not trying to hedge
consumption growth, it does not mean that these investors are doing the wrong thing. It means that
economists are using the wrong model.


5     Conclusion
If X is a priced risk factor--if the hypothesis that asset prices are moving because investors are
trying to insure themselves against bad future shocks to X is true--then investors must be trying
to insure themselves against bad future shocks to X . This goal must be something investors are
generally aware of. This is a necessary condition that must hold for any X to be a relevant risk

                                                 29
factor. We develop a framework for testing it using both survey experiments and field data.
    We apply this framework to evaluate the relevance of aggregate consumption growth, the
canonical risk factor in the academic literature. We find no evidence that investors prefer assets with
lower consumption-growth correlations or adjust their portfolio holdings based on this reasoning.
    Going forward, when a researcher proposes a new risk factor, X , we should ask for evidence that
investors actually think and trade based on the logic of their model. Economists typically apply a
strict hierarchy of explanations. If there is a risk-based explanation for an asset-pricing phenomenon,
then this explanation is viewed as correct even if there are other more parsimonious models. Our
results cast doubt on this hierarchy. They suggest that economists should be more skeptical of
risk-based explanations in the absence of supporting evidence that the model actually captures how
investors price assets.


References
Adam, K., D. Matveev, and S. Nagel (2020). Do survey expectations of stock returns reflect
  risk-adjustments? Journal of Monetary Economics .

Amromin, G. and S. Sharpe (2013). From the horse's mouth: Economic conditions and investor
 expectations of risk and return. Management Science .

Ang, A. (2014). Asset management: A systematic approach to factor investing. Oxford University
  Press.

Armona, L., A. Fuster, and B. Zafar (2018). Home-price expectations and behavior: Evidence from
  a randomized-information experiment. Review of Economic Studies .

Asparouhova, E., P. Bossaerts, N. Roy, and W. Zame (2016). "lucas" in the laboratory. Journal of
  Finance .

Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004). Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset-pricing
  puzzles. Journal of Finance .

Barber, B. and T. Odean (2007). All that glitters: The effect of attention and news on the buying
  behavior of individual and institutional investors. Review of Financial Studies .

Barro, R. (2006). Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics .

Bergman, A., A. Chinco, S. Hartzmark, and A. Sussman (2020). Survey curious? start-up guide and
  best practices for online survey experiments. Working Paper .

Bidder, R. and I. Dew-Becker (2016). Long-run risk is the worst-case scenario. American Economic
  Review .

Bossaerts, P. and C. Plott (2004). Basic principles of asset-pricing theory: Evidence from large-scale
  experimental financial markets. Review of Finance .

                                                 30
Bryzgalova, S. (2017). Spurious factors in linear asset-pricing models. Working Paper .

Campbell, J. (2003). Consumption-based asset pricing. Handbook of the Economics of Finance .

Campbell, J. and J. Cochrane (1999). By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation of
  aggregate stock-market behavior. Journal of Political Economy .

Campbell, J. and L. Viceira (1999). Consumption and portfolio decisions when expected returns are
  time varying. Quarterly Journal of Economics .

Carroll, L. (1894). Sylvie and Bruno concluded. New York; London: Macmillan.

Casler, K., L. Bickel, and E. Hackett (2013). Separate but equal? A comparison of participants and
  data gathered via Amazon's MTurk, social media, and face-to-face behavioral testing. Computers
  in Human Behavior .

Cheng, I.-H. and W. Xiong (2014). Financialization of commodity markets. Annual Review of
 Financial Economics .

Chinco, A., A. Neuhierl, and M. Weber (2020). Estimating the anomaly base rate. Journal of
 Financial Economics .

Choi, J. and A. Robertson (2019). What matters to individual investors? Evidence from the horse's
  mouth. Journal of Finance .

Cochrane, J. (1999). Portfolio advice for a multi-factor world. Chicago Federal Reserve, Economic
  Perspectives .

Cochrane, J. (2001). Asset pricing. Princeton University Press.

Cochrane, J. (2017). Macro-finance. Review of Finance .

Constantinides, G. and D. Duffie (1996). Asset pricing with heterogeneous consumers. Journal of
  Political Economy .

Crockett, S., J. Duffy, and Y. Izhakian (2019). An experimental test of the Lucas asset-pricing
  model. Review of Economic Studies .

Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, and K. Majlesi (2020). Stock-market returns and consumption. Journal
  of Finance .

Enke, B. and F. Zimmermann (2017). Correlation neglect in belief formation. Review of Economic
  Studies .

Epstein, L., E. Farhi, and T. Strzalecki (2014). How much would you pay to resolve long-run risk?
  American Economic Review .

Epstein, L. and M. Schneider (2010). Ambiguity and asset markets. Annual Review of Financial
  Economics .



                                               31
Epstein, L. and S. Zin (1989). Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of consumption
  and asset returns: a theoretical framework. Econometrica .

Eyster, E. and G. Weizsacker (2016). Correlation neglect in portfolio choice: Lab evidence. Working
  Paper .

Feng, G., S. Giglio, and D. Xiu (2020). Taming the factor zoo. Journal of Finance .

Freyberger, J., A. Neuhierl, and M. Weber (2020). Dissecting characteristics non-parametrically.
  Review of Financial Studies .

Friedman, M. (1953). Essays in positive economics. University of Chicago Press.

Frydman, C., S. Hartzmark, and D. Solomon (2017). Rolling mental accounts. Review of Financial
  Studies .

Gabaix, X. (2012). Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in
 macro-finance. Quarterly Journal of Economics .

Gabaix, X. (2014). A sparsity-based model of bounded rationality. Quarterly Journal of Economics .

Gabaix, X. (2016). Behavioral macroeconomics via sparse dynamic programming. Working Paper .

Giglio, S., M. Maggiori, J. Stroebel, and S. Utkus (2019). Five facts about beliefs and portfolios.
 Working Paper .

Gode, D. and S. Sunder (1993). Allocative efficiency of markets with zero-intelligence traders:
 Market as a partial substitute for individual rationality. Journal of Political Economy .

Greenwood, R. and A. Shleifer (2014). Expectations of returns and expected returns. Review of
 Financial Studies .

Hansen, L. and T. Sargent (2008). Robustness. Princeton University Press.

Harris, L., S. Hartzmark, and D. Solomon (2015). Juicing the dividend yield: Mutual funds and the
  demand for dividends. Journal of Financial Economics .

Hartzmark, S. (2014). The worst, the best, ignoring all the rest: The rank effect and trading
  behavior. Review of Financial Studies .

Hartzmark, S. and D. Solomon (2017). The dividend disconnect. Journal of Finance .

Hartzmark, S. and A. Sussman (2019). Do investors value sustainability? A natural experiment
  examining ranking and fund flows. Journal of Finance .

Harvey, C. and Y. Liu (2020). False (and missed) discoveries in financial economics. Journal of
 Finance .

Hauser, D. and N. Schwarz (2016). Attentive Turkers: MTurk participants perform better on online
  attention checks than do subject-pool participants. Behavior Research Methods .


                                                32
Huber, J., S. Palan, and S. Zeisberger (2019). Does investor risk perception drive asset prices in
  markets? Experimental evidence. Journal of Banking & Finance .

Jennings, D., T. Amabile, and L. Ross (1982). Informal covariation assessment: Data-based
  vs. theory-based judgements. Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases .

Jorion, P. (1990). The exchange-rate exposure of US multinationals. Journal of Business .

Kahneman, D. and S. Frederick (2002). Representativeness revisited: Attribute substitution in
  intuitive judgment. Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive judgment .

Kallir, I. and D. Sonsino (2009). The neglect of correlation in allocation decisions. Southern
 Economic Journal .

Koehler, J. (1995). The science of pocket billiards. Sportology Publications.

Kozak, S., S. Nagel, and S. Santosh (2018). Shrinking the cross-section. Journal of Financial
 Economics .

Kroll, Y. and H. Levy (1992). Further tests of the separation theorem and the capital asset-pricing
  model. American Economic Review .

Kroll, Y., H. Levy, and A. Rapoport (1988). Experimental tests of the separation theorem and the
  capital asset-pricing model. American Economic Review .

Laudenbach, C., M. Ungeheuer, and M. Weber (2019). How to alleviate correlation neglect. Working
  Paper .

Levy, G. and R. Razin (2015). Correlation neglect, voting behavior, and information aggregation.
  American Economic Review .

Lewellen, J., S. Nagel, and J. Shanken (2010). A skeptical appraisal of asset-pricing tests. Journal
  of Financial Economics .

Liu, H., C. Peng, W. Xiong, and W. Xiong (2020). Resolving the excessive trading puzzle: An
  integrated approach based on surveys and transactions. Working Paper .

Longstaff, F., J. Pan, L. Pedersen, and K. Singleton (2011). How sovereign is sovereign credit risk?
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics .

Lucas, R. (1978). Asset prices in an exchange economy. Econometrica .

Matthies, B. (2018). Biases in the perception of covariance. Working Paper .

McLean, D. and J. Pontiff (2016). Does academic research destroy stock-return predictability?
 Journal of Finance .

Mehra, R. and E. Prescott (1985). The equity premium: A puzzle. Journal of Monetary Economics .

Merton, R. (1969). Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time case. Review
 of Economics and Statistics .

                                                33
Merton, R. (1971). Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time model. Journal
 of Economic Theory .

Merton, R. (1973). An intertemporal capital asset-pricing model. Econometrica .

Odean, T. (1998). Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? Journal of Finance .

Paolacci, G. and J. Chandler (2014). Inside the Turk: Understanding Mechanical Turk as a
  participant pool. Current Directions in Psychological Science .

Plott, C. and S. Sunder (1988). Rational expectations and the aggregation of diverse information in
  laboratory security markets. Econometrica .

Rietz, T. (1988). The equity risk-premium: A solution. Journal of Monetary Economics .

Savov, A. (2011). Asset pricing with garbage. Journal of Finance .

Schwarz, N. (1999). Self-reports: How the questions shape the answers. American Psychologist .

Smith, V., G. Suchanek, and A. Williams (1988). Bubbles, crashes, and endogenous expectations in
  experimental spot asset markets. Econometrica .

Ungeheuer, M. and M. Weber (2019). The perception of dependence, investment decisions, and
  stock prices. Journal of Finance .




                                                34
A     Figures




    Figure 1a. Sample Investment-Decision Question without noise. This figure
    shows a sample question about investment decisions from the first part of our survey
    experiment. The economic growth line is GDP without noise added.




                                            35
Figure 1b. Sample Investment-Decision Question with Noise. This figure
shows a sample question about investment decisions from the first part of our survey
experiment. The economic growth line is GDP with noise added.




                                        36
                           Age                          Income           Invests      Owns stock        Worked            Is a
                                         Is male
                           < 40                         < $100k           wisely       mut fund        in finance        trader
                     5
                     4
                     3




                                                                                                                                  mean
                          FALSE
                     2



                          TRUE
                     1
                     0
                   0.0




                                                                                                                                  volatility
                   -0.5
     Coefficient




                   -1.0
                   -1.5
                   -2.0
                    0.6




                                                                                                                                  correlation
                    0.3
37




                    0.0
                   -0.3
                   -0.6


                          Figure 2. Investment Decisions by Participant Characteristics. This figure
                          reports regression results corresponding to column (4) in Table 2 for different subsets of our
                          participant pools. From top to bottom, each set of three bars represents the slope coefficients
                          from the regression stockFraci,q =   ^ +^meani,q +^ volatilityi,q +   ^correlationi,q +     ^i,q .
                          The dependent variable is the fraction invested in stocks, stockFraci,q . The right-hand-
                          side variables correspond to the average stock returns, meani,q , stock-return volatility,
                          volatilityi,q , and the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth,
                          correlationi,q , used to simulate the data for each question. The y-axis is scaled so that a
                          change in the given parameter of low to high would match the scale of the y-axis for the
                          mean graphs. Opaque bars are significant at the 5% level using standard errors clustered by
                          participant. Transparent bars are insignificant. Blue bars denote positive values. Red bars
                          denote negative values. The horizontal dotted gray lines correspond to coefficient values from
                          Table 2 column (4).
B     Tables



    a) Finance Professionals (N = 493)          #     Avg      Sd     Min     Med     Max
                             Stock Fraction           0.56    0.24    0.00    0.50    1.00
                                 Age < 40     221     0.45
                                   Is male    215     0.44
                          Income < $100k      217     0.44
               Owns stock or mutual funds     442     0.90
                               Is a trader    136     0.28

    b) MTurkers (N = 322)
                             Stock Fraction           0.58    0.27    0.00    0.60    1.00
                                Age < 40      232     0.72
                                  Is male     210     0.65
                          Income < $100k      281     0.87
               Own stocks or mutual funds     209     0.65
                        Worked in finance      29     0.09

    c) MBA Students (N = 308)
                             Stock Fraction           0.67    0.30    0.00    0.70    1.00
                                 Age < 40 304         0.99
                                   Is male 183        0.59
                         Worked in finance 118        0.38

    d) Asset Managers (N = 93)
                             Stock Fraction           0.67    0.25    0.00    0.70    1.00

    Table 1. Summary Statistics. This table presents summary statistics describing the
    four participant pools in our survey experiment. Stock Fraction: average fraction of
    their endowment that each participant invests in stocks; computed using data at the
    participant×question level. All remaining rows are computed at the participant level. #:
    represents the number of participants who answered `Yes'. Asset managers were not asked
    background questions prior to taking our survey due to time constraints.




                                              38
     Dependent Variable: stockFraci,q
                          (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)
             meani,q       3.24                                    3.22
                         (14.52)                                 (14.51)
      volatilityi,q                   -0.61                      -0.60
                                      (10.07)                     (9.97)
     correlationi,q                                  0.00         0.00          0.01         0.00         0.01
                                                    (0.00)        (0.16)       (0.69)        (0.06)       (0.68)

     Participant FE                                                                                        
       Question FE                                                                                         
             # Obs       10,062       10,062       10,062        10,062       10,062       10,062        10,062
39




            Adj. R2       0.04         0.01         0.00          0.05         0.43         0.01          0.44

          Table 2. Investment Decisions. This table shows how participants' investment decisions
          vary with average stock returns, meani,q , stock-return volatility, volatilityi,q , and the
          correlation between stock returns and consumption growth, correlationi,q . This table uses
          observations on all participant pools. Each column reports the results of a different regression
          of the form stockFraci,q =     ^+   ^  meani,q + ^  volatilityi,q +  ^  correlationi,q +     ^i,q .
          The dependent variable is the fraction invested in stocks, stockFraci,q . Columns (5) and
          (7) include participant fixed effects. Columns (6) and (7) include question-order fixed effects.
          The numbers in parentheses are t-stats computed using standard errors clustered by
          participant.  ,  , and  indicate statistically significant estimates at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
          levels.
     Dependent Variable: stockFraci,q
                                                       Finance                                             Asset
                          All Participants                             MTurkers       MBA Students
                                                     Professionals                                        Managers
                         (1)            (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)
     correlationi,q      0.01           0.00              0.00             0.00             0.07           -0.03
                        (0.69)          (0.33)           (0.11)           (0.12)           (1.88)           (0.38)

     Participant FE                                                                                             
            Pool FE                      
             # Obs     10,062          10,062            4,930            3,220            1,540                372
            Adj. R2     0.43            0.02              0.37             0.43             0.51                0.38
40




              Table 3. Investment Decisions by Participant Pool. This table shows how the
              investment decisions of different types of participants change in response to an asset's return
              correlation with consumption growth, correlationi,q . Each column reports the results
              of a different regression of the form stockFraci,q =       ^+  ^  correlationi,q +   ^i,q . The
              dependent variable is the fraction invested in stocks, stockFraci,q . Columns (1) and (2)
              report results using all participant pools. Column (3) reports results only for finance
              professionals. Column (4) reports results only for MTurkers. Column (5) reports results only
              for MBA students. And, column (6) reports results only for asset managers attending the
              investor conference. Columns (1), (3), (4), (5), and (6) include participant fixed effects.
              Column (2) includes pool fixed effects. The numbers in parentheses are t-stats computed
              using standard errors clustered by participant.  ,  , and  indicate statistically significant
              coefficient estimates at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.
 Dependent Variable: stockFraci,q
                         Personal           Personal            House           Industrial
                         Income             Wealth              Prices          Production
                           (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)
           meani,q          6.34               4.35               2.82               2.71
                          (10.15)             (8.16)             (4.92)             (5.13)
   volatilityi,q          -0.71              -0.51              -0.75              -0.15
                           (4.40)             (3.37)             (4.55)             (0.82)
 correlationi,q           -0.02                0.04               0.04               0.06
                           (0.35)             (1.15)             (0.97)             (1.45)

           # Obs           1,110              1,860              1,340             1,700
          Adj. R2           0.16               0.08               0.05              0.03

Table 4. Investment Decisions Using Different Terms. This table shows how
participants' investment decisions vary with average stock returns, meani,q , stock-return
volatility, volatilityi,q , and the correlation between stock returns and a risk factor,
correlationi,q , when that variable is labeled as `personal income', `personal wealth', `house
prices' or `industrial production'. Each column reports the results of a different regression
of the form stockFraci,q =     ^+  ^  meani,q + ^  volatilityi,q + ^  correlationi,q +     ^i,q .
The dependent variable is the fraction invested in stocks, stockFraci,q . Each column uses
data on a separate population of MTurkers. Numbers in parentheses are t-stats computed
using standard errors clustered by participant.  ,  , and  indicate statistically significant
estimates at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.




                                              41
 Dependent Variable: stockFraci,q
                                           Additional 
                         Text Only                             Scatterplots        No Graphs
                                           Instructions
                             (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)
           meani,q           4.11                3.52               1.31                1.93
                            (6.52)              (6.82)             (2.89)              (4.64)
   volatilityi,q           -0.58               -0.71              -0.74               -0.37
                            (3.35)              (4.51)             (3.99)              (2.26)
 correlationi,q              0.05               0.01                0.15                0.18
                            (1.29)              (0.18)             (3.85)              (4.61)

           # Obs            1,290              1,800               1,520              1,870
          Adj. R2            0.07               0.06                0.03               0.03

Table 5. Investment Decisions Using Treatment Variations. This table shows
how participants' investment decisions vary when we provided them with information about
the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth in a different format. Each
column reports the results of a different regression of the form stockFraci,q =     ^ + ^  meani,q +
^  volatilityi,q + 
                    ^ correlationi,q +     ^i,q . The dependent variable is the fraction invested in
stocks, stockFraci,q . In column (1), participants saw   {`none', `low', `medium', `high'}
reported as text rather than   {0.00, 0.15, 0.30, 0.45}. In column (2), participants
received additional instruction on how to interpret a correlation coefficient. In column (3),
participants saw a scatterplot rather than a time-series plot. In column (4), participants saw
the numeric values of the mean, volatility, and correlation but no time-series graphs. Each
column uses data on a separate population of MTurkers. Numbers in parentheses are t-stats
computed using standard errors clustered by participant.  ,  , and  indicate statistically
significant estimates at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.




                                                42
                                                   Mean          Volatility     Correlation
                                                    µR              R               
                                                   (1)             (2)             (3)
                             Pr[consideri ]         0.77            0.59            0.43
                                                    [0.04]          [0.07]          [0.03]

                      Pr[textbookLogici ]           0.58            0.44            0.11
                                                    [0.05]          [0.08]          [0.01]

 Pr[ textbookLogici consideri = true ]               0.76+++         0.72+++         0.24---
                                                    [0.02]          [0.03]          [0.03]


Table 6. Economic Reasoning. This table depicts the rate at which participants
reported thinking about average stock returns (µR ), stock-return volatility (R ), and
the correlation between stock returns and consumption growth () when making their
investment decisions. consideri is an indicator variable for whether the ith participant
thought about a parameter at all. textbookLogici is an indicator variable for whether
the ith participant thought about this parameter using textbook asset-pricing logic. If
consideri = false then textbookLogici = false as well. This table uses observations
on all participant pools. Numbers in square brackets are standard errors clustered by
participant pool. In the bottom row, we use + , ++ , and +++ to indicate probabilities greater
than 0.50 with statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels; whereas, we use - , -- ,
and --- to indicate probabilities less than 0.50 at the same significance levels.




                                              43
     Dependent Variable:                consideri                             textbookLogici             textbookLogici consideri = true
                                µR         R                          µR            R                       µR        R           
                               (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)       (6)           (7)       (8)         (9)
         isFinanceProi         0.72         0.52         0.38         0.56         0.36        0.10         0.78+++         0.69+++    0.27---
                               [0.02]      [0.02]       [0.02]       [0.02]       [0.02]       [0.01]       [0.02]         [0.03]     [0.03]

             isMTurkeri        0.77         0.53         0.48                                  0.08                                    0.17---
                               [0.02]      [0.03]       [0.03]                                 [0.02]                                 [0.04]

         isMBAstudenti         0.88         0.77         0.48         0.69         0.58        0.11          0.78+++        0.76+++    0.23---
                               [0.02]      [0.02]       [0.03]       [0.03]       [0.03]       [0.02]       [0.03]         [0.03]     [0.04]

       isAssetManageri         0.62         0.54         0.35         0.37         0.40        0.17          0.59+          0.74+++   0.48
                               [0.05]      [0.05]       [0.05]       [0.05]       [0.05]       [0.03]       [0.05]         [0.05]     [0.06]

                 # Obs        1,216        1,216        1,216         894          894        1,216         683            543        525
                Adj. R2        0.77         0.61         0.44         0.60         0.46        0.11         0.77           0.72       0.26
44




                           Table 7. Economic Reasoning by Participant Pool. This table depicts the rate
                           at which different participant pools reported thinking about average stock returns (µR ),
                           stock-return volatility (R ), and the correlation between stock returns and consumption
                           growth () when making their investment decisions. Each column reports results for a separate
                           regression of the form: yi =      ^  isFinanceProi +  ^  isMTurkeri +   ^  isMBAstudenti +
                           ^  isAssetManager + 
                                                     ^i,q . The dependent  variable is an indicator variable capturing
                                                 i
                           whether/how the ith participant thought about a parameter. consideri is an indicator
                           variable for whether the ith participant thought about a parameter at all. textbookLogici
                           is an indicator variable for whether the ith participant thought about this parameter using
                           textbook asset-pricing logic. If consideri = false, then textbookLogici = false as well.
                           The right-hand-side variables are indicators for which population the ith participant belongs
                           to. Numbers in square brackets are standard errors. In columns (7), (8), and (9), we use + ,
                           ++ , and +++ to indicate probabilities greater than 0.50 with statistical significance at the

                           10%, 5%, and 1% levels; whereas, we use - , -- , and --- to indicate probabilities less than
                           0.50 at the same significance levels.
     Dependent Variable: stockFraci,q
                                                            meani,q      volatilityi,q correlationi,q
                                                              (1)            (2)           (3)
                                    consideri = false         2.03           -0.37            -0.01
                                                             (4.30)           (4.34)           (0.59)
                                    consideri = true          3.62           -0.77              0.01
                                                            (14.36)           (9.16)           (0.67)
     (consideri = true) & (textbookLogici = false)            1.18             0.05             0.03
                                                             (2.22)           (0.26)           (1.12)
     (consideri = true) & (textbookLogici = true)             4.06           -1.17            -0.03
                                                            (11.68)          (10.38)           (0.71)


        Table 8. Investment Decisions by Economic Reasoning. This table presents
45




        regression results showing how participants' investment decisions vary with average
        stock returns, meani,q , stock-return volatility, volatilityi,q , and the correlation between
        stock returns and consumption growth, correlationi,q . This table uses data on all
        participant pools. Each entry in the table represents the estimated slope coefficient,
        ^, of a separate regression of the form stockFraci,q = 
                                                                      ^+    ^  xi,q + ^i,q where xi,q 
        {meani,q , volatilityi,q , correlationi,q } using the specified sub-population for a given
        row. The dependent variable is the fraction invested in stocks, stockFraci,q . consideri is
        an indicator variable for whether the ith participant thought about a parameter at
        all. textbookLogici is an indicator variable for whether the ith participant thought
        about this parameter using textbook asset-pricing logic. If consideri = false, then
        textbookLogici = false as well. Numbers in parentheses are t-stats computed using
        standard errors clustered by participant.  ,  , and  indicate statistically significant
        estimates at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.
                                                  Mean         Volatility     Correlation
                                                   µR             R               
 a) Personal Income                               (1)            (2)             (3)
                            Pr[consideri ]         0.65           0.48            0.28
                                                   [0.04]         [0.05]          [0.04]
 Pr[ textbookLogici consideri = true ]              0.99+++        0.85+++         0.19---
                                                   [0.01]         [0.05]          [0.09]




  b) Personal Wealth
                            Pr[consideri ]          0.69           0.53           0.37
                                                   [0.04]         [0.03]          [0.04]
  Pr[ textbookLogici consideri = true ]             0.87+++        0.83+++         0.12---
                                                   [0.03]         [0.04]          [0.05]




  c) House Prices
                            Pr[consideri ]          0.68           0.54           0.31
                                                   [0.05]         [0.05]          [0.04]
  Pr[ textbookLogici consideri = true ]             0.92+++        0.96+++         0.20---
                                                   [0.02]         [0.02]          [0.06]




  d) Industrial Production
                            Pr[consideri ]          0.62           0.48           0.38
                                                   [0.04]         [0.04]          [0.04]
  Pr[ textbookLogici consideri = true ]             0.87+++        0.85+++         0.06---
                                                   [0.03]         [0.04]          [0.03]


Table 9. Economic Reasoning Using Different Terms. This table depicts the
rate at which participants reported thinking about average stock returns (µR ), stock-return
volatility (R ), and the correlation between stock returns and four different risk factors ()
when making their investment decisions. Each panel uses data on a separate population of
MTurkers and reports results when the risk factor is labeled as `personal income', `personal
wealth', `house prices', or `industrial production'. consideri is an indicator variable for
whether the ith participant thought about a parameter at all. textbookLogici is an
indicator variable for whether the ith participant thought about this parameter using
textbook asset-pricing logic. If consideri = false then textbookLogici = false as well.
Numbers in square brackets are standard errors clustered by participant pool. In the bottom
row we use + , ++ , and +++ to indicate probabilities greater than 0.50 with statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels; whereas, we use - , -- , and --- to indicate
probabilities less than 0.50 at the same significance levels.



                                             46
                                                                                          Mentions related to other   Other macro
                                                          TNA ($bil)
                                                                           Mentions of         macro variables      correlation info?
                                                        Share             correlat(ion|e) §Investment §Investment
                                                        Class    Fund     covar(iance|y)     Risks     Objectives Num. Graph
                  Vguard 500 Idx, Adm       VFIAX         276      483           0              0              0          No     No
        Vguard Tot Stock Mkt Idx, Adm       VTSAX         225      814           0              0              0          No     No
                        Fidelity 500 Idx    FXAIX         198      198           4              0              0          No     No
     Vguard Tot Stock Mkt Idx, Instl Pl     VSMPX         170      814           0              0              0          No     No
          Vguard Tot Intl Stock Idx, Inv    VGTSX         146      382           0              0              0          No     No
            Vguard Tot Stock Mkt Idx, I      VITSX        140      814           0              0              0          No     No
         Vguard Tot Stock Mkt Idx, Inv      VTSMX         139      814           0              0              0          No     No
               Vguard Instl Idx, Instl Pl    VIIIX        115      229           0              0              0          No     No
              Vguard Institutional Idx, I    VINIX        114      229           0              0              0          No     No
      Vguard Tot Intl Stock Idx, Instl Pl   VTPSX         112      382           0              0              0          No     No
       Vguard Tot Bond Mkt II Idx, Inv      VTBIX         107      182           0              0              0          No     No
        Vguard Tot Bond Mkt Idx, Adm        VBTLX         100      229           0              0              0          No     No
                    Fidelity Contrafund     FCNTX          95      122           0              0              0          No     No
       Amer Funds Gr Fund of Amer, A        AGTHX          91      196           0              0              0          No     No
47




               Vguard Wellington, Adm       VWENX          89      105           0              0              0          No     No
         Vguard Tot Bond Mkt II Idx, I      VTBNX          75      182           0              0              0          No     No
        Vguard Tot Intl Stock Idx, Adm      VTIAX          75      382           0              0              0          No     No
     Amer Funds Incm Fund of Amer, A        AMECX          74      111           0              0              0          No     No
           Amer Funds American Bal, A       ABALX          72      150           0              0              0          No     No
             Amer Funds Europa Gr, R6       RERGX          71      162           0              0              0          No     No
                    Dodge & Cox Stock       DODGX          71       71           1              0              0          No     No
             Vguard 500 Idx, Instl Select   VFFSX          70      483           0              0              0          No     No
                   PIMCO Income Instl        PIMIX         67      128           3              0              0          No     No
       Amer Funds Cap Income Bldr, A        CAIBX          65      105           0              0              0          No     No
       Vguard Interm-Term Tx-Ex, Adm        VWIUX          65       68           0              0              0          No     No
                                                         2821     3734           8              0              0

                Table 10. Mutual-Fund Prospectuses. This table describes how the 25 largest US mutual funds talk
                about risk-factor correlations in their prospectuses. "Mentions of correlat(ion|e) covar(iance|y)" counts the
                number of times `correlation', `correlate', `covariance', or `covary' appear in a fund's prospectus. "Mentions
                related to macro variables" counts the number of times a fund mentions its exposure to a macroeconomic
                variable in either the Investment Risks or Investment Objectives sections of its prospectus. "Other macro
                correlation info?" is an indicator variable for whether a prospectus addressed the fund's correlation with
                macroeconomic variables in some other way.
