                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


               TOKENOMICS: DYNAMIC ADOPTION AND VALUATION

                                     Lin William Cong
                                          Ye Li
                                        Neng Wang

                                     Working Paper 27222
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27222


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020

We are deeply grateful to Editor and two anonymous referees for very helpful comments. We
thank Philip Bond, Matthieu Bouvard, Jaime Casassus, Tom Ding, Alex Frankel, Zhiguo He,
Dirk Jenter, Andrew Karolyi, Yongjin Kim, Michael Sockin, Aleh Tsyvinski, Pietro Veronesi,
Johan Walden, Larry Wall, Randall Wright, Yizhou Xiao, and seminar and conference
participants at AEA/AFE (Atlanta), Ansatz Capital, Ant Financial, Atlanta Fed & GSU CEAR
Conference on Financial Stability Implications of New Technology, Baidu Du Xiaoman
Financial, CEPR ESSFM Gerzensee, Chicago Booth, City University of Hong Kong
International Finance Conference, CKGSB, CMU Tepper (Business Technology/
Information Systems), Emerging Trends in Entrepreneurial Finance Conference, Finance
UC 14th International Conference, Georgetown, HKUST Finance Symposium, JOIM
Conference on FinTech, LeBow/GIC/FRB Conference on Cryptocurrencies in the Global
Economy, London Finance Theory Group Summer Conference, Luohan Academy First Digital
Economy Conference (joint with Alibaba Damo Academy), National University of Singapore,
NYU Stern FinTech Conferece, Norwegian School of Economics, PBC School of Finance,
the 3rd Pensions and ESG Forum, RCFS/RAPS Conference in Baha Mar, 3rd Rome Junior
Finance Conference, SEC DERA, Shanghai Forum, Stanford SITE, Tokenomics International
conference on Blockchain Economics, Security and Protocols, University of Cincinnati,
University of Washington Foster, University of Zurich/ETH, and UT Dallas Finance Conference
for helpful comments. Cong gratefully acknowledges Xiao Zhang for excellent research
assistance and the Center for Research in Security Prices for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lin William Cong, Ye Li, and Neng Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tokenomics: Dynamic Adoption and Valuation
Lin William Cong, Ye Li, and Neng Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 27222
May 2020
JEL No. E42,G12,L86

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a dynamic asset-pricing model of cryptocurrencies/tokens that allow users to conduct
peer-to-peer transactions on digital platforms. The equilibrium value of tokens is determined by
aggregating heterogeneous users' transactional demand rather than discounting cashflows as in
standard valuation models. Endogenous platform adoption builds upon user network externality
and exhibits an S-curve--it starts slow, becomes volatile, and eventually tapers off. Introducing
tokens lowers users' transaction costs on the platform by allowing users to capitalize on platform
growth. The resulting intertemporal feedback between user adoption and token price accelerates
adoption and dampens user-base volatility.

Lin William Cong                                Neng Wang
Cornell University                              Columbia Business School
Ithaca, NY 14853                                3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
will.cong@cornell.edu                           New York, NY 10027
                                                and NBER
Ye Li                                           nw2128@columbia.edu
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
2100 Neil Ave
Fisher Hall 836
Columbus, OH 43210
li.8935@osu.edu
1         Introduction
        Blockchain-based applications and cryptocurrencies have recently taken a center stage
among technological breakthroughs in finance. The global market capitalization of cryp-
tocurrencies has grown to hundreds of billions of US dollars. Nevertheless, academics, prac-
titioners, and regulators have divergent views on how cryptocurrencies derive their value.
        In this paper, we provide a fundamentals-based dynamic valuation model for cryptocur-
rencies. We focus on the endogenous formation of a digital marketplace or network ("the
platform") where its native cryptocurrency settles transactions and derives its value from
underlying economic activities on the platform. To distinguish from cryptocurrencies as
general-purpose medium of exchange, we shall refer to platform-specific currencies as to-
kens. In contrast to financial assets whose values depend on cash flows, tokens derive value
by enabling users to conduct economic transactions on the digital platform.
        Our model captures two key features shared by a majority of tokens. First, they are the
means of payment on platforms that support specific economic transactions. For example,
Filecoin is a digital marketplace that allows users to exchange data storage space for its
tokens (FIL). Another example is Basic Attention Token (BAT): advertisers use BATs to
pay for their ads, publishers receive BATs for hosting these ads, and web-browser users
are rewarded BATs for viewing these ads. Second, user adoption exhibits network effects.
In both examples, the more users the platform has, the easier it is for any user to find a
transaction counterparty, and the more useful the tokens are. Our model also applies to
tokens used on centralized platforms such as those being developed by platform businesses.1
        Consequently, the market price of tokens and the platform user base (i.e., the total
number of platform users) naturally arise as two key endogenous variables in our model.
Our equilibrium token pricing formula exhibits three desirable features. First, token value
depends on the platform's productivity, which captures the platform's functionality and
other related factors (e.g., technological and regulatory changes). Second, the user base
enters positively into the pricing formula, capturing the positive network externality of user
    1
   Examples include online social networks (e.g., QQ coins on Tencent's messaging platform) and online
games (e.g., Linden dollar for Second Life and WoW Gold for World of Warcraft ).



                                                  1
adoption. Third, user heterogeneity matters for both platform adoption and token pricing.
   Moreover, we clarify the roles of tokens in platform adoption by comparing token-based
platforms and platforms that settle transactions with the numeraire consumption goods.
Using the numeraire goods as means of payment incurs a carry cost, the forgone return from
investing in financial assets. In contrast, introducing tokens encourages early adoption of
productive platforms, because agents expect token price appreciation, and thus, effectively
face a lower carry cost of using tokens for transactions. The expectation of future token
price change also stabilizes user adoption in the presence of platform productivity shocks.
   Specifically, we consider a continuous-time economy with a continuum of agents who dif-
fer in their transaction needs (i.e., types) on the platform. We broadly interpret transactions
as including value transfers (e.g., Filecoin and BAT) and smart contracting (e.g., Ethereum).
Accordingly, we model an agent's utility flow from platform transactions as a function of
platform productivity that evolves exogenously, her type, the user base, and the real (nu-
meraire good) value of the agent's token holdings ("real token balance"). Importantly, this
flow utility increases with the user base, capturing the network effects. We characterize the
Markov equilibrium with platform productivity being the state variable. The model has two
key endogenous variables, the user base and token price.
   In our model, agents make a two-step decision on (1) whether to adopt by paying a
participation cost to become a platform user, and if so, (2) the real token balance. The
token market clears by equating the agents' demand and the fixed supply. A key insight of
our model is that users' adoption decision exhibits not only static complementarity through
the flow utility of platform transactions but also an inter-temporal complementarity via the
carry cost of holding tokens that depends on the endogenous variation of token price.
   Holding tokens as means of payment incurs a carry cost that is the forgone return from
investing in financial assets. However, on a promising platform with a positive productivity
drift, such cost is partly offset by the expected token price appreciation. Given a fixed supply
of tokens, the prospective growth of user base driven by productivity growth leads agents
to expect more users in the future and thus a stronger demand for tokens, which implies
an increase of token price. As such, even though users forgo the financial assets' returns by


                                               2
holding tokens to transact, they are compensated by the expected appreciation of tokens.
   Introducing tokens also stabilizes the user base, making it less sensitive to platform pro-
ductivity shocks. Consider a platform with growing yet stochastic productivity. A negative
productivity shock reduces users' transactional utility and thus lowers the user base. This
negative effect is mitigated by an increase in the expected token price appreciation. A lower
current level of adoption implies a larger expected token price appreciation because more
users can be brought onto the platform in the future. Consequently, the effective token carry
cost declines, encouraging adoption. Similarly, a positive productivity shock directly in-
creases adoption, but its effect is dampened because the pool of potential newcomers shrinks
and the expected token price appreciation declines, resulting in a greater effective carry cost.
   In the Markov equilibrium, our tokenized economy features an S -curve of user adoption
­ as the platform productivity grows, the user base expands slowly, and then the expansion
speeds up before eventually tapering off near full adoption. We show that the user base
is larger and more stable than that of a tokenless platform that has the same productivity
process but uses the numeraire goods as means of payment.
   We derive an equilibrium token pricing formula that incorporates endogenous network
effects in an otherwise canonical Gordon growth formula. Token valuation boils down to
solving an ordinary differential equation subject to intuitive boundary conditions. Just as
tokens affect the user-base dynamics, endogenous adoption is critical for understanding major
asset-pricing issues surrounding tokens.
   First, the network effects imply a large cross-sectional variation in token price among
platforms in early stages of adoption. Second, adoption externality amplifies the impact
of productivity shocks on token price, creating "excess volatility"(e.g., Shiller, 1981). The
amplification is even stronger when we allow the productivity drift to increase with the
user base -- a form of community bootstrapping that practitioners emphasize. Finally,
by allowing the productivity beta (systematic risk) to increase with adoption, our model
generates an initial rise of token price followed by a decline and eventual stabilization, broadly
consistent with the observed "bubbly" price dynamics. These results are in line with evidence
(e.g., Liu and Tsyvinski, 2018; Shams, 2019).


                                                3
       In sum, our model features rich interactions between financial markets and the real
economy: the financial side operates through the endogenous determination of token prices,
whereas the real side manifests itself in the user adoption. By trading in the token market,
users profit from platform growth and effectively bear a reduced carry cost of conducting
transacting.2 For payment platforms, the prominent adoption problem in platform economics
(e.g., Rochet and Tirole, 2006) is naturally connected with the carry cost in the classic models
of money as transaction medium (e.g., Baumol, 1952; Tobin, 1956). Comparing with the
traditional user subsidies, we demonstrate tokens' advantages in accelerating and smoothing
adoption. This new solution is often based on blockchains: decentralized consensus allows
the token supply to be credibly fixed, and thus, anchoring the token price to users' demand.3


Related Literature. Among early economic studies on blockchain games and consensus
generation mechanisms, Biais, Bisiere, Bouvard, and Casamatta (2019) and Saleh (2017) an-
alyze mining/minting games in Proof-of-Work- and Proof-of-Stake-based public blockchains;
Easley, O'Hara, and Basu (2019), Huberman, Leshno, and Moallemi (2019), and Cong, He,
and Li (2018) study the market structure of miners; Cong and He (2018) examine the impact
of decentralized consensus on industrial organization. We differ by focusing on token users'
trade-off and the resulting dynamic interaction between platform adoption and token pricing
that apply to both centralized and decentralized platforms.
       We connect platform economics and asset pricing by demonstrating that the token price is
anchored upon the platform-specific convenience yield (transactional value). Our treatment
of convenience yield is related to Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) and earlier
studies. Our contribution is to incorporate user network effects in the convenience yield,
and study the implications on platform adoption and token pricing. We emphasize agent
heterogeneity and its asset-pricing implications. Instead of balance-sheet crises (e.g., He and
Krishnamurthy, 2011, 2013; Brunnermeier and Sannikov, 2014), we model the heterogeneity
   2
      Our model has complete information. Token capitalizes the otherwise non-tradable growth of platform
user base, and thereby, accelerates adoption under network effects. This is distinct from the informational
effects of financial markets that feeds back into the real activities (see Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein, 2012).
    3
      As pointed out by Hinzen, John, and Saleh (2019), the decentralized consensus often comes with a cost
of payment delays for proof-of-work blockchains. Computer scientists and economists are active in studing
alternative protocols (e.g., Saleh, 2017; Fanti, Kogan, and Viswanath, 2019).


                                                      4
of platform users and the resulting endogenous growth of user base. In our model, platform
users expect profits from selling tokens to future users. This mechanism is related to but
different from Harrison and Kreps (1978) and Scheinkman and Xiong (2003) as the expected
capital gain in our model is due to the growth of user base rather than heterogeneous beliefs.
    We do not analyze the implications of blockchain technology on general-purpose curren-
cies and monetary policies (e.g., Balvers and McDonald, 2017; Raskin and Yermack, 2016;
Garratt and Wallace, 2018; Schilling and Uhlig, 2018). Instead, we focus on the endogenous
interaction between token pricing and user adoption on platforms that serve niche markets
with time-varying productivity. Therefore token pricing is anchored upon the platform's
productivity and the popularity of specific economic transactions it supports, such as adver-
tisement (BAT) and digital storage (Filecoin).
    Among contemporary theories featuring token valuation in static settings, Sockin and
Xiong (2018) study tokens as indivisible membership certificates for agents to match and
trade with each other; Li and Mann (2018) argue that initial token offering allows agents to
coordinate by costly signaling through token acquisition; Pagnotta and Buraschi (2018) study
Bitcoin pricing on exogenous user networks; Catalini and Gans (2018) examine developers'
pricing of tokens to fund projects and aggregate information; Chod and Lyandres (2018)
contrast security token offerings with traditional financing.4 Our paper is the first to clarify
the role of tokens in capitalizing the endogenous platform growth, and thereby, reducing
agents' effective carry cost of holding the transaction medium.5
    In dynamic settings, Athey, Parashkevov, Sarukkai, and Xia (2016) emphasize the role of
learning in agents' decisions to use Bitcoin absent stochastic platform productivity and user
network externality; Biais, Bisi`
                                ere, Bouvard, Casamatta, and Menkveld (2018) emphasize
the fundamental value of Bitcoin from transactional benefits; Fanti, Kogan, and Viswanath
(2019) provide a valuation framework for Proof-of-Stake (PoS) payment systems; Goldstein,
Gupta, and Sverchkov (2019) study initial token offerings that allow monopolistic platforms
   4
     Tokens in our model facilitate transactions. They should be distinguished from security tokens that
represent claims on issuers' cashflows or rights to redeem products/services (e.g., Slice and Siafund tokens).
   5
     The carry cost features prominently in classic models of money demand (e.g., Baumol, 1952; Tobin,
1956) and recent literature of cash management (e.g., Alvarez and Lippi, 2013; Bolton, Chen, and Wang,
2011; D´ecamps, Mariotti, Rochet, and Villeneuve, 2011; Li, 2017; Lucas and Nicolini, 2015).



                                                      5
to credibly commit to long-run competitive pricing of services. We differ by studying the
joint determination of user adoption and token valuation in a framework that highlights
user heterogeneity, network externalities, and most importantly, inter-temporal feedback
effects. Moreover, our model is applicable to platforms owned by trusted third parties and
permissioned blockchains as well as permissionless blockchains.
    In the remainder of the article, Section 2 sets up the model, and 3, and 4 solve the
tokenless and tokenized economies, respectively. Section 5 discusses how tokens affect user
adoption and how endogenous adoption affects token price; Section 6 discusses alternative
solutions to platform adoption and trade-offs between scale and decentralization that can
potential limit the application of blockchain technologies in supporting tokenized platforms.


2     A Model of Platform Economy
    Consider a continuous-time economy where a continuum of agents of unit measure con-
duct peer-to-peer transactions on a blockchain platform or a general digital marketplace.


2.1    Platform and Agents

    The platform is characterized by At , the productivity that evolves according to a geo-
metric Brownian motion:
                                    dAt
                                        = µA dt +  A dZtA ,                                (1)
                                    At
where ZtA is a standard Brownian motion under the physical measure and µA and  A are
constant parameters. We interpret At broadly. A positive shock to At can reflect technolog-
ical advances, favorable regulatory changes, growing users' interests, and increasing variety
of activities feasible on the platform.

Preferences for platform transactions. The platform allows agents to conduct transac-
tions that are settled via a medium of exchange. We consider two cases for the medium: the
generic good, which is the numeraire, and the local platform currency (token).
    We use xi,t to denote the value of agent i's holdings of medium of exchange in units of the
numeraire good. Conditioning on participating on the platform, a platform user i derives a

                                               6
utility flow from her holdings of the medium of exchange, xi,t ,


                            dvi,t = (xi,t )1- (Nt At eui ) dt - dt - xi,t rdt .                           (2)


Next, we explain the three terms in (2) and later discuss agents' participation decision.
       The first term,
                                                        ui 
                                           x1 -
                                            i,t (Nt At e ) dt,                                            (3)

is the transactional benefits of xi,t , where Nt is the platform user base, ui is the agent's
type, At measures platform productivity, and   (0, 1) is a constant.6 Let Ut denote the
set of participating agents (with xi,t > 0), so formally, Nt  [0, 1] is the measure of Ut . We
choose this specification of utility flow with the following considerations. First, the utility
flow increases in Nt . It captures the positive user network effect, as it is easier to find a
transaction counterparty in a larger community. Second, the marginal utility decreases with
xi,t , captured by  > 0. The exponents of xi,t and Nt At eui sum up to one for analytical
convenience. Third, agents' transaction needs (or types), ui , are heterogeneous.7 Let G (u)
and g (u) denote the cross-sectional cumulative distribution function and density function of
ui , respectively. Both are continuously differentiable over the finite support [U , U ].
       To realize the transaction benefits given in (3), the agent needs to incur a flow cost 
per unit of time for platform participation corresponding to the second term in (2). For
example, transacting on the platform takes effort and attention. At any time t, agents may
choose not to participate and then collect no utility. Naturally, agents with sufficiently high
ui choose to join the platform, while agents with sufficiently low ui do not participate.
       In addition to , the agent has to incur an opportunity cost of rxi,t per unit of time
to realize the transactional benefits in (3). This cost is similar to those induced by the
cash-in-advance constraints in monetary models where the opportunity costs of conducting
transactions is the forgone interest payments on the money balance (e.g., Gal´
                                                                             i, 2015; Walsh,
   6
    Appendix A contains a theoretical foundation for this reduced-form flow utility.
   7
    For payment blockchains (e.g., Ripple), a high value of ui reflects agent i's urge to conduct an in-
ternational remittance. For smart-contracting blockchains (e.g., Ethereum), ui captures agent i's project
productivity. For decentralized computation (e.g., Dfinity) and data storage (e.g., Filecoin) applications, ui
corresponds to the need for secure and fast access to computing power and data.


                                                      7
2003). It also resembles the carry cost of cash holdings in corporate finance models that
emphasize external financing frictions (e.g., Bolton, Chen, and Wang, 2011; Li, 2017).


Valuing utilities from platform transactions. Because we consider a dynamic economy
of infinite horizon, the valuation of flow utilities from platform activities requires a stochastic
discount factor (SDF). For tractability, we consider the following widely-used specification
of SDF, which we denote by :

                                       d t
                                           = -rdt - dZt ,                                        (4)
                                        t

where r is the risk-free rate and  is the price of risk for systematic shock Zt under the
physical measure.8 The SDF is typically linked to agents' consumption dynamics, so by
specifying an exogenous SDF, we assume that agents' utility from platform activities consti-
tutes only a small part of their total utility. This echoes the models of an individual firm's
valuation where an exogenous SDF is directly parameterized (Chapter 7, Campbell, 2017).
      Let  denote the instantaneous correlation between the SDF shock and the platform
productivity shock At . A positive  implies a positive beta (Duffie, 2001). Indeed, the
usefulness and quality of a particular platform evolves with the economy, as agents discover
new ways to utilize the technology, which in turn depends on the progress of complementary
technologies. Macro and regulatory events may also affect the usage of a platform.
      It is more convenient to solve our model via the change-of-measure technique widely used
in the derivatives pricing literature (Duffie, 2001). By Girsanov's Theorem, we know that
under the risk-neutral measure, the Brownian motion driving the SDF is Zt that satisfies


                                        dZt = dZt + dt.                                          (5)


Therefore, under the risk-neutral measure, At follows

              dAt
                  = µA dt +  A dZtA = µA -  A dt +  A dZtA  µA dt +  A dZtA .                    (6)
              At
  8
    The standard no-arbitrage argument implies that the drift of the SDF has to equal to the negative
interest rate. See Duffie (2001) for a textbook treatment.


                                                 8
   Let yi,t denote agent i's (undiscounted) cumulative payoff from platform activities, which
depends on dvi,t (the transactional benefits defined in (2)) and may differ on platforms with
and without token as medium of exchange as will be specified shortly. Let E and E denote the
expectation under the physical and risk-neutral measure, respectively. Agent i maximizes
her life-time payoff,
                                                            
                                          t
                             E              dyi,t = E          e-rt dyi,t .                    (7)
                                  0       0             0

This equality follows from the change-of-measure technique. Throughout the remainder of
our paper, we conduct our analysis under the risk-neutral measure unless stated otherwise.



2.2     Tokenless and Tokenized Economies

Tokenless economy. On platforms with transactions settled by the numeraire good, agent
i's utility flow only depends on whether she chooses to be a platform user, and if she does,
the transactional benefits of holding xi,t units of goods as means of payment:


                dyi,t = max {0, max dvi,t }                                                    (8)
                                          xi,t


                        = max 0, max (xi,t )1- (Nt At eui ) -  - rxi,t         dt .            (9)
                                         xi,t



Here, the inner "max" operator gives the conditional demand xi,t if participating and the
outer "max" operator reflects agent i's option to leave the platform and obtain zero profit.
This tokenless model is analogous to the standard models of money holdings (e.g., Ljungqvist
and Sargent, 2004), given that the real value of money balance, xi,t , generates a flow utility via
(xi,t )1- (Nt At eui ) dt but induces a cost of forgone interests via xi,t rdt. Our novel modeling
ingredient is the user network effect--the positive externality of agents' adoption decision--
which is a defining feature of digital platforms.


Tokenized economy. In what follows, we introduce a native (crypto)currency on the
platform, i.e., the token. To conduct transactions on the platform, users are required to use



                                                  9
tokens.9 The value of agent i's token holdings, xi,t , satisfies the following identity:


                                                xi,t = Pt ki,t ,                                        (10)


where Pt is the token price in terms of the numeraire good and ki,t is the units of tokens.
The real (numeraire) value, xi,t = Pt ki,t , rather than the token units, ki,t , appears in the
transactional benefits because the transaction utility depends on the numeraire value of
goods and services that are transacted as in the standard monetary economic models.
       Without loss of generality, we write the equilibrium token price process as follows under
the risk-neutral measure:


                                     dPt = µt dt + t dZtA                                               (11)

                                           = P t µP         P   A
                                                  t dt + Pt t dZt .                                     (12)


Here, µt and t can be any admissible stochastic processes. (12) is a re-writing of (11) where


                                  µt = P t µP
                                            t        and                    P
                                                                    t = Pt  t ,                         (13)

and µP     P                                                              P     P
     t and t can follow any admissible processes. We choose to work with µt and t

rather than µt and t , because the former set of notations is more convenient especially when
we analyze our model's asset-pricing predictions such as the expected token return and token
return volatility. But we could have used µt and t to obtain the same solution.10
       Conditional on participating on the platform, agent i derives a total payoff that includes
the transactional benefits of token holdings, i.e., dvi,t , and also the investment payoff due to
endogenous token price change:


                                           dvi,t + ki,t Et [dPt ] .                                     (14)
   9
     In Appendix D, we generalize our model to incorporate agents' endogenous decisions on whether to use
the numeraire good or token as medium of exchange, and show that our results are robust.
  10
     Proposition B1 in Appendix B shows that Pt > 0 in equilibrium. Therefore, since Pt > 0, we can uniquely
infer µP    P
        t , t  from (µt , t ) or infer (µt , t ) from µP   P
                                                       t , t , so these two sets of notations are equivalent.




                                                      10
By substituting ki,t = xi,t /Pt into (14), we rewrite the total payoff:

                                                           Et [dPt ]
                                            dvi,t + xi,t             .                                    (15)
                                                              Pt

Using the definition µP
                      t dt  E [dPt ] /Pt , we can write the the total payoff as



                              dyi,t = max 0, max dvi,t + xi,t µP
                                                               t dt            ,                          (16)
                                                  xi,t



where the outer max accounts for agent i' option to leave the platform and achieve zero
profit. In contrast to (8) of the tokenless economy that contains only dvi,t (the transactional
benefits), token introduces an additional term xi,t µP
                                                     t dt due to the endogenous price variation.

       By substituting (2) into (16), we express dyi,t explicitly as follows:


               dyi,t = max 0, max (xi,t )1- (Nt At eui ) -  - r - µP
                                                                   t xi,t                    dt.          (17)
                                    xi,t



Introducing tokens changes the unit carry cost for holding transaction medium from rdt to
 r - µP
      t dt. Agents must hold a medium of exchange ( the numeraire good in the tokenless

economy, or token in the tokenized economy) for dt to conduct transactions.11 During this
holding period, in addition to incurring the opportunity cost of forgone interests, agents in
the tokenized economy are exposed to the endogenous variation of token price. This feature
is absent in our tokenless economy.


Markov equilibrium. We study a Markov equilibrium with At , the platform productivity,
as the state variable whose dynamics generate the rational-expectation agents' information
filtration. To focus on the dynamics of user adoption and demand, we fix the token supply
  11
    In blockchain-based systems, the holding period naturally arises because forging the ledger of transactions
takes time. For example, the Bitcoin blockchain requires 10-11 minutes to generate consensus on transactions.
This confirmation period is necessary for the finality of transactions as shown by Chiu and Koeppl (2017).




                                                         11
to a constant M .12 The market clearing condition is


                                             M=                  ki,t di,                              (18)
                                                        i[0,1]


where for those who do not participate, ki,t = 0.

Definition 1. A Markov equilibrium with state variable At is described by agents' decisions
and equilibrium token price such that the token market clearing condition given by (18) holds
and agents optimally decide to participate (or not) and choose token holdings.



3        Solution: Tokenless Economy
       In our tokenless economy, the numeraire good is the medium of exchange. Conditional
on joining the platform (i.e., xi,t > 0), the agent chooses xi,t to maximize (2), which implies:

                                                                     
                                                      Nt At e u i
                                       (1 - )                           = r,                           (19)
                                                        xi,t
the marginal benefit from transaction is equal to the carry cost of forgone interests on xi,t .
Rearranging the optimality condition, we have:

                                                                            1/
                                                        ui,t     1-
                                     xi,t   = Nt At e                                                  (20)
                                                                  r

and the maximized profit from participating on platform is then:

                                                                        1-

                                                 ui        1-            
                              dvi,t = Nt At e                                -  dt.                    (21)
                                                            r
  12
     This captures the majority real-world applications. More generally, blockchain technology allows supply
to be based on explicit rules. This can be accommodated in the model by adding in an exogenous token
inflation or deflation rates that are orthogonal to the endogenous adoption and token demand dynamics.




                                                         12
An agent participates only when dvi,t given in (21) is positive. That is, agent i participates
if and only if ui  uN T        NT
                    t , where ut  is the endogenous threshold given by:

                                                           1-                1-
                    uN
                     t
                       T
                         = - ln (Nt ) + ln           -                 ln                 .               (22)
                                             At                               r

Here, the superscript "N T " refers to the equilibrium value of the "no-token" (tokenless)
economy. Given the distribution of ui , G (ui ), the user base is thus given by:

                                                                         1-                   1-
    NtN T = 1 - G uN
                   t
                     T
                       = 1 - G - ln (Nt ) + ln                   -                ln                  .   (23)
                                                         At                                    r

(22) and (23) jointly determine uN
                                 t
                                   T
                                     and NtN T as functions of At .

Proposition 1 (Tokenless Equilibrium). In the Markov equilibrium with At being the
state variable, the user base NtN T and user type threshold uN
                                                             t
                                                               T
                                                                 solve (22) and (23). Addi-
tionally, the user base, NtN T , increases in At if the cross-sectional distribution of agent type,
G (u), has an increasing hazard rate.



4     Solution: Tokenized Economy
    Now consider a tokenized platform. As platform productivity At is the state variable,
all endogenous variables are functions of At in equilibrium. For example, Pt = P (At ). By
applying It^
           o's lemma to Pt = P (At ), we obtain:

                                         1                         2
         dPt = dP (At ) = P  (At )At µA + P  (At ) At  A                 dt + P  (At ) At  A dZtA .       (24)
                                         2

By matching the coefficients of dt and dZtA to (12), we obtain µP     P
                                                                t and t as functions of At :



                                        P  ( At )          1 P  (At )             2
                      µP    P
                       t = µ ( At ) =             At µ A +            At  A           .                   (25)
                                        P ( At )           2 P ( At )
and
                                 P                   P  ( At )
                                 t =  P ( At ) =               At  A .                                    (26)
                                                     P ( At )


                                                13
   With tokens, agent i's decision on the real balance of medium of exchange, inside the
inner max operator in (17), is similar to (19) of the tokenless economy, but with tokens, the
effective carry cost is now r - µP
                                 t and the optimality condition agents' token balance is:

                                                                
                                               N t At e u i
                                 (1 - )                            = r - µ P ( At ) ,                             (27)
                                                  x i,t


where the marginal benefit of transaction is equal to the carry cost. Rearranging the equa-
tion, we have:
                                                                                    1

                                                      ui          1-                
                                   xi,t   = Nt At e                                     .                         (28)
                                                               r - µ P ( At )
the maximized profit from participating on platform is then

                                                                                                    1-
                                      [dPt ]                       ui           1-                   
            max       dvi,t + xi,t Et            = Nt At e                                               -  dt.   (29)
             xi,t                      Pt                                    r - µ P ( At )

Substituting xi,t given in (28) into (17), we obtain the following user-type cutoff threshold


                                                                   1-                      1-
                    ut = - ln (Nt ) + ln                   -                   ln                          ,      (30)
                                               At                                       r - µ P ( At )

and because only agents with ui  ut will participate, the user base is then given by


                                               Nt = 1 - G ( u t ) .                                               (31)


Equations (30) and (31) solve ut = u (At ) and Nt = N (At ) as functions of At .
   Next, we derive an equilibrium token pricing formula. By using ki,t = xi,t /Pt and substi-
tuting (28) into the market clearing condition (18), we obtain:

                                                                                            1
                                  N ( At ) S ( A t ) At                  1-                 
                             Pt =                                                               ,                 (32)
                                          M                           r - µ P ( At )

where
                                                                  U
                                     S t  S ( At ) =                       eu dG (u)                              (33)
                                                                u (A t )




                                                           14
is the sum of all participating agents' eui , measuring the aggregate transaction needs. Indus-
try practices broadly corroborate the pricing formula (32). For example, as proxies for Nt
and St respectively, daily active addresses (DAA) and daily transaction volume (DTV) are
featured prominently in practitioners' token valuation framework.13 But instead of heuristi-
cally aggregating such inputs into a pricing formula, we derive the token pricing formula as
equilibrium outcome together with endogenous user adoption.
       By substituting (25) into the market clearing condition (32), we obtain:

                                                                                                 
                            1                             2               N ( At ) S ( At ) At
   rP (At ) = P (At ) At µ + P  (At ) At  A
                             A
                                                              + (1 - )                              P ( At ) .   (34)
                            2                                                 P ( At ) M

       While our token pricing equation (34) may appear similar to the Black-Scholes-type
differential equation for derivatives pricing, the underlying economic force in our model is
                                                          
                                             N t St A t
different. The "flow" term, (1 - )            Pt M
                                                               P (At ), in (34) comes from rearranging the
market clearing condition (32) and reflects the aggregation of agents' transactional demand
for tokens. The Black-Scholes equation does not feature such a flow term. Moreover, the
Black-Scholes equation has a "theta" term ­ the variation of derivative value over time ­
because of finite maturity, while (34) does not have such term because token does not have
maturity. Finally, platform productivity, At , the underlying fundamental that drives token
price, is not tradable, so the coefficient on P  (At ) is µA At , the drift of At under the risk-
neutral measure, instead of r in the case of derivatives on tradable underlying assets whose
risk-adjusted return must be r.14
       We solve the preceding ODE for P (At ) with the following boundary conditions. The
lower boundary is given by:
                                             lim P (At ) = 0 .                                                   (35)
                                            A t 0


As At = 0 is an absorbing state, the platform is not productive and no agent participates.
Therefore, the token price is zero. When At is sufficiently high, all agents participate. The
  13
     See, for example, the articile on token valuation, Today's Crypto Asset Valuation Frameworks , by Ashley
Lannquist at World Economic Forum (Blockchain and Digital Currency).
  14
     Appendix F2 provides a more detailed comparison between our token pricing equation (34) and the
Black-Scholes derivative pricing equation.




                                                          15
upper boundary, which we denote by A, corresponds to the minimal level of At to have full
adoption : Nt = 1. For At  A, the following Gordon Growth Formula for token price holds:

                                                                   1
                                               SAt        1-       
                                    P ( At ) =                         .                 (36)
                                               M         r - µA
where the aggregate transaction needs, St , is given by

                                                 U
                                         S           eu dG (u) ,                         (37)
                                                U


      The value-matching and smooth-pasting conditions hold at A:

                                                                           
                               P (A) = P (A) and P  (A) = P (A).                         (38)


      The next proposition summarizes the equilibrium features of tokenized economy.

Proposition 2 (Tokenized Equilibrium). Under the increasing hazard rate condition for
G (u) and other regularity conditions, the Markov equilibrium with At as the state variable
has the following properties:

  1. Token price P (At ) solves the ODE (34) subject to boundary conditions (35) and (38).
        µP     P
         t and t in the token price dynamics (12) are given by (25) and (26), respectively.


  2. Given the token price dynamics, agents participate if ui  ut , given by (30), and the
        user base is Nt = 1 - G (ut ), which increases in At and µP
                                                                  t .


  3. Conditional on participation, the value of agents' token holdings xi,t is given by (28),

        which increases in At and µP
                                   t .



      The tokenless and tokenized economies differ in agents' means of payment. As in the
cash-in-advance models (e.g., Gal´
                                 i, 2015; Walsh, 2003), the cost of conducting transactions is
comprised of the forgone interests on the balance of transaction medium.15 In the tokenless
economy, this carry cost is rdt, the risk-adjusted return of any tradable assets. In the
 15
      Appendix F1 compares our model setup with that of standard monetary models.

                                                    16
            date t                               date t + dt                          date t + 2dt         ...

                                                  dZtA > 0



                                             Productivity At+dt                    Productivity At+2dt 



         Transaction benefits dvi,t           Transaction benefits dvi,t+dt        Transaction benefits dvi,t+2dt



                                                User base Nt+dt                      User base Nt+2dt 

                                 µA > 0                                   µA > 0
                                 µP
                                  t > 0                                 µP
                                                                         t+dt>0
           User base Nt                       Token price Pt+dt                    Token price Pt+2dt 

Figure 1: Adoption-Accelerating Effect of Tokens. The black solid arrows point to the increases of
the expected future productivity A, which lead to higher transaction benefits of tokens, and in turn, larger
user bases N . The blue dotted arrows show that increases in user base result in even higher transaction
benefits due to the user network externality. Finally, more users drive up the token prices P in future dates,
which feed into a current expectation of price appreciation and greater adoption (red dash arrows).


tokenized economy, this carry cost is r - µP
                                           t dt due to the expected token return.
                                                                                  16
                                                                                     Agents
expect token price to appreciate when they expect higher future productivity (and thus larger
user base and stronger token demand).17 Figure 1 illustrates the intertemporal feedback
mechanism from token price dynamics to user adoption.
    In sum, tokens accelerate user adoption by capitalizing the expected user-base growth
into an expected token return, reducing the effective carry cost. In contrast, the numeraire
good as means of payment does not deliver any financial return to offset the carry cost.18
    16
       As shown by the optimality condition (27), token delivers a dominated risk-adjusted financial return,
µPt  <  r, but compensates transactional benefits. Therefore, holding token is still optimal for users.
    17
       We note that a predetermined token supply schedule is important. If token supply can arbitrarily increase
ex post, then the expected token price appreciation is delinked from the the productivity growth and the
resulting increase of user base and token demand. Pre-determinacy or commitment be credibly achieved
through the decentralized consensus mechanism empowered by the blockchain technology. In contrast,
traditional monetary policy has commitment problem (Barro and Gordon, 1983).
    18
       Admittedly, an expected capital loss, µP
                                              t < 0, discourages adoption by increasing the carry cost. In
Appendix D, we extend our model: agents can choose between the numeraire good and token as transaction
medium rather than always use either the numeraire good (Section 3) or token (Section 4). In this more
general setting, agents only use tokens when µP t > 0, and thus, by introducing tokens, platforms accelerate
adoption by simply expanding agents' choice set, allowing them to pick the currency with the lowest carry
cost.



                                                      17
5     Roles of Tokens
    In this section, we first present the planner's solution and then use it as a benchmark to
analyze the roles of tokens in the tokenless and tokenized economies.


5.1    The Planner's Solution

    The planner's problem is subject to the same platform transaction technology faced by
users in the tokenless economy. However, unlike the individual users, the planner solves the
adoption problem by taking into consideration the positive externalities of agents' adoption
decisions. The present value of aggregate platform transactional benefits is given by:

                                          
                                     E         e-rt          dvi,t di ,                                  (39)
                                         t=0           iUt


where E[ · ] is the expectation under the risk-neutral measure and dvi,t is given in (2).
    We solve (39) as follows. First, we show that similar to the tokenless economy, the set
of users, Ut , is characterized by a cutoff threshold: Ut = {i : ui,t  uP L
                                                                        t }, which implies

Nt = 1 - G(uP L
            t ). This follows from that it is in the planner's interest to bring agents

with higher ui on the platform for a given Nt . Second, solving the socially optimal demand,
xi,t , boils down to maximizing dvi,t agent-by-agent, yielding the solution given by (20). By
aggregating dvi,t over all participating agents, we obtain

                                1-                                         1-

                      ui   1-                                  1-           
            Nt At e                  -  di = Nt                                 At         eui di -  .   (40)
      iUt                   r                                   r                    iUt



As (40) is linear in Nt , the planner chooses full participation by setting Nt = 1, if the
platform productivity is sufficiently high, i.e., if and only if At > AP L , where

                                                               1-         -1
                                    PL                1-        
                                A        =                          S                                    (41)
                                                       r


and S is given by (37).



                                                      18
Figure 2: S -shaped User Adoption Curve in Tokenized and Tokenless Economies. This graph
shows that the use base, Nt , in the tokenized economy (blue solid curve) and tokenless economy (red dash
line) as functions of the logarithmic productivity ln (At ). The gray scattered plot is based on data of
normalized active user addresses (details in Appendix C). The vertical green dash line marks the level of
productivity, beyond which the planner chooses full adoption, and below which the planner chooses zero
adoption.


5.2       User Adoption Growth

       Figure 2 reports the adoption dynamics from our numerical solutions for the tokenized
economy, the tokenless economy, and the planner's problem. The blue solid line in Figure 2
shows that the user base Nt in the tokenized economy is an S -shaped function of ln (At ).19
When the platform's productivity At is low, the user base Nt barely responds to changes
in At . In contrast, when At is moderately high, Nt responds much more to changes in At .
The growth of user base feeds onto itself ­ the more agents join the ecosystem, the higher
transaction surplus each derives. User adoption eventually slows down when the pool of
newcomers gets exhausted. We also plot the scattered data points of active user addresses,
our proxy for Nt , that guide our choices of parameter values. In Appendix C, we detail the
parameter choices and data sample construction.
       By comparing the adoption dynamics in the tokenized and tokenless economies, we see
that the tokenized economy has faster adoption than the tokenless economy in Figure 2.
  19
    The curve starts at ln (At ) = -48.35 (At = 1e - 21), a number we choose to be close to the left boundary,
zero. The curve ends at ln (At ) = 18.42 (At = 1e8), the touching point between P (At ) and P (At ).



                                                     19
Introducing tokens effectively lowers the carry cost from rdt to (r - µP
                                                                       t )dt, because, under

the current parameter values, µP
                               t > 0. Tokens are of limited supply and are required for

transactions, users expect tokens to appreciate when they expect adoption to grow.
   We also plot in Figure 2 the planner's solution via the dash vertical line at ln AP L ,
which is given by (41). Recall that the planner chooses full adoption if At  AP L and zero
adoption otherwise. Relative to the planner's solution, a tokenless economy features under-
adoption as its Nt is below that of the planner's solution (100%) when At  AP L .20 This is
because agents do not internalize the the positive network externalities of adoption.
   Introducing tokens lifts up the adoption curve relative to that of the tokenless economy
but is still below the full-adoption level for At  AP L . However, for At < AP L , though
not sharply visible in the figure, the tokenized economy features a positive level of adoption
while the planner chooses zero adoption. Here by introducing tokens, we change the payment
technology that is accessible to platform users. Even for the planner, requiring agents to hold
the means of payment incurs a carry cost of rdt per numeraire value, but when tokens are
available (and in the numerical solution, µP                                         P
                                           t > 0), the carry cost is reduced to r - µt dt,

and thus, the adoption level is higher. For tokens to accelerate adoption, there must be a
market where tokens are traded and agents can form their expectation of token price change,
µP
 t . Therefore, tokens reduce the carry cost of payment by capitalizing the future growth of

user base, and this mechanism does not exist in the planner's economy where agents cannot
trade tokens and decide on xi,t voluntarily.
   Among the purported reasons for this common practice of introducing tokens, entrepreneurs
foremost believe that using tokens can "bootstrap" the community. Heuristically, practition-
ers have argued that tokens help grow the ecosystem and allow all participants to benefit
from the growth prospect of platforms, although no formal analysis has been provided. Our
paper exactly examines this argument formally.




                                               20
Figure 3: User-Adoption-Volatility Reduction Effect. Panel A plots the volatility of user base, t
                                                                                                N
                                                                                                  , in
the tokenized (blue solid curve) and tokenless (red dotted curve) economies as functions of Nt , respectively.
Panel B shows that the expected token return under the risk-neutral measure, µMt , as a function of logarithmic
productivity, ln (At ). The black dotted line marks the (risk-neutral) expected growth rate of At , µA .


5.3       User Adoption Volatility

       In equilibrium, all endogenous variables are functions of At , the state variable, including
Nt = N (At ). Therefore, the dynamics of Nt can be written as


                                            dNt = µN      N   A
                                                   t dt + t dZt ,                                              (42)


where both the drift µN    N                     N   N
                      t = µ (At ) and volatility t =  (At ) are functions of At .
                                                                                  21
                                                                                     We
          N                                                                    N
thus plot t against Nt in Panel A of Figure 3. Doing this allows us to compare t of the two
economies at the same stage of adoption Nt .22 Both curves start and end at zero, consistent
with the S-shaped adoption dynamics in Figure 2. A key result is that the tokenized has a
      N
lower t . The intuition is as follows.
       First recall that Nt increases in At (through the transactional benefit) and µP
                                                                                     t (through
                                                                              N
the carry cost reduction) as shown in Proposition 2. Therefore, to understand t , i.e., how
Nt responds to shocks, we examine how At and µP
                                              t respond to shocks. Consider a negative

  20
     Proposition B2 in Appendix B shows that AN T , the lowest value of At where NtN T > 0, is below AP L .
  21                                             N
     Proposition B3 in Appendix B solves t         for the tokenized and tokenless economies and provides an
analytical characterization of how tokens affect the user-base volatility.
  22
     The adoption is either zero or full in the planner's solution so its volatility is not economically interesting.


                                                         21
shock, dZtA < 0. The platform productivity is thus lower, reducing the transactional benefit
and hence Nt . How µP               A
                    t responds to dZt < 0 depends on the long-run prospect of adoption.

   A smaller current user base implies a greater potential of future adoption (i.e., 100% - Nt )
because under the current parameter choices for our numerical solution, µA > 0 and Nt
reaches 100% in the long run. Therefore, agents expect a stronger future token demand and
a stronger token price appreciation (i.e., an increase of µP
                                                           t ). In sum, while the decrease of

At reduces Nt , the increase of µP
                                 t dampens the reduction, making Nt less responsive to the

shock. This buffering effect of µP                                            N
                                 t is absent in the tokenless economy, so its t is higher.

   Panel B of Figure 3 shows that µP
                                   t declines in ln (At ), which generates the previously

discussed user-base stabilizing effect of tokens. When At (and thus, Nt ) is low, token price
is expected to increase at a faster rate, reflecting the potential future adoption. As At and
Nt grow, the pool of agents who have not adopted (i.e., 100% - Nt ) shrinks so the expected
token appreciation declines.
                       N
   We can also compare t of the tokenized and tokenless economies over different values
of At instead of Nt . For the same level of At , as the tokenized economy has a larger Nt , it is
                                                        N
likely to have a larger variation in Nt (i.e., a larger t ) than the tokenless one. Therefore,
                     N              N
instead of comparing t , we compare t /Nt , the volatilities of user-base growth rate (i.e.,
dNt /Nt ). Proposition B4 in Appendix B2 shows that when the two economies have the same
productivity, the tokenized economy has a smaller volatility of user-base growth rate.
   This user-base stabilizing effect also holds under µA < 0, which implies a long-run adop-
tion level of 0%. When Nt declines due to the decrease of At , µP
                                                                t increases and dampens the

reduction of Nt because the potential of token demand (and price) to decline further (i.e.,
Nt - 0%) is smaller. To sum up, µP
                                 t is a counter-cyclical force in the tokenized economy: it

increases when dZtA < 0 and decreases when dZ A > 0, dampening Nt 's to shocks.
   So far, we have only considered a constant drift of At . The user-base stabilizing effect of
tokens may not hold under an alternative specification of productivity dynamics. Consider
a time-varying drift of At that follows a mean-reverting process and loads on a standard




                                               22
                             A
Brownian motion shock dZtµ ,

                                                         A     A
                             dµA    ¯ A - µA
                               t =  µ      t dt + 
                                                   µ
                                                     dZtµ ,                               (43)


where  > 0. Then the Markov equilibrium shall have two state variables, At and µA
                                                                                t .

Consider the scenario where the realized productivity shock is negative: dZtA < 0. As long
       A
as dZtµ and dZtA are positively correlated, µA
                                             t is expected to decline. Foreseeing a slower

growth of productivity, user base, and token demand, agents expect a decline of µP
                                                                                 t , and thus,

become more reluctant to participant. This amplifies the initial negative impact of dZtA < 0
on Nt via At . Due to the lack of empirical studies on tokenized platforms' fundamentals, our
modelling of At is guided by parsimony and how the model's adoption curve fits the data (see
Appendix C). Our discussion of alternative µA
                                            t specifications suggests that whether tokens

amplify or dampen the response of Nt to variations of platform fundamentals sheds light on
the underlying dynamics of platforms' fundamentals.


5.4    Token Price Dynamics under Endogenous User Adoption

   In this section, we discuss how endogenous user adoption leads to nonlinear price dynam-
ics that are broadly consistent with empirical observations. The token price, P (At ), and user
base, N (At ), are functions of platform productivity, At , the state variable. Figure 4 plots
the joint dynamics of these two key observables. Token price increases sharply with adoption
in the early stages, changes gradually in the intermediate stage, and speeds up again once
the user base reaches a sufficiently high level. The two price run-ups in the early and final
stages of adoption correspond to the slow user base growth in these stages relative to token
price changes. Consistent with our model's prediction, Liu and Tsyvinski (2018) find that
the value of cryptocurrencies is significantly correlated with the growth of user networks.
   This figure helps us understand the cross-sectional differences in token pricing. Consider
blockchain platforms categorized in term of their adoption stages: early, intermediate, and
late. For two blockchain platforms in the early stage, a small difference of Nt between them
can generate a very large difference in the market capitalization of tokens (Pt M ), as seen in


                                              23
Figure 4: Token Price Dynamics over Adoption Stages. This graph plots the log token price over
adoption stages, Nt (blue solid curve), and data as scattered dots.


Figure 4. Essentially the same result holds in the late stage. In contrast, in the intermediate
stage, even a large difference of Nt between the two platforms only yields a small difference
of ln(Pt ). Shams (2019) documents that user network externality is a key factor driving the
cross-sectional variation in cryptocurrency price dynamics.
   Appnedix E provides more asset-pricing predictions. In Appendix E.1, we explore the
implications of endogenous user adoption on the volatility of token price. The network effects
amplify the transmission of At shocks to the transactional benefits of token and its price.
The mechanism is related to the literature on strategic complementarity and fragility (e.g.,
Goldstein and Pauzner, 2005). Our analysis have so far assumed that platform productivity
shock commands a constant risk premium. In Appendix E.2, we follow P´
                                                                    astor and Veronesi
(2009) by modelling the correlation between the SDF shock and At shock as an increasing
function of Nt , which captures the rising systematic risk of widely adopted platforms. The
resulting Nt -dependent risk premium induces a bubble-like behavior of token price ­ a gradual
run-up followed by an eventual decline.




                                              24
Figure 5: User Subsidy vs. Token. This figure plots Nt for the tokenized economy (blue solid curve),
the tokenless economy (red dotted curve), and the tokenless economy with subsidy  = 0.5 (green dash
curve).


6      Extensions and Discussions

6.1     Subsidy as an Alternative Solution to User Adoption

     In this subsection, we compare tokens with a traditional alternative solution to network
adoption ­ user subsidy (Rochet and Tirole, 2006) ­ and discuss the associated technical
and financial considerations that affect the implementation.
     Let  denote the lump-sum subsidy that the platform gives to a user for platform par-
ticipation per unit of time. Given this subsidy, agent i solves the following problem at each
t:
                              dyi,t = max     0, max [dt + dvi,t ] ,                           (44)
                                                xi,t >0


where dvi,t is given in (2). Without this subsidy, this objective function is the same as (2)
in the tokenless economy. By combining the subsidy  with the participation cost , we can
equivalently interpret introducing  as reducing the participation cost from  to  - .
     Panel A of Figure 5 compares the adoption dynamics of token-based economy (the solid
blue curve), the tokenless economy (the dotted red curve), and the tokenless economy with
subsidy  = 0.5 (the dash green curve). Here we allow a sufficiently generous subsidy that


                                                25
effectively reduces agents' cost of participation by half. In this case, subsidy lifts up the
adoption curve, but it is still below what tokens can achieve.


Charging fees on profits. One question remains: How to finance the subsidies paid to
users? Subsidies are often made possible by charging fees to users. One way to introduce
fees in our analysis is via a standard proportional tax, t , which can be time-varying and
state-dependent. Given t , agent i solves the following modified problem:


         dyi,t = max 0, (1 - t ) max (xi,t )1- (Nt At eui ) dt - ( - )dt - xi,t rdt         .       (45)
                                   xi,t



As the fee is charged on the maximized profit, introducing t does not affect agent i's choice
of xi,t and adoption decision.23
       The fee charged on users, t > 0, can be set to finance the subsidy:


         t         max dt + (xi,t )1- (Nt At eui ) dt - dt - xi,t rdt dG (ui ) = Nt dt,             (46)
             ui ut xi,t >0


where the left side gives the total fees collected from users and the right side is the total
subsidy to users. For i to be feasible, it has to be smaller than 100%. In the early stage
where At is sufficiently low, the t implied by the subsidy can be greater than 100% and thus
infeasible. In contrast, tokens do not have this problem. The adoption-accelerating effect is
active even when At is extremely low. In fact, as show by Panel B of Figure 3, the expected
token return, µP
               t , is larger when At and Nt are smaller, and thereby, the future potential of

adoption, i.e., 100% - Nt , is larger. This is one advantage of tokens over subsidies.
       Second, implementing this tax-subsidy scheme can be more difficult than tokens. Agents
may not truthfully report their profits from platform activities because agents' type, ui , can
be private information. Incomplete information is a classic challenge recognized by stud-
ies on optimal taxation in the public finance literature (e.g., Mirrlees, 1971). Moreover, our
analysis assumes that agents receive subsidy only if they participate. If agents can obtain the
subsidy and fake participation, the subsidy becomes a pure outflow of the platform and does
  23
    If the maximized profit is positive when t = 0, it is still positive when t  (0, 1) and agent i still
participates. This result resembles the standard result that a firm is neutral to profit taxes.


                                                   26
not induce adoption. While by improving transparency, blockchain technology can poten-
tially mitigate but cannot fully eliminate these frictions. Therefore, from an implementation
perspective, token is a more operational mechanism to induce early adoption.


Charging fees on xi,t . The platform may also directly charge fees on the value of users'
holdings of means of payment:


     dyi,t = max 0, max (xi,t )1- (Nt At eui ) dt - ( - )dt - xi,t rdt - xi,t t dt      .   (47)
                     xi,t >0



Here in addition to the subsidy term which effectively lowers the participation cost to ( -
)dt, the fee, t xi,t , effectively increases the carry cost from rdt to (r + t )dt. In addition,
the platform also faces a new budget constraint:


                                t dt           xi,t dG (ui ) = Nt dt.                       (48)
                                       ui ut


Here t distorts agents' choice of xi,t . Although easier to implement, this alternative fee-
subsidy is subject to the same problem we discussed earlier: it is only feasible when At is
sufficiently large. In contrast, tokens accelerate adoption across all values of At .


Intertemporal fee-subsidy scheme. So far we have only considered static fee-subsidy
scheme. Dynamic schemes are more flexible, but their applicability may be significantly
compromised by financial constraints. An intertemporal transfer, subsidizing users in earlier
stages (i.e., when At is low) and charging fees in later stages (i.e., when At is high), requires
external financing to fund early-stage subsidy. Therefore, financial frictions may arise, due
to asymmetric information on the flow of fees and platform managers' moral hazard in
administrating the fee-based payouts to investors.


Subsidies under incomplete information. Agents' adoption decisions feature strategic
complementarity, but given At and µP
                                   t , the assumption of monotonic hazard rate of G (u)

guarantees a unique Nt > 0 in equilibrium (see Proposition 2). Once we relax this assump-
tion, there can exist multiple pairs of Nt and ut that satisfy (30) and (31). To select the

                                                  27
equilibrium user base, one may take a global game approach (e.g., Carlsson and van Damme,
1993; Goldstein and Pauzner, 2005; Morris and Shin, 1998). For example, agents may receive
noisy and correlated signals of platform productivity.24 In this case, user subsidies, by effec-
tively changing the participation cost, can potentially improve the coordination outcome.25
A fruitful direction of future research is to investigate how tokens and subsidies can be jointly
introduced to stimulate adoption and address coordination failure.


Subsidies and user-base volatility. Finally, we compare the impact of tokens and sub-
sidies on the user-base volatility. In Section 5.3, we show that tokens reduce the user-base
volatility. Alternatively, platforms may conduct counter-cyclical subsidies, i.e., increasing
subsidies following negative shocks while decreasing subsidies following positive shocks. This
is analogous to the counter-cyclical government expenditures as automatic stabilizers. How-
ever, to implement such state-contingent subsidy schemes, external funds are likely to be
necessary because precisely when At and the aggregate profits (or tax base) on the platform
are low, subsidies are high and have to be externally financed. Therefore, the effectiveness of
this alternative mechanism depends on how severe the financing frictions are. In comparison,
the stabilizing effect of tokens is always at work without requiring external financing.


6.2       Scalability and Decentralization

       So far, our analysis applies to both centralized and decentralized platforms. To provide a
more balanced view of blockchains' potential, we now highlight important tradeoffs concern-
ing a salient feature of blockchains: the (relatively) decentralized nature of record-keeping.
For clear illustration, we focus on a tokenless economy.26


Generalizing agent's payoff. Specifically, we generalize the agent's flow payoff (condi-
tional on participation) given in (8) to account for the effects of decentralization and scaling
  24
     One may assume that the productivity is observed immediately after agents make decisions on adoption
and token holdings, so the model features a tractable, static form of incomplete information.
  25
     This is analogous to government inventions that affect the parameters of individuals' decision making
(e.g., Bebchuk and Goldstein, 2011).
  26
     The tokenized economy features similar tradeoffs, but the endogenous time-variation of µPt precludes a
pure analytical characterization.

                                                    28
as follows:
                                                                   )dt .
                                   max dvi,t + F (Nt , xi,t ; , , N                                   (49)
                                   xi,t >0

                                        ), captures the agent's preference (denoted by ) for
Here, the new term, F (Nt , xi,t ; , , N
decentralization (denoted by ), as well as her disutility from congestion (which is negatively
                        ) and from consensus delays (which is increasing in decentralization
related to scalability N
).
                                                        and weakly decreasing in Nt , for
     We only require F to be weakly increasing in  and N
a given level of decentralization . For illustration, we consider:


                                          ) =  - c[Nt - N
                      F (Nt , xi,t ; , , N               ]+ - xi,t h() ,                              (50)


where h () > 0. The first term is the agent's additional utility flow from her preference for
decentralization, for example, due to the reduction of single points of failure or intermediary
rent (Chen, Cong, and Xiao, 2019). The second term describes disutility from congestion
when the user-base is sufficiently large (e.g., Huberman, Leshno, and Moallemi, 2019; Easley,
O'Hara, and Basu, 2019). This term captures the potential negative network effect for a
relatively decentralized blockchain. The last term reflects that a more decentralized network
is more costly for an agent with a larger choice of xi,t . This is because the more decentralized
a network is, the longer it takes to reach consensus (e.g., Hinzen, John, and Saleh, 2019).


Adoption trajectory. Conditional on participating on the platform, the agent's optimal
holdings of the medium of exchange in units of the numeraire good, xi,t , satisfies the first-
order condition:

                                                                                             1/
                                                                                     1-
   (1 - )(xi,t )- (Nt At eui ) - r - h() = 0                 xi,t = Nt At e
                                                                            ui,t
                                                                                                  .   (51)
                                                                                   r + h()

Therefore, an agent would participate if the maximized profit is non-negative:

                                                1-
                                                 
                                       1-                            ] +  0.
                   N t At e u i                      -  +  - c[Nt - N                                 (52)
                                      h() + r


                                                     29
By following essentially the same argument in Section 3, we obtain the following equilibrium
condition for Nt :

                                                    ]+
                                       -  + c[Nt - N                     1-              1-
  1 - Nt = G - ln (Nt ) + ln                                       -              ln                      (53)
                                          At                                           r + h()

                                                      , and h(). An increase in  or N
Comparing (53) with (23), we notice the effects of , N                              

weakly reduces the right side of (53), which implies that the equilibrium Nt has to weakly
increase. In other words, agents' preference for decentralization and efforts to improving
scalability (such as increasing block size without reducing network security) would positively
impact the adoption trajectory. The effect of decentralization on adoption trajectory is
ambiguous because on the one hand, agents prefer decentralization, but on the other hand,
an increase in decentralization might create a large enough increase in consensus delay that
adoption drops.


Designer's problem and scale-decentralization tradeoff. We recognize that it is tech-
nologically infeasible or economically very expensive to achieve high decentralization and
large scale at the same time. For example, to reach consensus on a decentralized/permissionless
blockchain (across the nodes of the record-keeper network through costly protocols such as
proof-of-work) takes time, which inevitably constrains the transaction processing scale.27
    To model this tradeoff, we let the designer choose a system with decentralization  and
             . To do so, the designer incurs a cost C (, N
scalability N                                             ; a), which is increasing in  and
 .28 Here a measures her attribute, e.g., her skill at scaling traditional business or expertise
N
   27
      As another example, to maintain a decentralized consensus system with 1,000 nodes, a traditionally
centralized designer such as Facebook may get other institutions to act as record-keepers and use a Practical
Byzantine Fault Tolerance protocol that scale more cheaply than PoW protocols which is extremely costly
in terms of energy consumption and requires the entrant to pay the nodes through large mining rewards, but
would have greater difficulties to decentralize or to convince the users that they are decentralized, relative
to entrant blockchain startups such as Ethereum. Such issues are exactly what the LIBRA project is facing.
   28       ; a) could be the present value of the stream of future costs of maintaining  and N
      C (, N                                                                                     . One example
                   2 3    3
                          N                                                                             for the
is C (, N ; a) = a  + a + 3N , where the exponent 3 is to guarantee that the optimal  and N
designer are bounded above. In fact, we could equivalently specify that the designer faces a constraint that
pins down the production possibility frontier, such as H (, N    ; a) = B - C (, N  ; a), where B can be viewed
as a total budget or labor to be allocated to develop decentralization and scalability and C (, N    ; a) would
correspond to the cost. The analysis is similar and the comparative statics we care about remain the same.



                                                      30
at decentralization technology. For example, Visa. Inc is very efficient at conducting large-
scale business transactions (large a) whereas Ethereum is known for well-designed consensus
protocols which attract users who value decentralization (small a). Naturally, their different
attributes lead to different choices of scalability and decentralization.
                                                        and  which maximize the following:
       Specifically, the designer chooses the optimal N

                                 1-
       
                       1-         
                                                                        ]+ dt - C (, N
                                                                                      ; a), (54)
          e-rt Nt                     At         eui di -  +  - c[Nt - N
  t=0                 h() + r              iUt



where the first term is the present value of aggregate transaction surplus (see, (39) and (40)),
and the last term reflects the designer's cost.
                                                                             ,
       In practice, the marginal cost of increasing the scalability/capacity N          C
                                                                                        ,
                                                                                        N
                                                                                             is lower for
a more reputable traditional designer (higher value of the attribute a in our convention,
                                           2C
think about VISA). In other words,           
                                           a N
                                                  < 0. Similarly, the marginal cost of increasing the
                       C
decentralization ,     
                         ,   is lower for an entrant with greater expertise at designing decentral-
ized protocols (lower value of the attribute a in our convention, think about Ethereum). In
                 2C
other words,     a 
                      > 0. Moreover, current technology dictates that it is more costly to scale
                                                                             2C
business on a decentralized system than on a centralized system               
                                                                             N
                                                                                     0 .29
       Concerning the ideal scale-decentralization choice, we first note that (54) exhibits nega-
                                                               , and weakly negative cross
tive cross-partial in a and , positive cross-partial in a and N
            and . Applying monotone comparative statics results, e.g., Theorem 4.1 in
partial in N
Athey, Milgrom, and Roberts (1998), we conclude that the designer's optimal  is de-
                                  is increasing in a. In other words, a more reputable
creasing in a while the optimal N
traditional designer (bigger a) optimally implements a system that is bigger in scale but less
decentralized.
  29
    More generally, to capture these observations, we can assume that C has strictly increasing differences
                                                     , and increasing differences in N
in a and , strictly decreasing differences in a and N                                 and .




                                                     31
7     Conclusion
    We provide a tractable dynamic equilibrium model of token pricing and platform adop-
tion. Platforms create value by supporting specific economic activities and platform tokens
derive value by enabling transactions among heterogeneous users. As a result, token value
reflects users' endogenous participation and the associated network externality effects. En-
dogenous user base also plays a critical role in explaining the cross-section variation of token
pricing, the dynamics of token price volatility, and the run-up and crash of token prices.
    By comparing platforms with and without tokens, we show that introducing tokens low-
ers the effective carry cost of conducting platform transactions and hence accelerates the
adoption of productive platforms. Introducing tokens also reduces the volatility of user
base because agents' expectation of long-term growth in token value weakens the impact of
temporary productivity shocks on the user base.
    A key assumption in our model is that the token market is fully liquid. However, the
token market may be illiquid especially at early stages of platform adoption. We leave in-
corporating token market illiquidity into our model for future research. Another interesting
extension of our model is to combine our analysis of user activities with the design of plat-
form infrastructure (e.g., blockchain protocol design in Fanti, Kogan, and Viswanath, 2019).
Finally, tokens may influence platform competition as users compare platforms in both their
current productivities and the effective carry costs of conducting transactions.




                                              32
References
Alvarez, Fernando, and Francesco Lippi, 2013, The demand of liquid assets with uncertain lumpy
  expenditures, Journal of Monetary Economics 60, 753 ­ 770.
Athey, Susan, Paul Milgrom, and John Roberts, 1998, Robust comparative statics,
  Manuscript, Department of Economics, Harvard University http://kuznets. fas. harvard. edu/~
  athey/draftmonograph98. pdf.
Athey, Susan, Ivo Parashkevov, Vishnu Sarukkai, and Jing Xia, 2016, Bitcoin pricing, adoption,
  and usage: Theory and evidence, Working Paper.
Balvers, Ronald J, and Bill McDonald, 2017, Designing a global digital currency, Working Paper.
Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon, 1983, A positive theory of monetary policy in a natural
  rate model, Journal of Political Economy 91, 589­610.
Baumol, William J., 1952, The transactions demand for cash: An inventory theoretic approach,
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 66, 545­556.
Bebchuk, Lucian A, and Itay Goldstein, 2011, Self-fulfilling credit market freezes, Review of Fi-
  nancial Studies 24, 3519­3555.
Biais, Bruno, Christophe Bisiere, Matthieu Bouvard, and Catherine Casamatta, 2019, The
  blockchain folk theorem, The Review of Financial Studies 32, 1662­1715.
Biais, Bruno, Christophe Bisi`
                             ere, Matthieu Bouvard, Catherine Casamatta, and Albert Menkveld,
  2018, Equilibrium Bitcoin pricing, Working paper Toulouse School of Economics.
Bolton, Patrick, Hui Chen, and Neng Wang, 2011, A unified theory of tobin's q, corporate invest-
  ment, financing, and risk management, The Journal of Finance 66, 1545­1578.
Bond, Philip, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein, 2012, The real effects of financial markets, Annual
  Review of Financial Economics 4, 339­360.
Brunnermeier, Markus K, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A macroeconomic model with a financial
  sector, American Economic Review 104, 379­421.
Campbell, John Y., 2017, Financial Decisions and Markets: A Course in Asset Pricing (Princeton
  University Press).
Carlsson, Hans, and Eric van Damme, 1993, Global games and equilibrium selection, Econometrica
  61, 989­1018.
Catalini, Christian, and Joshua S Gans, 2018, Initial coin offerings and the value of crypto tokens,
  Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Chen, Long, Lin William Cong, and Yizhou Xiao, 2019, A brief introduction to blockchain eco-
  nomics, Working Paper.
Chiu, Jonathan, and Thorsten V Koeppl, 2017, The economics of cryptocurrencies­Bitcoin and
  beyond, Working Paper.
Chod, Jiri, and Evgeny Lyandres, 2018, A theory of ICOs: Diversification, agency, and asymmetric
  information, Working paper Boston University Questrom School of Business.
Christiano, LawrenceJ., Martin Eichenbaum, and CharlesL. Evans, 2005, Nominal rigidities and
  the dynamic effects of a shock to monetary policy, Journal of Political Economy 113, 1­45.
Cochrane, John H., 2018, The Bitcoin market isn't irrational, Chicago Booth Review.



                                                33
Cong, Lin William, and Zhiguo He, 2018, Blockchain disruption and smart contracts, Forthcoming,
  Review of Financial Studies.
       , and Jiasun Li, 2018, Decentralized mining in centralized pools, Working Paper.
D´
 ecamps, Jean-Paul, Thomas Mariotti, Jean-Charles Rochet, and St´   ephane Villeneuve, 2011, Free
  cash flow, issuance costs, and stock prices, The Journal of Finance 66, 1501­1544.
Duffie, Darrell, 1990, Chapter 3 money in general equilibrium theory, Handbook of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 1, 81­100.
       , 2001, Dynamic Asset Pricing Theory (Princeton university Press).
Easley, David, Maureen O'Hara, and Soumya Basu, 2019, From mining to markets: The evolution
  of Bitcoin transaction fees, Journal of Financial Economics.
Fanti, Giulia, Leonid Kogan, and Pramod Viswanath, 2019, Economics of proof-of-stake payment
  systems, Working paper.
Feenstra, Robert C., 1986, Functional equivalence between liquidity costs and the utility of money,
  Journal of Monetary Economics 17, 271 ­ 291.
Freeman, Scott, and Finn E. Kydland, 2000, Monetary aggregates and output, American Economic
  Review 90, 1125­1135.
Gal´
   i, Jordi, 2015, Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the
  New Keynesian Framework and Its Applications Second edition . No. 10495 in Economics Books
  (Princeton University Press).
Garratt, Rodney, and Neil Wallace, 2018, Bitcoin 1, Bitcoin 2,....: An experiment in privately
  issued outside monies, Economic Inquiry 56, 1887­1897.
Goldstein, Itay, Deeksha Gupta, and Ruslan Sverchkov, 2019, Initial coin offerings as a commitment
  to competition, Discussion paper, Carnegie Mellon University and University of Pennsylvania The
  Wharton School.
Goldstein, Itay, and Ady Pauzner, 2005, Demand­deposit contracts and the probability of bank
  runs, the Journal of Finance 60, 1293­1327.
Griffin, John M, and Amin Shams, 2018, Is Bitcoin really un-tethered?, Working Paper.
Harrison, J Michael, and David M Kreps, 1978, Speculative investor behavior in a stock market
  with heterogeneous expectations, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 92, 323­336.
He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2011, A Model of Capital and Crises, The Review of
  Economic Studies 79, 735­777.
       , 2013, Intermediary asset pricing, American Economic Review 103, 732­70.
Hinzen, Franz J, Kose John, and Fahad Saleh, 2019, Proof-of-works limited adoption problem,
  NYU Stern School of Business.
Hu, Albert, Christine Parlour, and Uday Rajan, 2018, Cryptocurrencies: Stylized facts on a new
  investible instrument, Working paper University of California Berkeley.
Huberman, Gur, Jacob D Leshno, and Ciamac C Moallemi, 2019, An economic analysis of the
  Bitcoin payment system, .
Jackson, Lloyd K, 1968, Subfunctions and second-order ordinary differential inequalities, Advances
  in Mathematics 2, 307­363.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, The aggregate demand for treasury
  debt, Journal of Political Economy 120, 233­267.

                                                34
Li, Jiasun, and William Mann, 2018, Initial coin offering and platform building, Working Paper.
Li, Ye, 2017, Procyclical finance: The money view, Dice center working paper, The Ohio State
   University Fisher College of Business.
Liu, Yukun, and Aleh Tsyvinski, 2018, Risks and returns of cryptocurrency, Working Paper 24877
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
      , and Xi Wu, 2019, Common risk factors in cryptocurrency, Working Paper 25882 National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Ljungqvist, Lars, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2004, Recursive Macroeconomic Theory, 2nd Edition .
  vol. 1 of MIT Press Books (The MIT Press).
Lucas, Robert E., and Juan Pablo Nicolini, 2015, On the stability of money demand, Journal of
  Monetary Economics 73, 48 ­ 65.
Mirrlees, J. A., 1971, An exploration in the theory of optimum income taxation, The Review of
  Economic Studies 38, 175­208.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin, 1998, Unique equilibrium in a model of self-fulfilling currency
 attacks, The American Economic Review 88, 587­597.
Nagel, Stefan, 2016, The Liquidity Premium of Near-Money Assets, The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 131, 1927­1971.
Pagnotta, Emiliano, and Andrea Buraschi, 2018, An equilibrium valuation of Bitcoin and decen-
  tralized network assets, Working paper Imperial College.
P´
 astor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2009, Technological revolutions and stock prices, The American
  Economic Review 99, 1451­1483.
Pissarides, Christopher A, 2000, Equilibrium unemployment theory (MIT press).
Poterba, James M, and Julio J Rotemberg, 1986, Money in the utility function: An empirical
  implementation, Working Paper 1796 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Raskin, Max, and David Yermack, 2016, Digital currencies, decentralized ledgers, and the future
  of central banking, Working Paper 22238 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rochet, Jean-Charles, and Jean Tirole, 2006, Two-sided markets: A progress report, The RAND
  Journal of Economics 37, 645­667.
Saleh, Fahad, 2017, Blockchain without waste: Proof-of-stake, working paper, New York University.
Scheinkman, Jos´e. A., and Wei Xiong, 2003, Overconfidence and speculative bubbles, Journal of
  Political Economy 111, 1183­1220.
Schilling, Linda, and Harald Uhlig, 2018, Some simple Bitcoin economics, Discussion paper, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research.
Shafir, Eldar, Peter Diamond, and Amos Tversky, 1997, Money Illusion, The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 112, 341­374.
Shams, Amin, 2019, What drives the covariation of cryptocurrency returns?, Working paper The
  University of Texas at Austin.
Shiller, Robert J, 1981, Do stock prices move too much to be justified by subsequent changes in
  dividends?, The American Economic Review 71, 421­436.
Sockin, Michael, and Wei Xiong, 2018, A model of cryptocurrencies, Working Paper.
Tobin, James, 1956, The interest-elasticity of transactions demand for cash, The Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics 38, 241­247.
Walsh, Carl E., 2003, Monetary Theory and Policy, 2nd Edition (The MIT Press).

                                                35
Appendix A ­ Transaction Surplus and Flow Utility
   In this section, we provide theoretical foundations for our specification of platform trans-
action surplus in (2). We first present a general model based on transaction costs that applies
to all platform tokens (not necessarily blockchain-based), which essentially captures a form
of convenience yield (see, e.g., Cochrane, 2018), and then discuss a case that is specific to
blockchain platform. Our goal here is not to microfound every application scenario, but to
illustrate practical settings that motivate our specification.

A model of convenience yield. Agents have investment opportunities that occur at
Poisson arrival times, {Tn }+ 
                            n=1 , with time-varying and agent-specific intensity, i,t . At a
given Poisson time, Tn , agent i is endowed with a technology, i F (·), that transforms labor
into goods, and is matched with another agent who can supply the required labor input.
Agent-specific productivity is captured by i . To simplify the exposition, we assume that
the labor supply has a constant marginal cost of one, and the supplier breaks even, so the
full trade surplus is enjoyed by agent i. This setup of uncertain lumpy transactions follows
the Baumol-Tobin model of Alvarez and Lippi (2013).
   Agent i's labor demand, denoted by h, is not restricted by the real balance of token
holdings, Pt ki,Tn - , where ki,Tn - denotes the units of tokens carried to Tn and we make token
price explicit in the expression because we want to start with microfounding the utility flow
in a tokenized economy. Since the focus of this paper is not on financial constraints, we
allow the agent to borrow dollars (an instantaneous loan) at zero cost, so h may exceed
agent i's wealth at the moment. The production is done immediately, and the loan is repaid
immediately by the goods. So, given a competitive credit market, the loan rate is zero.
   The lumpy payment for labor incurs a transaction cost that is proportional to the total
payment value, h ( > 0), but using tokens as means of payment save the transaction cost
by U (Pt ki,Tn - ) (U  > 0, U  < 0) because agent i does not need to exchange dollars for
tokens, the required means of payment on the platform.
   Agent i maximizes the investment profit, which is a jump in wealth,

                           max i F (h) - h - (h - U (Pt ki,Tn - )) ,                       (55)
                             h


where the last term is the transaction cost. The optimal labor demand, h , is given by

                                      i F  (h ) = 1 + ,                                    (56)

                                              A-1
so the marginal value of production is equal to the marginal cost of labor plus the transaction
cost,  . We can substitute the constant h into the investment profit to have

                             i F (h ) - (1 +  ) h + U (Pt ki,Tn - ) .                         (57)

We assume that i is sufficiently high so h  Pt ki,Tn - . The conversion between the local
currency (token) and other assets can be costly, especially when a lumpy transaction is
required within a short period of time. By holding tokens, agents save such costs. Linking
transaction costs to the monetary value of assets has a long tradition in economics (Baumol,
1952; Tobin, 1956; Duffie, 1990).
   Therefore, at time t, agent i has an expected gain of i,t U (Pt ki,t ) dt by holdings ki,t units
of tokens for dt. To obtain a tighter analytical characterization of the equilibrium, we specify
i,t = (Nt At eui ) ,   (0, 1). A larger community (Nt ) makes it easier to find transaction
counterparties. A higher platform quality (At ) reflects a more efficient matching mechanism
or the fact that the economic transactions supported by the platform are more popular.
And ui captures agent-specific transaction needs. We specify U (Pt ki,t ) =  (Pt ki,t )1- , so
the expected transaction costs saved are

                         i,t U (Pt ki,t ) dt = (Nt At eui ) (Pt ki,t )1- dt.                  (58)

In the following we set  = 1 because its scaling effect can be subsumed by the level of At .
   We may reinterpret h as goods or services other than labor, and the investment profit as a
burst of consumption or utility value from transactions. The foundation of this specification
of trade surplus is two-fold: (1) the arrival of transaction opportunities depends on the user
base, the platform quality, and agent-specific factors; (2) holding tokens on the tokenized
platform save transaction costs for lumpy payments.
   Note that the same setup can also generate the trade surplus for a tokenless economy
where transaction is settled using the numeraire good, so in the main text, we assume the
same functional form of transaction surplus. In a tokenless economy, agents hold assets that
yield a risk-adjusted return of r and dollars worth of xi,t . The transaction cost, h, is thus
the cost of immediately exchanging a lumpy chuck of assets for cash. Holding cash saves
this cost by U (xi,t ). If external financing is required, the per unit cost of transaction,  ,
also captures the difficulty to raise funds in lumpy amounts. The concavity of U (·) can be
motivated by models of cash holdings that recognize cash carry costs and external financial


                                                A-2
constraints (e.g., Bolton, Chen, and Wang, 2011).

Staking tokens. While the above transaction-cost based model applies to platform tokens
that serve as means of payment, we next give another theoretical foundation to illustrate:
(i) although we focus on tokens that serve explicitly as means of payment on platforms, our
theory applies more generally to all tokens that provide users utilities specific to the underly-
ing platform technology; (ii) blockchain-based platforms provide novel forms of transaction
surplus from holding tokens on platforms and further motivate our specification of token
flow utility.
   Many blockchain-based platforms feature users providing service to peers to make a
profit. For example, Filecoin, Golem, Storj, Elastic, etc., all have "storage miners" who help
clients store digital files for a profit paid in native tokens. Oftentimes, storage miners have
to "stake" native tokens (i.e., post it as collateral) in order to win the chance to service
clients. In fact, staking is a common practice on blockchain platforms to encourage value-
creating activities among their users. It goes beyond validating transactions and producing
blocks within consensus mechanisms such as Proof-of-Stake (POS) and Distributed Proof-
of-Stake (DPOS). In general, holding/staking tokens may enable network participants to
potentially receive access to exclusive features of the platform, partake of business activities,
or receive status recognition. For example, OmiseGO (OMG), the first ERC20 tokens on
Ethereum sold via an ICO to reach unicorn status (US$1 billion market cap) in August
2017 (coinmarketcap.com), has validators deposit OMGs in staking contracts to validate
transactions. OmiseGo selects the validator based on who has staked the highest token to
validate the transaction and it performs the task. Depending on the performance of the
validator, the validator will either receive rewards or penalties. Filecoin, VentureFusion,
Numerai, etc., all feature some forms of staking.
   Now suppose a storage miner on the platform has a realized storage space eui  , and
is waiting to be matched with clients demanding decentralized storage (similar to a labor-
market search-and-matching scenario). Potential client demand (analogous to the number
of job seekers) is proportional to Nt , the user base of the platform, whereas the matching
effort of the storage miner is proportional to staking amount xi (similar to job vacancies).
   Then if the platform has a matching efficiency of A , a matching function with constant
return to scale (e.g., Pissarides, 2000) would yield the storage miner a payoff of

                         eui  A Nt (Pt ki,t )1- = (Pt ki,t )1- (ANt eui ) ,                 (59)


                                               A-3
which exactly gives the surplus flow in (2). The storage miner then takes back the same
number of tokens staked after providing the service for dt.
   In the case above, it is crucial that a service provider (storage miner in the case of Filecoin)
needs to stake/hold native tokens to have a chance of being matched with a customer. If she
can match with a customer and instantaneously exchange tokens for the numeraire good,
the the velocity of native tokens can be infinite, resulting in price indeterminacy.

Other tokens. While our focus is on a majority of tokens whose value derives from the
productivity of underlying platforms and user network effects, we acknowledge that in reality,
there exists a variety of tokens that serve purposes other than facilitating platform-specific
transactions. Digital currencies developed by central banks serve general payment purposes.
They are typically not tied to specific user networks, and their adoption is driven by policy
and legal decisions. There are also tokens that enable the sharing of future corporate revenues
or the distribution of products and services. Such security tokens can be valued using
traditional discounted cash-flow models, and are therefore not our focus.
   Moreover, our model does not capture the more complex interdependence of platforms
and their tokens. For example, Litecoin and Dogecoin are "altcoins" -- variants of the
original open-sourced Bitcoin protocol to enable new features. Therefore, the productivity
of their platforms inherits significantly from that of the Bitcoin blockchain. Other examples
include the "AppCoins," what entrepreneurs often sell through the initial coin offerings
(ICOs), that are developed for specific applications (e.g., Gnosis and Golem) and are built
on existing blockchain infrastructures (e.g., Ethereum or Waves).




                                               A-4
Appendix B - Proofs
Lemma B1. Given µP                                                     P
                 t and a sufficiently high productivity, i.e., At > A µt , we have
a unique non-degenerate solution, Nt > 0, and ut > U for (30) and (31) if G (u) has an
increasing hazard rate. The user base, Nt , increases in µP
                                                          t and At . Agent i participates
when ui  ut . Conditional on participating, the numeraire value of agent i's optimal token
                                                           P
holding, xi,t , is given by (28), and increases in At and µt .



Proof of Lemma B1. (30) and (31) jointly determine the user base Nt given At and µP
                                                                                  t .
First, we note that Nt = 0 is always a solution. Here we focus on the non-degenerate case,
i.e., Nt > 0. Fixing At and µP                                              P
                             t , we consider a response function R n; At , µt that maps a
hypothetical value of Nt , say n, to the measure of agents who choose to participate after
knowing Nt = n:

          R n; A, µP
                   t = 1 - G u n; A, µP
                                      t
                                                              1-          1-
                       = 1 - G - ln (n) + ln              -         ln             ,     (60)
                                                    At                   r - µP
                                                                              t


Before we start, for any At = A > 0, we define the value of its response function at n = 0:
R 0; A, µP
         t   = 0. This is consistent with that given a zero user base, each agent derives
zero transaction surplus from token holdings and chooses not to participate. Note that
limn0 R n; A, µP
               t = 0, so the response function is continuous in n. As depicted in Figure
6, the response curve originates from zero (the degenerate case).
   First, we show that given µP
                              t , there exists a A such that for At = A > A, its corresponding
response curve,

          R n; A, µP
                   t = 1 - G u n; A, µP
                                      t                                                  (61)
                                                              1-          1-
                       = 1 - G - ln (n) + ln              -         ln             ,     (62)
                                                    At                   r - µP
                                                                              t


crosses the 45o line at least once in (0, 1], and for any value of At = A < A, the response
curve never crosses the 45o line in (0, 1]. Later in our numerical solution, we verify that
this inequality holds at all values of At . Given µP
                                                   t , we define a mapping, A(n), from any
equilibrium, with non-zero value of user base, n  (0, 1], to the corresponding value of At ,




                                              B-1
Figure 6: Determining User Base. This graph shows the aggregate response of users' adoption decision,
R n; At , µP                                                        P
           t , to different levels of Nt = n  [0, 1], given At and µt .



i.e., the unique solution to

                                                1-             1-
           1 - G - ln (n) + ln             -             ln                = n,    n  (0, 1].        (63)
                                    At                        r - µP
                                                                   t


This mapping is a continuous mapping on a bounded domain  (0, 1]. Then by the Least-
Upper-Bound-Property of real numbers, the image set of this mapping, {A(n), n  (0, 1)},
has an infimum, which we denote by A. Now, for At = A, consider a n (A)  (0, 1] such that
(63) holds. For any A > A, the LHS of (63) is higher than the RHS, i.e., R n (A) ; A, µP
                                                                                       t >
n (A), so that the response curve of At = A is above the 45o line at n (A). Next, because the
response function R n; A, µP
                           t is continuous in n and R 1; A, µP
                                                             t  1 by definition in (62),
i.e., it eventually falls to or below the 45o line as n increases, there must exist a n (A)  (0, 1]
such that when at At = A, (63) holds by the Intermediate Value Theorem. Therefore, we
have proved that for any At = A > A, there exists a non-zero user base. Throughout the
proof, we fix µP                          P
               t , so A is a function of µt .
       After proving the existence of Nt > 0 for At  [A, +), we prove the uniqueness given
                                                g (u)
the increasing hazard rate of g (u) (i.e.,     1-G(u)
                                                        increase in u).30 Specifically, we show that
for At  A µP                                    o
           t , the response curve crosses the 45 line exactly once (and from above) when
At  [A, +). First note that R n; At , µP
                                       t - n has either a positive derivative or a negative

  30
    The hazard rate is increasing if and only if 1 - G(u) is log-concave. This assumption is common in the
theory literature, for example, to avoid the complicated "ironing" of virtual values.


                                                  B-2
derivative at n = 0. If it has positive derivative (i.e., the response curve shoots over the 45o
line), then at n , the first time the response curve crosses the 45o line again, the derivative
of R n; At , µP
              t - n must be weakly negative at n , i.e., the response curve crosses the 45o
from above,
                                                           1
                                    g u n ; At , µP
                                                  t          - 1  0.                         (64)
                                                           n
Now suppose the response curve crosses the 45o line for the second time from below at
 
n > n , so the derivative of R n; At , µP         
                                        t - n at n must be weakly positive, and is equal to


                                         1          g u n ; At , µPt
                  g u n   
                             ; At , µP
                                     t      -1 =                           -1                (65)
                                         n       1 - G (u (n ; At , µP
                                                            
                                                                      t ))
                                                    g u n ; At , µP
                                                                  t
                                                                           -1
                                                 1 - G (u (n ; At , µP
                                                                     t ))
                                                 g u n ; At , µPt
                                               =          
                                                                     -1
                                                        n
                                               < 0,

where the first inequality comes from the increasing hazard rate and the fact that u n; At , µP
                                                                                              t
is decreasing in n for n  (0, 1], and the second inequality follows from (64) and the fact that
the response curve crosses the 45o line at n (i.e., n = R n ; At , µP
                                                                    t = 1 - G u n ; At , µP
                                                                                          t    ).
This contradicts the presumption that the response curve reaches the 45o line from below
(and the derivative of R n; At , µP
                                  t - n is weakly positive). Therefore, we conclude that for
At  [A, +), there exists a unique adoption level n. Now if R n; At , µP
                                                                      t - n has negative
derivative at n = 0, then in the previous argument, we can replace n with 0 and show that
there does not exist another intersection between the response curve and the 45o line beyond
n = 0. Therefore, only if R n; At , µP
                                     t - n has positive derivative at n = 0, do we have a
positive (non-degenerate) adoption level.
   Finally, we prove that Nt increases in µP              ~P
                                             t . Consider µ
                                                                 P
                                                            t > µt . Suppose the contrary
                                                 ~t  Nt . Because we have proved that the
that their corresponding adoption levels satisfy N
response curve only crosses the 45o line only once and from above, given Nt , we have

                                             1-              1-
     1 - G - ln (n) + ln                 -            ln                n,   n  (0, Nt ] .   (66)
                                At                          r - µP
                                                                 t




                                                 B-3
We know that by definition,

               ~t = 1 - G u N
               N            ~ t ; At , µ
                                       ~Pt

                                  ~t + ln                             1-             1-
                     = 1 - G - ln N                          -                 ln
                                                      At                            r-µ ~P
                                                                                         t

                                  ~t + ln                             1-             1-
                     > 1 - G - ln N                          -                 ln
                                                      At                            r - µP
                                                                                         t
                      ~t ,
                      N                                                                          (67)

                                ~P
where the first inequality uses µ      P                                              ~
                                  t > µt and the second inequality uses the fact that Nt 
(0, Nt ] and the inequality (66). This contradiction implies that the adoption level Nt has to
be increasing in µP                                P
                  t . Because ut decrease in both µt and At . The same method proves that
the adoption level Nt increases in At .

Proof of Proposition 1. By setting µP
                                    t to zero, we can apply Lemma B1 to the tokenless
economy, and obtain the following the results: (i) (22) and (23) solve a unique pair of NtN T
and uN
     t
       T
         as functions of At ; (ii) the adoption level NtN T increases in At .

Proof of Proposition 2. We apply Lemma B1 to the tokenized economy, and obtain the
following the results: (i) (30) and (31) solve a unique pair of Nt and ut as functions of At
and µP
     t ; (ii) the adoption level Nt (the participation threshold, ut ) increases (decreases) in
At and µP
        t . Next we show that (32) implies a second-order ordinary differential equation for
the token price, Pt = P (At ).
   Because ut decreases in µP                                                        P
                            t , the right side of (32) is monotonic (increasing) in µt , so,
given At and Pt , (32) uniquely solves µP               P
                                        t . This means µt can be expressed as a function
of Pt and At , denoted by µP
                           t = H (At , Pt ). Note that by applying It^
                                                                     o's lemma, we have
       P  (At )        1 P  (At )         2
µP
 t =            A µA + 2
       P (A t ) t        P (At )
                                    At  A . Therefore, (32) implies an ordinary differential equation:

                            P  ( At )          1 P  (At )         2
                                      At µ A +            At  A       = H (At , Pt ) .           (68)
                            P ( At )           2 P ( At )
Given the boundary conditions (35) and (38), this ODE satisfies the regularity conditions in
Theorems 4.17 and 4.18 in Jackson (1968), so the solution exists and is unique.
   In the following, we summarize the steps of solving the token pricing ODE. First, the
user-type cutoff threshold ut and the user base Nt jointly solve (30) and (31). Moreover, we
define the aggregate of agents' type in (33), which only depends on ut . All three variables,


                                                     B-4
        Figure 7: Endogenous Variables as Functions of the State Variable.


ut , Nt , and St , can be expressed as functions of At and µP
                                                            t .
   Second, the token-market clearing condition, (32), only contains Pt , At , and µP
                                                                                   t . Because
Nt and St increase in At and µP
                              t (as previously discussed), the right side of (32) is monotonic
in µP                                      P
    t , so (32) implies a unique value of µt given the values of At and Pt .
   Third, because in equilibrium, the token price is a function of At , we can apply It^
                                                                                       o's
                  P  (At )        1 P  (At )       2
lemma: µP
        t =       P (At ) t
                           A µA + 2 P (At )
                                             At  A . (32) then implies a mapping from At , P (At ),
and P  (At ) to   P  (At ), i.e., a second-order ODE of P (At ). Augmenting the ODE with the
boundary conditions (35) and (38), we can solve the token price function P (At ).
                                                        o's lemma again to solve µP
   Finally, once we have solved P (At ), we can apply It^                         t as a
function of At , and then using (30) and (31) to solve Nt and ut (and thus St ) as functions
of At . Figure 7 plots the complete solution of the model that includes all the endogenous
variables as functions of At , the state variable of the Markov equilibrium.



                                                B-5
Proposition B1. The token price is positive in the Markov equilibrium in Propsition 2.

Proof of Proposition B1. We prove this proposition by contradiction. The token-market
clearing condition implies the aggregate token demand, M =                                    ui ut
                                                                                                      ki,t di > 0. Consider a
value of At such that P (At ) = 0. Agent i chooses the units of tokens

               max (Pt ki,t )1- (Nt At eui ) dt - dt - Pt ki,t rdt + ki,t Et [dPt ] .                                   (69)
                ki,t


                                                                            
Given that Pt = 0, the first term of transactional benefit is zero, so for ki,t to be a finite
number, agent i must be indifferent between the marginal benefit from the expected token
price change, Et [dPt ], and the marginal cost of losing interests Pt rdt. Since the latter is zero,
the former must be zero Et [dPt ] = 0. As a result, the maximized profit is - < 0 for all
agents, and no agent chooses to participate, resuting in a zero aggregate token demand that
violates the token market-clearing condtion.


Proposition B2. Define AN T  min At : N N T (At ) > 0 . We have AP L < AN T .

Proof of Proposition B2. To prove this inequality, consider the agent whose type is uN T ,
i.e., the type whose flow profit is equal to zero when At = AN T in the tokenless economy.
Therefore, we have the following
                                                            1-                                         1-

                       NT       N T uN T       1-            
                                                                                     NT       1-        
              0=N           A      e                                -  < A                S                 - ,         (70)
                                                r                                              r

where we use
                                                                     U                           uN T
                       NT                               NT                      NT
            N N T eu        = 1 - G uN T           eu         <            eu        dG (u) +           eu dG (u)       (71)
                                                                    uN T                        U
                                  U                          uN T
                                        u
                            <           e dG (u) +                  eu dG (u)  S.
                                 uN T                    U


Recall that in the planner's solution, we have:
                                                                           1-

                                                   PL          1-           
                                           0 = A        S                            - .                                (72)
                                                                r

By comparing the right sides in the two preceding inequalities, we conclude AN T > AP L .

                                                              B-6
Proposition B3 (Comparing User-Base Volatilities over Adoption Stages). The
user-base volatility of the tokenless economy is

                               N             g uN t
                                                     T
                               t =                              A.                       (73)
                                        1 - g ( uN T   NT
                                                 t ) /Nt


The user-base volatility of the tokenized economy is

                                                                      µP
                   N            g ( ut )          A    1-            t
                   t   =                        +                             ,          (74)
                            1 - g (ut ) /Nt                        r - µP
                                                                        t


      µ  P
where t is the diffusion of µP
                             t as defined below:


                                          µ   P  µ     P
                                   dµP               A
                                     t = µt dt + t dZt .                                 (75)

Under the same level of adoption, i.e., Nt = NtN T , the user-base volatility of the tokenized
economy is smaller than that of the tokenless economy if and only if µP decreases in At .

Proof of Proposition B3. Without loss of generality, we write the dynamics of Nt as:

                                   dNt = µN
                                          t dt + 
                                                  N
                                                 ~t Nt dZtA ,                            (76)

       N       N
where ~t Nt =  t is a more convenient notation to work with for the derivations.
   First, we solve the user-base volatility without token. Using It^
                                                                   o's lemma, we can differ-
entiate (23) and then, by matching coefficients with (42), derive µN     N
                                                                   t and t :


                                          1
                     dNt = -g uN
                               t
                                 T
                                   duN
                                     t
                                       T
                                         - g  uN
                                               t
                                                 T
                                                               duN T   NT
                                                                 t , dut  ,              (77)
                                          2

where duN T   NT
        t , dut  is the quadratic variation of duN T
                                                 t . Using It^
                                                             o's lemma, we differentiate
(22)

                           1          1              1        1
               duN
                 t
                   T
                     =-       dNt +     2
                                          dNt , dNt - dAt +       dAt , dAt
                           Nt       2 Nt             At     2 A2t
                                                           2
                             µN
                              t    N     2    A   A                  N
                     =-         - ~t         +µ -              dt - ~t +  A dZtA .       (78)
                             Nt                   2




                                               B-7
Substituting this dynamics into (77), we have:

                                                                 2
                              µN
                               t             2        A               1                           2
        dNt = g       uN
                       t
                         T
                                 -  N
                                   ~t            +µ - A
                                                                     - g  uN
                                                                           t
                                                                             T
                                                                                          N
                                                                                         ~t + A        dt
                              Nt                      2               2
                + g uN
                     t
                       T      N
                              t +  A dZtA ,                                                                 (79)

By matching coefficients on dZtA with (42), we can solve for t
                                                             N
                                                               .
   Next, we solve the user-base volatility in the tokenized economy where Nt depends on
the expected token price appreciation µP
                                       t that is a univariate function of At . In equilibrium,
its law of motion is given by a diffusion process

                                               µ      P
                                                      µ          P
                                        dµP               A
                                          t = µt dt + t dZt .                                               (80)

Now, the dynamics of ut becomes

                      1          1              1        1
            dut = -      dNt +     2
                                     dNt , dNt - dAt +       dAt , dAt
                      Nt       2 Nt             At     2 A2t

                       1-              1                        1-          1
                 -                               dµP
                                                   t -                               2     dµP     P
                                                                                             t , dµt        (81)
                                    r - µP
                                         t                            2 (r -    µP
                                                                                 t )

    u
Let t denote the diffusion of ut . By collecting the coefficients on dZtA in (81), we have:
                                                                        P
                                                                        µ
                             u           N        A        1-          t
                             t     =   -~t   - -                                  ,                         (82)
                                                                     r - µP
                                                                          t


which, in comparison with (78), contains an extra term that reflects the volatility of expected
token price change. Note that, similar to (77), we have:

                                                  1
                              dNt = -g (ut ) dut - g  (ut ) dut , dut ,                                     (83)
                                                  2
                                   u                                                          N
so the diffusion of Nt is -g (ut ) t . Matching it with the conjectured diffusion coefficient t
      N
gives t .
   Under the same level of adoption, i.e., Nt = NtN T , we also have ut = uN T
                                                                           t , so the first
brackets in (73) and (74) have the same value. Therefore, the only difference between the two
                                           µ          P
curves of user-base volatility arises from t , the volatility of expected token price change.
                µ      P     dµP                          µ      P
By It^
     o's lemma, t =            t
                             dAt
                                    A At , so the sign of t depends on whether µP
                                                                                t increases or




                                                          B-8
                                           µ           P
decreases in At . When µP
                        t decrease in At , t < 0, and thereby, the tokenized economy has
a smaller user-base volatility than the tokenless economy.


Proposition B4 (Comparing the Volatilities of User-Base Growth Rates). For any
given At , the volatility of user-base growth in the tokenized economy is smaller than that of
the tokenless economy if µP          P
                          t > 0 and µt decreases in At .



Proof of Proposition B4. From the proof of Proposition B3, we know that in the token-
less economy, the volatility of user-base growth rate, dNt /Nt , is

                N             g uNt
                                    T
                                                  A                  g uN t
                                                                            T
               ~t   =                            =                                        A,             (84)
                          NtN T - g (uN T
                                      t )                    1 - G ( uN T        NT
                                                                      t ) - g ( ut )


and similarly, in the tokenized economy,

                                                                                   µ  P
                  N              g ( ut )                    A       1-           t
                 ~t   =                                     +                             .              (85)
                           1 - G ( ut ) - g ( ut )                              r - µP
                                                                                     t


                                                                                                       g (·)
Under the assumption of a weakly monotone hazard rate (introduced in Proposition 2),                  1-G(·)
                                         g (·)
is weakly increasing in ut , so is    1-G(·)-g (·)
                                                   .   If µP
                                                           t > 0, a tokenized platform has        ut < u Nt
                                                                                                             T

(Proposition 2). Therefore,

                                g uNt
                                      T
                                                                 g ( ut )
                                                                                      .                  (86)
                            NtN T - g (uN T
                                        t )                1 - G ( u t ) - g ( ut )

                                                  µ              P    dµP
Moreover, if µP
              t decreases in At , by It^
                                       o's lemma, t =                   t
                                                                      dAt
                                                                             A At < 0, and thereby,

                                                              µ  P
                                  A        1-                t
                                  +                                     < A.                             (87)
                                                           r - µP
                                                                t


Consequently, the volatility of user-base growth rate of the tokenized platform is smaller
than that of the tokenless economy for any given At .




                                                       B-9
Appendix C - Parameter Choices

C1. Parameter Values
       We choose the model parameters under the physical measure so that the model generates
patterns that are broadly consistent with user adoption and token price dynamics. Recall
from Section 2.1 that under the widely-used SDF,

                                         d t
                                             = -rdt - dZt ,                                           (88)
                                          t
At under the physical measure follows a GBM process, where the drift coefficient, µA , is
equal to µA +  A and the volatility coefficient is  A .
       We use token price and blockchain user-base dynamics from July 2010 and April 2018.
We normalize one unit of time in the model to be one year. Since we fix the token supply at
M , the token price Pt completely drives the market capitalization (Pt M ). We map Pt to the
aggregate market capitalization of major cryptocurrencies.31 Since we study a representative
token economy, focusing on the aggregate market averages out idiosyncratic movements due
to specificalities of token protocols.
       We collect the number of active user addresses for these cryptocurrencies and map the
aggregate number to Nt . We map the data to early stage of adoption in the model (i.e.,
Nt  0.5). We normalize the maximum number of active addresses (in December 2017) to
Nt = 0.5 and scale the number of addresses in other months by that of December 2017. For
each month, we also need a value of ln (At ). Since we cannot observe the platform quality, we
assign December 2017 the value of ln (At ) in our model that corresponds to Nt = 0.5. With
December 2017 as a reference point, we calculate the values of ln (At ) for other months by
applying forward and backward the expected growth rate of At under the physical measure.
As a result, we focus on the stage of adoption, i.e., Nt  [N , 0.5], where N = 0.0001.
       Next, we choose parameter values such that the model generates data patterns in Figures
2 and 4. We set the annual risk-free rate, r, to 5% and choose µA = 2% < r to satisfy the
no-arbitage restriction. As we have previously discussed, we interpret At as a process that
broadly captures technological advances, regulatory changes, and the variety of activities
  31
    We include all sixteen cryptocurrencies with complete market cap and active address information on bit-
infocharts.com: AUR (Auroracoin), BCH (Bitcoin Cash), BLK (BlackCoin), BTC (Bitcoin), BTG (Bitcoin
Gold), DASH (Dashcoin), DOGE (DOGEcoin), ETC (Ethereum Classic), ETH (Ethereum), FTC (Feath-
ercoin), LTC (Litecoin), NMC (Namecoin), NVC (Novacoin), PPC (Peercoin), RDD (Reddcoin), VTC
(Vertcoin). They represent more than 2/3 of the entire crypto market.



                                                   C-1
feasible on the platform, all of which suggest a fast and volatile growth of At . This con-
sideration motivates us to choose  A = 200%. In Appendix C2, we conduct comparative
statics for µA and  A . As shown in Figure 11, the model does generate a close link between
the technology volatility and that of token returns, likely to due the fact that we focus on
fundamental aspects of adoption and valuation while do not fully capture the behavioral and,
in general, speculative factors in the model. That said, our choice of  A = 200% leads to a
token return volatility that is close to the median cryptocurrency's return volatility in Hu,
Parlour, and Rajan (2018). They document that the median cryptocurrency's daily return
volatility is 14.6%, which is annualized to 232%.
   This choice of  A = 200% gives us both a high volatility for At but also much of the
growth for At under the physical measure, as the physical-measure drift of At is µA =
µA +  A (Girsanov's theorem). To match the growth of Nt in the data, we set  = 1,
so that µA = 202% using the preceding equation. As a result, the user base Nt grows from
N = 0.0001 to 0.5 during the eight-year period of our data sample and the growth rate
for the model-implied Nt matches that in data. One way to generate  = 1 is to set  to
1.5, which is roughly the Sharpe ratio of ex-post efficient portfolio in the U.S. stock market
(combining various factors) and  to 0.67, a sensible choice of betas for the technology sector
(P´
  astor and Veronesi, 2009).
   By no arbitrage, the drift of At , µA , is smaller than r under the risk-neutral measure,
because after full adoption, µP    A
                              t = µ as implied by the boundary condition. Therefore, for
the model to generate the high growth of user base in data, we need the drift of At to be
high under the physical measure, which requires, first, a high volatility of At and, second,
a high enough . Setting  to 0.67 seems at odd with the existing studies on the returns
of cryptocurrencies that show their correlations with the returns of traditional assets and
macroeconomic factors are low (Hu, Parlour, and Rajan, 2018; Liu and Tsyvinski, 2018).
However, we argue that in our model, dZtA captures the shocks to the underlying technology
or platform quality instead of direct return shocks. Moreover, the returns of cryptocurrencies
can be driven by factors outside of our model, and such factors can add noise orthogonal to
the SDF and reduce the correlation between cryptocurrency returns and the SDF.
   We use the normalized distribution for ui by truncating the Normal density function
                 u2
g (u) =    1
          2 2
              e- 22   within six-sigma on both sides. As the dispersion of ui determines how
responsive Nt is to the change of At , we match the curvature of Nt with respect to At by
               
setting  = 10/ 2, which implies that thee cross-section variance of ui is 50. Note that
what drives agents' adoption and token holding decisions is eui . A normal distribution of

                                             C-2
Figure 8: Comparative Statics ­ Risk-Adjusted Productivity Growth µA . Panel A plots the ratio
of token price to productivity, Pt /At , against the user base, Nt , under different values of µA . Panel B plots
the user base, Nt , against the logarithmic productivity, ln (At ), under different values of  A . The values of
the other parameters are set according to Appendix C1.


ui implies a log-normal distribution of eui that features a concentrated mass in the range of
low ui and a heavy right tail. Our choice of this distribution is guided by data. In Appendix
C2, we compare the adoption curve implied by the normal distribution of ui and that from
a uniform distribution, and show that the normal distribution generates an adoption curve
that fits data better.
    We set  to 0.3 so that the senstivity of ln(Pt ) with repect to Nt matches the data in the
region where Nt  [N , 0.5] as we show in Figure 4.
    The remaining parameters quantitatively do not affect much the equilibrium dynamics.
We set the participation cost, , to one and normalize M to 10 billion. As our model
features monetary neutrality, Pt is halved when M is doubled but importantly the equilibrium
dynamics is invariant.


C2. Comparative Statics
    We conduct comparative static analysis for µA ,  A , and G (u). We report in the following
that the qualitative results are robust to the choices of µA and  . The normal distribution of
agents' type, ui , is guided by data. Agents' transaction need, i.e., what drives token demand,
is eui , which follows a log-normal distribution featuring heavy tail. To demonstrate the
desirability of using a normal distribution of ui , we also report the model-implied adoption
curve from a uniform distribution of ui , and show that it fails to match data.



                                                      C-3
Figure 9: Comparative Statics ­ Productivity Volatility  A . Panel A plots the user base, Nt , against
the logarithmic productivity, ln (At ), under different values of  A . Panel B plots the expected token return
under the risk-neutral measure, µP t , against the logarithmic productivity, ln (At ), under different values of
 A . Panel C plots the token price, Pt , against the productivity, At , under different values of  A . The values
of the other parameters are set according to Appendix C1.


Risk-adjusted productivity growth µA . As shown in our revised draft, the dynamics
of At under the physical measure is

                                     dAt
                                         = µA +  A dt +  A dZt .                                           (89)
                                      At

Here we do not necessarily require the growth rate of At under the physical measure to be
small, and in particular, below r.
    The risk-adjusted drift of At , µA , must be below r following the standard no-arbitrage
condition. Under the risk-neutral measure, the total return of any asset is equal to r. Upon
full adoption, the expected token return under the risk-neutral measure, µP
                                                                          t , converges to µ
                                                                                             A

(see the upper boundary condition for the token pricing ODE), so we must have µP    A
                                                                               t = µ < r
once At increases beyond the upper boundary.
    In Figure 8, we report the ratio of token price to productivity, Pt /At , over the stages of
adoption, Nt in Panel A and the user base, Nt , against the logarithmic productivity ln (At )
under different values of µA . The figures show that the qualitative dynamics of Pt and Nt ,
the two key endogenous variables in the model, are robust to the choices of µA . While the
level of token price increases significantly in the drift of platform productivity, the adoption
curve is largely stable across different values of parameters with the case of the highest µA
(= 0.03) featuring the fastest adoption.



                                                      C-4
Productivity volatility  A . The volatility of platform productivity, At , certainly drives
the volatility of token price. While the endogenous adoption amplifies the volatility, the
                        P
token price volatility, t , is largely in the same magnitude of At 's volatility as shown in
Appendix E. The focus of this paper is not on generating excessive volatility. Here we model
agents' adoption and token demand decisions that are purely based on utility maximization
under rational expectation, while in reality, a great number of other factors affect token
demand (e.g., Griffin and Shams, 2018; Liu, Tsyvinski, and Wu, 2019). In fact, the upper
boundary condition at full adoption shows that the token price evolves in lock-step with
the platform productivity after Nt reaches 100%. Therefore, this paper does not investigate
whether token volatility deviates from that of fundamentals and why.
   The aim is thus to develop a rational benchmark of token pricing and endogenous adop-
tion. Accordingly, the model has the desirable feature that the key results are largely not
affected by the choices of the volatility parameter,  A . Panel A of Figure 9 plots the user
base, Nt , for different values of  A . The curves are almost identical. As shown by (30) and
(31), what determines Nt are At and µP
                                     t . Therefore, in Panel A of Figure 9, given At , the
adoption curves are similar across different values of  A because the values of µP
                                                                                 t are similar
as shown in Panel B. In our model, agents' decisions on adoption and token demand depends
on At and µP                     A                                       P
           t , and the parameter  only affects agents' decision through µt . Using It^
                                                                                     o's
lemma, we have
                                  P  ( At )          1 P  (At )         2
                           µP
                            t =             At µ A +            At  A       .              (90)
                                  P ( At )           2 P ( At )
The choices of  A does not strongly affect the equilibrium outcome because the second-order
derivative of Pt to At is close to zero. Panel C reports the token price, which is almost linear
in At (i.e., has a second-order derivative close to zero).

Agent type distribution G (u). We choose a normal distribution for G (u) and set the
parameter in order to generate an adoption curve the matches well the data. Note that
even though the participation threshold, ut in (30), has ln (At ) in its expression, we cannot
draw the conclusion that the adoption curve, Nt = 1 - G (ut ), is S-shaped as the cumulative
distribution function of normal distribution. The threshold also contains other endogenous
variables, such as the current user base, Nt , and the expected token return, µP
                                                                               t . Therefore,
the adoption curve is S-shaped as a result of multiple endogenous forces in equilibrium
together with the parameter choice of G (u).
   Many blockchain platforms cater to a small group of enthusiasts and thus a distribution


                                               C-5
Figure 10: Comparative Statics ­ The Distribution of ui . This figure plots the user base, Nt , against
the logarithmic productivity, ln (At ), under the normal distribution of ui in Appendix C1 (blue solid curve)
and the uniform distribution of ui (red dash line). The support of the uniform distribution is [-29, 29],
chosen so that the productivity at full adoption matches that of the baseline model.


of agents' type should feature a fat tail. Indeed, this is what a normal distribution of
ui captures. Agents' token holdings and participation profits are given by (28) and (29)
respectively. Both are proportional to eui . Therefore, in our model, what drives agents'
activities and profits on the platform is eui , which follows a log-normal distribution when
ui follows a normal distribution. The log-normal distribution has its mass concentrated in
the small values (i.e., the majority who have low transaction needs) and a heavy tail that
extends to very large values (i.e., the minority of very active users).
    For robustness, we plot in Figure 10 the user base, Nt , against the logarithmic produc-
tivity, ln (At ), under the normal distribution of ui in Appendix C1 (blue solid curve) and
the uniform distribution of ui (red dash line). The support of the uniform distribution
is [-29, 29], chosen so that the productivity at full adoption matches that of the baseline
model. It is clear that a uniform distribution would not fit the data and our distributional
assumption is guided by the need to fit empirical data.




                                                    C-6
Appendix D. Endogenous Choice of Platform Currency
   In the main text, we analyze the tokenized and tokenless economies and compare their
adoption dynamics. The numerical solution shows that µP
                                                      t is positive across the values
of At with µA > 0, and therefore, tokens accelerate adoption by reducing the carry cost
by µP
    t . A potential concern is that the conclusion is only valid under the specific set of
parameter values. We address this issue by extending the model to incorporate platform
users' voluntary choice between the numeraire good and token as means of payment on the
platform. For this general setup, we can prove that µP
                                                     t > 0 in equilibrium.
   Every instant, agents can choose either the numeraire good or tokens as means of pay-
ment. The maximized profit from using the numeraire good is given by (21):
                                                          1-

                                        ui      1-         
                                 Nt At e                       -  dt.                               (91)
                                                 r

The maximized profit from using token is given by (29):
                                                               1-

                                   ui           1-              
                             N t At e                               -  dt.                          (92)
                                             r - µ P ( At )

Considering the choice of currency, a participating agent's maximized profit is
                                    1-                                                 1-

                      ui   1-        
                                                               ui        1-             
       max     N t At e                  -  dt, Nt At e                                     -  dt
                            r                                         r - µ P ( At )
                            1-

               ui   1-       
      N t At e                   -  dt.                                                             (93)
                     r

In the states where µP (At ) > 0, agents choose token; otherwise, agents can always opt for
the numeraire good as means of payment. The adoption-accelerating effect does not require
µP                                                                             P
 t > 0 for every value of At . As long as there exists values of At such that µ (At ) > 0,
in those states, participating agents choose to use tokens and derive more profits, and as a
result, the user base is higher than that in a tokenless economy.

Proposition D1 (Endogenous Currency Choice). If token is available, the user base,
Nt , is equal to or larger than the user base in the tokenless economy for any given At .

   In this more general setting, agents only use tokens when µP
                                                              t > 0, and thus, by introducing


                                                  D-1
tokens, platforms accelerate adoption by simply expanding agents' choice set, allowing them
to pick the currency with the lowest carry cost.
   Next we show that in equilibrium, agents either always choose to use tokens (and µP
                                                                                     t > 0)
or always choose to use the numeraire goods as means of payment. We prove this statement
by contradiction. Consider an equilibrium where at time t, agents choose to use the numeraire
goods, but there exists a positive probability that agents choose to use tokens in the future.
To clear the token market, the aggregate token demand must be positive and equal to M .
Since agents do not use tokens as means of payment and µP
                                                        t  0, for the aggregate demand
to be equal to M , the token price must be zero because the transactional benefit is zero and
the expected financial return, µP
                                t  0 < r . However, there is a positive probability that in
the future, agents use tokens, derive transactional benfits, and thus Pt > 0. The current
Pt = 0 then implies a positive infinite expected return, contradicting µP
                                                                        t  0.


Proposition D2 (Consistent Choice of Currency). In equilibrium, agents either always
use tokens and µP
                t > 0 or always use the numeraire goods as means of payment.


   Proposition D2 states that our choice to examine the tokenized and tokenless economics
separately in the main text does not lose generality, because even when agents are allowed
to choose the platform currency every instant, the equilibria that emerge will either feature
complete token usage or complete usage of the numeraire goods. Moreover, in the equilibrium
where agents use tokens, µP
                          t > 0 holds in every state of the world.




                                             D-2
Figure 11: The Persistent Impact of Shocks and Volatility Amplification. This graph shows the
                                 P
ratio of token price volatility, t , to productivity volatility,  A , which quantifies the strength of volatility
amplification by the endogenous user adoption. The solid line shows the baseline model. The dash line
shows the model with endogenous platform productivity.


Appendix E: Additional Results on Token Price

E1: Token Volatility and Endogenous Adoption
    The shocks to platform productivity are transmitted to token price through users' decision
                                                                P
on adoption and token holdings. In fact, token-price volatility t is generally larger than  A ,
the productivity volatility, as Figure 11 illustrates. To see the intuition, consider a positive
shock to At that directly increases the utility flow of token holdings. User adoption increases
as a consequence, which leads to an even higher utility flow (as Nt enters into the utility
flow). This feedback effect amplifies the shock's impact on token price, which implies that
endogenous user adoption amplifies volatility.
    Importantly, our model features a new form of endogenous risk that is unique to platform
economics. The volatility of token price is larger than the productivity volatility (exogenous
risk) in equilibrium due to endogenous adoption. The amplification constitutes an endoge-
nous asset-price risk that is distinct from the fire-sale risk triggered by the balance-sheet
channel in the macro-finance literature (e.g., He and Krishnamurthy, 2011, 2013; Brunner-
meier and Sannikov, 2014). Note that under full adoption Nt = 1, (36) reveals that the ratio
                              P
of Pt to At is a constant, so t =  A and the endogenous risk disappears. The network
effect induces strategic complementarity in agents' adoption decision, and thereby, amplifies
the impact of fundamental shock. This mechanism is related to the literature on strategic


                                                      E-1
complementarity and fragility (e.g., Goldstein and Pauzner, 2005). Here the endogenous risk
from strategic complementarity manifests itself in the equilibrium asset (token) price.
       Figure 11 also shows that the token price volatility exhibits non-monotonic dynamics as
                                 P
the platform productivity grows: t shoots up in the early stage, gradually declines, and
eventually converges to  A as Nt approaches one. This dynamics is broadly consistent with
the following observations: token price volatility for a nascent platform is large and the
cross-sectional variation of volatility is also greater for nascent platforms.
       Our analysis thus far has taken the platform productivity process as exogenous. In reality,
many token and cryptocurrency applications feature an endogenous dependence of platform
productivity on the user base. A defining feature of blockchain technology is the provision of
consensus on decentralized ledgers.32 In general, the more users on the platform, the more
economic activities taking place (i.e., higher At ). Moreover, a greater user base attracts
more resources and research onto the platform, accelerating the technological progress on
the platform and creating a positive feedback loop.
       To capture this positive feedback feature between productivity and user base, we gener-
alize the process of At as follows:

                                   dAt
                                       =  (Nt - N ) dt +  A dZtA ,                                     (94)
                                   At

where  > 0 and N is the minimal user base to achieve non-negative drift. The lack of early
adoption reduces the likelihood of the platform achieving a high level of adoption. Because
when At and Nt , are low, µA
                           t is negative, and thus, the only way for At to grow, i.e., dAt > 0,
is to have a long sequence of positive shocks, i.e., dZtA > 0. In contrast, when At and Nt are
high, At grows from both a positive drift and positive shocks.
       For our numerical solution, we set  to 0.04 and N to 0.5, so when Nt < 0.5, µA
                                                                                    t < 0,
and when Nt = 1, µA                                          A
                  t is equal to 0.02, which is the value of µ in the numerical solution
of the main model. Solving the Markov equilibrium under endogenous productivity only
requires to replace µA in (6) with  (Nt - N ). The growth rate of At is no longer i.i.d. and
the shock's impact on At becomes more persistent. Consider a positive shock. Not only
the current At increases, but through Nt , the growth rate of At increases, propagating the
shock's impact into the future. This amplifies the volatility of token price.
  32
    In a "proof-of-stake" system, the consensus is more robust when the user base is large and dispersed
because no single party is likely to hold a majority stake; in a "proof-of-work" system, more miners deliver
faster and more reliable confirmation of transactions, and miners' participation in turn depends on the size
of user base (for example, through transaction fees).


                                                   E-2
   Consider a negative shock. It not only drags down the current productivity and adoption
but also, through µA
                   t =  (Nt - N ), reduces the likelihood of higher future productivity
and adoption. The direct impact on the current adoption decreases the token price via a
decline of the current token demand. Moreover, the decline of expected future adoption
implies a weaker token demand in the future, and as a result, a decrease of µP
                                                                             t that further
discourages adoption and depresses the current token demand, resulting in a further decline
of token price. Therefore, we expect the current specification to deliver a stronger shock
amplification effect than the case of constant (and positive) µA . Figure 11 shows that the
         P
ratio of t to  A is higher with endogenous productivity than with exogenous productivity.
   Our discussion on the token price volatility relates to the current debate on sources of
cryptocurrency volatilities and the possibility of creating stable coins for means of payment.
The endogenous adoption is a natural mechanism that transmits and amplifies the shocks
to platform fundamentals (At ) to the token price. However, as shown in Figure 11, this
amplification mechanism is not strong under the current parameter choices for our numerical
solution. Therefore, if one has in mind a token-based ecosystem as described in our paper, the
concern over token price stability, and the associated benefits of having a stable token, should
be directed towards the volatility of platform fundamentals rather than active exit/entry
of users. To look for stronger volatility amplification mechanism, one may consider the
economic forces outside of our model, such as behavioral factors and token market structure.


E2: Technology Adoption and Bubbly Token Price
   The prices of several prominent cryptocurrencies experienced significant run-up followed
by crash and subsequent stabilization. We show that such "bubbly" dynamics of token price
dynamics can arise in a rational model with endogenous adoption driving the correlation
between the SDF and token return. So far we have set up and analyzed the model under the
risk-neutral measure. Next, we explicitly model risk premium as a function of user base Nt .
   Let t denote the instantaneous correlation coefficient between the productivity shock,
dZtA in (1), and the SDF shock, dZt in (88). To model the endogenous beta of platform
productivity, we allow t to depend on Nt . Suppose that d (Nt ) /dNt > 0, which means
that the productivity beta increases as the user base grows. As the technology becomes more
"mainstream," shocks to it become increasingly systematic. This assumption is inspired by
the adoption-dependent beta of new technologies in P´
                                                    astor and Veronesi (2009). By using
Girsanov's theorem, we obtain the following productivity process under the risk-neutral


                                              E-3
Figure 12: The "Bubbly" Behavior of Token Price. This graph plots the ratio of
token price, P (At ), to the long-run (full-adoption) value of token, P (At ), which shows how
endogenous adoption shapes the token price dynamics. The solid line shows the baseline
model. The dash line shows the model with endogenous systematic risk.


measure,
                                 dAt
                                     = µA -  (Nt )  A dt +  A dZtA .                               (95)
                                  At
When the productivity shock becomes more correlated with the SDF shock, investors demand
a higher risk premium, which lowers the risk-adjusted growth of productivity. In other words,
the risk-neutral expected growth rate of At is µA -  (Nt )  A , is lower. To solve the Markov
equilibrium, we simply replace µA in (6) with this risk-adjusted drift of At .
      There are thus two opposing forces that drive Pt as At grows. On the one hand, the
mechanism that increases Pt is still present: when At directly increases the flow utility of
token, or indirectly through its positive impact on Nt , token price increases. On the other
hand, the risk premium increases as Nt increases, so the risk-adjusted growth of At declines,
which in turn decreases Pt . The former channel could dominate in the early stage of adoption
while the latter channel dominates in the late stage of adoption. Therefore, Pt first rises with
Nt and then declines as Nt reaches a sufficiently high level, which resembles a bubble, as
shown in the left panel of Figure 12.33
 33
      In the numerical solution, we set µA = 4% and  (Nt ) = µA Nt /3 for illustrative purposes.




                                                     E-4
           Table 1: Comparing Our Model and Standard Monetary Models

This table provides a side-by-side mapping between our tokenized model economy and the
standard monetary economic models, such as money-in-utility and cash-in-advance models.

 a                                                       Our Model               Monetary Economics

 One unit of token/money buys:                P units of numeraire goods          1/P units of goods
 Token/money units (nominal value):                 ki,t units of token            M units of money
 Real token/money balance:                                 P ki,t                          M/P
 Effective carry cost:                                    r - µP t                          r


Appendix F: Classic Models and Tokenomics

F1: Tokenomics and Monetary Economics
       By trading in the token market, users profit from platform growth and effectively reduce
the carry cost of conducting transacting. Therefore, for payment platforms, the promi-
nent adoption problem in platform economics (e.g., Rochet and Tirole, 2006) is naturally
connected with the carry cost in the classic models of money as transaction medium (e.g.,
Baumol, 1952; Tobin, 1956). In the following, we compare our model with the standard
monetary models (i.e., the money-in-utility and cash-in-advance models).
       The token price, Pt is the price of tokens denominated in the numeraire consumption
goods. It is how many units of goods that one unit of token can buy. Therefore, xi,t = Pt ki,t
is the real value of token holdings, and ki,t , the units of tokens, is the nominal value of token
holdings. An agent cares about her real token value, i.e., how many units of goods the ki,t
units of tokens can be exchanged for, rather than the nominal token value, i.e., the units
of tokens, as the agent derives utilities from the real value of transactions in the units of
numeraire consumption goods.
       We follow the existing literature on money as means of payment. In theoretical models of
monetary economics (e.g., Baumol, 1952; Tobin, 1956; Feenstra, 1986; Freeman and Kydland,
2000) and empirical studies (e.g., Poterba and Rotemberg, 1986; Lucas and Nicolini, 2015;
Nagel, 2016), agents derive utility from the real value of money holdings.34 Table 1 provides
  34
    For the nominal value of means of payment to affects agents' decisions, additional frictions, such as
nominal illusion (e.g., Shafir, Diamond, and Tversky, 1997) or sticky prices (e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans, 2005), have to be introduced into the model.


                                                   E-5
a side-by-side mapping between our model of tokens as means of payment and the standard
models in the monetary economics literature (e.g., money-in-utility and cash-in-advance
models). We refer readers to the classical textbook treatments regarding monetary economics
(e.g., Gal´
          i, 2015; Ljungqvist and Sargent, 2004; Walsh, 2003).
       Note that our notations differ from those in standard monetary economics literature.
We use Pt as the value of token denominated in the numeraire consumption good. This is
different from the convention that money serves as the numeraire and the prices of goods
are denominated in money.
       The micro-foundation of our flow utility in Appendix A also sheds light on why it is
the real (goods) value of token holdings, instead of the nominal value, that matters. Agent
i holds ki,t units of tokens in preparation for a Poisson-arriving transaction opportunity
because carrying tokens provide payment convenience. When agent i conducts transactions,
the transaction counterparty demands payments in the units of numeraire consumption goods
instead of in the units of tokens, because eventually, the transaction counterparty cares about
the amount of goods that tokens can buy, not tokens themselves.35


F2: Token Pricing and the Black-Scholes Differential Equation
       Our token pricing equation (34) shares some common features with the Black-Scholes
derivative pricing equation. Both are second-order ordinary differential equation of an asset
price that evolves with an underlying state variable. However, the economic mechanisms
that lead to these equations are fundamentally different. The Black-Scholes equation is
derived from the no-arbitrage condition. Our token pricing equation (34) is obtained from
aggregating platform users' token demand and clearing the token market. In the following,
we list the steps that we use to obtain (34) and then discuss its differences and similarities
with the Black-Scholes option derivative equation.
  35
     For example, Opensea is an DApp marketplace on Ethereum that allows users to buy and sell through
smart contracts the crypto collectibles, gaming items, and other items that are backed by the Ethereum
blockchain. A seller Koryue listed to sell MCH Hero: #40320018 Lv.78 at 6:17:37am on 01/04/2020 for
2.1 ETH, with Ether price then being about 133 USD. The same person relist the item at 5:54:29pm on
01/16/2020 for 1.5 ETH, when Ether price was about 166 USD. The item is sold about an hour later. To
the extent that during the short span, agents' valuation of the item did not change dramatically, we can see
that they care about not the number of tokens (2.1 vs 1.5) but the actual dollar value that they can use for
offline consumption (279 vs 249). The latter only has slight drop (possibly due the the seller lowering the
price slightly), but it differs a lot in ETH. There are many similar cases to show that people think in terms
of numeraire (the actual consumption value of those Ethers), not the number of Ethers. When ether price
fluctuates, they simply adjust the number of ethers when listing prices.



                                                    E-6
   First note that the state variable for our equilibrium solution is the exogenous productiv-
ity At , and thus, all endogenous variables are functions of At in equilibrium. For example,
the equilibrium token price can be written as Pt = P (At ), a univariate function of At . Sim-
ilarly, Nt = N (At ) and St = S (At ). Figure 7 in Appendix B plots the solved endogenous
variables that are all functions of At from our model solution. By rewriting the token-market
clearing condition (32), we obtain the following equilibrium condition for the drift µP
                                                                                      t :

                                                                  
                                                     N t S t At
                               µP
                                t = r - (1 - )                       .                                 (96)
                                                      Pt M

              o's lemma to Pt = P (At ), we may express the drift of Pt , µP
By applying It^                                                            t , as follows:


                                 P  ( At )          1 P  (At )           2
                          µP
                           t =             At µ A +            At  A         .                         (97)
                                 P ( At )           2 P ( At )

Finally, (96) with (97) together give us (34), which we state below for the ease of reference:
                                                                                      
                                    1                 2                  N t S t At
         rP (At ) = P  (At ) At µA + P  (At ) At  A       + (1 - )                       P ( At ) .    (98)
                                    2                                     Pt M

   Next, we compare our token pricing equation with the Black-Scholes derivative pricing
equation that values a derivative on a dividend-paying stock. Let St denote the ex-dividend
price of stock, which follows a geometric Brownian motion under the physical measure:

                                  dSt
                                      = (µS -  )dt +  S dZt ,                                          (99)
                                   St

where µS ,  S , and  are all constant and Zt is a standard Brownian motion. Note that this
stock continuously pays dividends at a constant dividend yield  . Let Vt denote the price of a
derivative which delivers a contingent payment G(ST ) at maturity T , where G( · ) is a function
of ST , the underlying stock price at maturity T . (For example, the Black-Scholes European
call option pricing formula corresponds to the case where G(ST ) = max{ST - K, 0}).
   By the standard no-arbitrage argument (e.g., Duffie, 2001), the value of this derivative,
Vt , is given by
                                  Vt = Et e-r(T -t) G(ST ) ,                                          (100)

where Et is the conditional expectation under the risk-neutral measure. We know that
the value of the derivative Vt is Markovian, which we express as V (St , t), The standard



                                              E-7
no-arbitrage argument implies that V (St , t) satisfies the following PDE

                                V (St , t)               1  2 V ( S t , t)             2       V (St , t)
                rV (St , t) =              St ( r -  ) +                   St  S           +              .            (101)
                                 St                      2     St2                               t

       Comparing our equilibrium token pricing ODE (34) with (101), the PDE for derivative
pricing, we make the following observations:

   1. Difference: Price determination mechanism. The derivative pricing equation
         is derived from the absence of arbitrage between the derivatives and their underlying
         assets (and risk-free bonds). Economic profits from trading do not exist in the standard
         derivative pricing framework. Our token pricing equation is derived from the token
         market clearing condition, which implies that the marginal participant (with ui = ut )
         breaks even but all other participants collect positive profits. Agents with ui > ut
         break even at the margin as required by their first-order conditions, but their average
         revenues are larger than their costs due to the concavity (or decreasing return to
         scale) of transactional benefits, (xi,t )1- (Nt At eui ) dt, in the numeraire value of token
         holdings, xi,t .

   2. Difference: Token's "flow" term. Another difference between the two pricing
                                                                                                            
                                                                                               N t St A t
         equations is that token has an additional "flow" term, (1 - )                          Pt M
                                                                                                               P (At ), while
                                                           36
         the derivatives pricing model does not.                This "flow" term appears in our model
         because of the aggregation of heterogeneous users' demand for tokens as transaction
         medium.

   3. Similarity: the same risk-adjusted expected return. Our token pricing equation
         and the Black-Scholes pricing equation have the value of asset multiplied by r on the
         left side, meaning that both feature a marginal risk-adjusted return equal to r, the risk-
         free rate. Note that the total risk-adjusted return of tokens is the sum of transactional
         benefits and the financial return (see (27) in our revision).
                                                   V (St ,t)         dP (At )
   4. Similarity: The coefficients of               St
                                                               and    dAt
                                                                              .   The state variable of derivatives
         is the underlying stock's price. Since the stock is traded, so it has an expected cum-
         dividend return equal to r, and thus, its ex-dividend stock price has a drift that is equal
  36
    That there is no flow term in the derivative pricing formula (101) is due to the fact that this derivative
does not have any flow payment before maturity T . If we had allowed this derivative to pay holders prior to
maturity, the derivative pricing equation (101) would have a "flow" term as well.



                                                        E-8
                                                                                               V (St ,t)
  to St (r -  ) under the risk-neutral measure, which is the coefficient on                     St
                                                                                                         .   The
  underlying state variable of tokens is the platform productivity At . The coefficient on
  dP (At )
   dAt
             is At µA , also the state variable's drift. Since At is not traded, the risk-neutral
  drift, At µA , is not equal to At r, resulting in a shortfall similar to  in the (r -  ) in
  the coefficient.

5. Similarity: The quadratic variation terms. Both our token pricing equation and
  the standard derivative pricing equation have the second-order derivative term which
  depends on the volatility of the underlying state variable (At for tokens and St for
                                                                                                                2
  derivatives). As a result, we have the same similar quadratic variation terms ( At  A
                              2                                                  2 V (St ,t)            d2 P (At )
  for tokens, and St  S           for derivatives) i.e., the coefficients on       St 2         and       dA2 t

  respectively, from It^
                       o's calculus.

6. Non-essential differences: finite maturity versus perpetuity. Tokens in our
  model are perpetual with no maturity. Standard derivatives often have maturity, and
                                         V (St ,t)
  hence, have the additional term          t
                                                     in the pricing equation.




                                                E-9
