                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                        DEPUTIZATION

                                         Bruce I. Carlin
                                          Tarik Umar
                                           Hanyi Yi

                                       Working Paper 27225
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27225


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Bruce I. Carlin, Tarik Umar, and Hanyi Yi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Deputization
Bruce I. Carlin, Tarik Umar, and Hanyi Yi
NBER Working Paper No. 27225
May 2020
JEL No. G28,H31,K23

                                          ABSTRACT

A policy of deputization asks agents to monitor others without providing explicit incentives. It is
often used to prevent dangerous activities. To calibrate whether and why it works, we study
recent laws that deputized financial professionals to help fight elder financial abuse. We show
deputization led to a 4%-6% decrease in suspected cases and a 4.5% drop in personal
bankruptcies. Women, minorities, and unmarried people benefited more. Effectiveness operated
through higher community-mindedness and deeper social connections. Egoistic incentives, legal
concerns, publicity, and religiosity were less important. This suggests that regulators can rely on
social networks to solve tough problems.

Bruce I. Carlin                                  Hanyi Yi
Jones School of Business                         Rice University
Rice University                                  6100 Main Street
1900 Rice Boulevard                              Houston, TX 77005
Houston, TX 77005                                hy25@rice.edu
and NBER
carlin@rice.edu

Tarik Umar
Rice University
6100 Main St. MS 531
Houston, TX 77005
tarik.umar@gmail.com
1. Introduction

    Deputization occurs when a principal empowers an agent to carry out a monitoring
function without providing explicit incentives. Because of its permissive nature, the success
of this policy depends on other existing extrinsic incentives or intrinsic motivation (moral
beliefs, ethical behavior, or a sense of community).1 Deputization may be useful when the
principal lacks a sufficient revenue stream to provide monetary incentives or the scale of the
task makes it infeasible to completely reward or punish the agents who participate.
    Deputization is frequently important for solving public goods problems that involve iden-
tifying dangerous activities. For example, the federal government calls upon UPS and FedEx
to identify suspicious packages associated with drug trafficking or terrorist activity (Michaels,
2011). Financial institutions are asked to monitor transactions for money laundering, fraud,
and other crimes (Levinson, 2008). Facebook and Google assist in flagging communications
that are suspicious for terrorism or other illegal activities (Michaels, 2018).
    Deputization may also involve individuals. For example, New York City recently dep-
utized thousands of social distancing ambassadors to curb the spread of COVID-19 amid
growing social unrest.2 It has also been applied to reporting suspicious activities at airports,
identifying illegal immigration (Lin, 2009), and stopping the abuse of minors (Kesner, 2002;
Mitter, 2011).
    Opportunities to calibrate whether and why deputization works are rare because it is
not typically implemented for exogenous reasons. In this paper, we exploit a quasi-natural
experiment that involved a nationwide effort to curb financial abuse of the elderly. This is not
only a pervasive and growing problem, it is pernicious.3 Elder abuse is hard to police because
the perpetrators are often people close to the victim like family members and caregivers.
    Through the Model Act and FINRA Rule 2165, regulators deputized financial profession-
als and gave them the authority to halt the disbursement of funds that appear suspicious for
financial abuse. Both regulations are permissive rather than mandatory. Regulators chose

    1
      Many economists have suggested that agents conform to ethical codes rather than act egoistically (e.g.
Arrow, 1988; Brennan, 1994; Akerlof, 2007) As far back as Aristotle (in Nicomachean Ethics), it was pro-
posed that individuals in a civilized society incorporate ethical standards into the decisions that they make
(Aristotle, 2004). This has been studied in psychology (Judge and Ilies, 2002), law (Shavell, 2002), economics
(Frank, 1987; Noe and Rebello, 1994), and finance (Carlin and Gervais, 2009). See Carlin et al. (2009) and
Sapienza et al. (2013) for an analysis of trust formation in markets.
    2
      See https://newyork.cbslocal.com/2020/05/10/social-distancing-ambassadors/.
    3
      According to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), in 2017 there were 63,500 cases of elder
financial exploitation reported to the Department of the Treasury, totaling $1.7 billion dollars. See https://
files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb suspicious-activity-reports-elder-financial-exploitation report.
pdf. DeLiema et al. (2020) find that 30% of older Americans have experienced others using or attempting
to use their accounts without permission.



                                                      1
not to give participants rewards or make them subject to punitive actions if they choose
not to act. As FINRA Regulatory Notice 17-11 states: "The rule creates no obligation to
withhold a disbursement of funds or securities in [suspicious] circumstances." Importantly,
these rule changes did not alter the existing requirement that financial professionals report
elder financial exploitation to the U.S. Treasury, as mandated by the Bank Secrecy Act of
1970. However, oftentimes retrieving the lost monies after disbursement was unsuccessful.
So, regulators implemented these new rules to allow more time for investigation, but did not
include carrots or sticks.
    We exploit the staggered passage of these rules across states to identify whether dep-
utization works and why. This setting is natural for a staggered difference-in-differences
specification with multiple control groups (Goodman-Bacon, 2018) and provides a unique
opportunity to assess this type of policy change. The timing of adoption across states is
unrelated to previous financial exploitation, the size of the elderly population, and other
observable characteristics. To discern the channels through which this regulation acts, we
examine how effectiveness of the laws varies at the county level.
    We amass a large dataset: reports of suspected elder financial exploitation from the De-
partment of Treasury4 , the employment history of the entire universe of registered brokers
and advisers from FINRA and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), credit bu-
reau reports from older adults in the United States, county-level data on congregations and
adherents from the U.S. Religion Census, media coverage for elder abuse during 2015-2020
from Factiva, and county-level data from the U.S. census.
    Deputizing appears to be effective at deterring the financial exploitation of the elderly. We
estimate that this policy led to a 4%-6% reduction in the monthly number of elder financial
abuse cases in treated counties. We find similar estimates using a sample of counties that
are matched on pre-treatment characteristics. This effect is more pronounced for women,
minorities, seniors without a spouse, and seniors with more retirement capital, who are more
likely to be targets of financial exploitation.
    We investigate the welfare implications of the new laws by assessing their effect on per-
sonal bankruptcies. Consumer bankruptcy is well-known to result in substantial damages to
individuals and a dead-weight loss to society (e.g. Athreya, 2002; Chatterjee and Gordon,
2012). We find that this policy of deputization was responsible for a 4.5% reduction in the
frequency of personal bankruptcies among the elderly, which is a substantial welfare effect.
    A series of cross-sectional tests suggest that higher community mindedness and social

  4
    A CFPB report studying a random sample of suspected cases finds that approximately 80% result in a
financial loss. See https://www.justice.gov/file/852856/download.



                                                  2
connectedness are responsible for the success of deputization. Other alternatives such as
preserving fees based on assets under management (AUM), getting publicity5 , adhering to
moral codes, or using the law to strengthen desirable norms (Sunstein, 1996) do not appear
to be channels through which the new regulations affected outcomes.
    We find that there is a significant reduction in elder exploitation in counties that have
a higher per capita presence of investment advisers. But, the same is not true for brokers.
This dichotomy casts doubt on several potential explanations for the overall drop in elder
abuse. If financial incentives or legal ramifications were important, then we should likely see
an effect for both sets of professionals.
    To explore these egoistic incentives, we show that when more professionals in a county
charge fees for AUM, commissions, or hourly fees, this does not change the effectiveness of
the new laws. Also, the laws did not appear to primarily curb improper behavior by the
financial professionals themselves: we find no difference in the effectiveness of the laws in
counties with more past customer complaints, regulatory actions, civil litigation, or criminal
actions. Moreover, there was no change in regulatory actions or measures of adviser and
broker misconduct after the implementation.
    The dichotomy is more likely to be based on the quality of relationships, as investment
advisers typically work closely with clients and brokers are at arm's length. We find that the
reduction of elder abuse is higher for advisers who have spent more time in a community.
The same is not true for differences in time in the profession or tenure at a firm.6 Also,
the reduction appears weaker when financial professionals are registered to work in multiple
states, perhaps because their clients are more dispersed. These findings imply that stronger
bonds may be more important for deputization to work than experience or skill.
    Consistent with this, deputization appears to work better in areas that have more social
connectedness. We find a greater reduction in elder exploitation in communities with larger
religious congregations, controlling for the number of adherents per capita. Advisers within
more dense social networks may be more community minded or interested in preserving their
local reputations. By contrast, more religious counties with more adherents per capita do
not see a differential change in elder abuse. This difference makes a moral imperative a less
likely explanation for the success of deputization.
    The role of social networks in regulatory design has been underappreciated. One of the

   5
     Publicity results from media coverage across communities. An extensive Factiva news search suggests
there is essentially no coverage of elder financial exploitation using a firm's or adviser's name, casting doubt
on a publicity-seeking incentive to serve clients.
   6
     Tenure at a firm does not guarantee deep-seated relationships. Clients are portable when advisers
change firms and promotion that comes with tenure may even reduce time with clients because of added
administrative responsibilities (Clifford and Gerken, 2017).


                                                       3
contributions of our paper is to show that regulators should consider and can rely on social
networks and community-mindedness when enacting permissive policies like deputization.7
Existing literature sheds light on why social networks and the strength of relationships are
likely to matter for deputization to work. First, more connected communities and personal
relationships may help financial professionals identify unusual activity. Second, professionals
in such communities are more likely to derive utility from the increases in welfare of others
(Leider et al., 2009). Third, social norms and morality may only be applicable to a narrow
community, such as a congregation (Tabellini, 2008). Fourth, reciprocal exchange is more
likely to be important in closer-knit communities, which creates incentives to protect clients
(Kranton, 1996).
    It is important to point out that the magnitudes of the effects of deputization in this
paper likely underestimate its potential role in other settings. First, from an econometric
standpoint, the fact that the policy's effect is not immediate works against finding an effect
in a staggered difference-in-differences specification. We describe this in detail in the paper.
Second, the financial industry is not known for being particularly altruistic. A growing lit-
erature characterizes this (Dimmock and Gerken, 2012; Dimmock et al., 2018; Charoenwong
et al., 2019). In fact, financial professionals are commonly culpable for preying on the el-
derly (Egan et al., 2019). Happily, though, we do find in this paper that relying on financial
professionals does work, which may cast a more positive, optimistic light on the industry.

2. Background
2.1. Elder Financial Exploitation
    Elder financial exploitation is defined by the U.S. Government Accountability Office as
the "illegal or improper use of an older adults funds, property, or assets."8 Such exploitation
is pervasive and economically meaningful. In 2017, there were 63,500 cases of elder financial
exploitation reported to the Department of the Treasury, totaling $1.7 billion dollars.9 These
numbers likely represent a lower bound because of under-reporting: the National Adult
Protective Service Association (NAPSA) estimates that for every 1 case of elder abuse that
comes to light, another 43 remain hidden.10

   7
     Review of comment letters shows no consideration of these community dimensions when the Model Act
and FINRA Rule 2165 were designed. Comment letters available at https://www.nasaa.org/nasaa-proposals/
?t=seniors&y=.
   8
     See https://www.gao.gov/new.items/d11208.pdf.
   9
     See https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb suspicious-activity-reports-elder-financial-exploitation
report.pdf.
  10
     See https://www.napsa-now.org/get-informed/exploitation-resources/.




                                                     4
    Why are the elderly particularly vulnerable to financial exploitation? Two interrelated
sets of factors are at work. The first set is health-related. The aging process brings about
cognitive and physical changes that elevate the risks of financial exploitation. The changes
can include cognitive impairment, poor physical health, functional impairment, and depen-
dency on others. According to the Alzheimers Association, around 15-20% of people 65 years
of age or older have Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), and about a third of persons with
MCI develop dementia within five years.11
    The second set of factors are related to financial and retirement trends. Americans
over the age of 50 currently account for 77% of financial assets in the United States.12 Their
wealth, combined with greater financial autonomy upon retirement brought by a general shift
from defined benefit to defined contribution plans, makes them popular targets of financial
exploitation. This issue will likely become more prevalent as the elderly population grows in
the next 40 years.13
    Elder financial exploitation can be divided into three broad categories: scams by strangers,
scams by professionals, and exploitation by family members and trusted others. Typical
scams by strangers include lottery scams, "grandparent" scams (for example, an older adult
is called and told that his or her grandson is in jail and needs money immediately), and
charity scams (i.e. falsely soliciting funds for good causes). Scams by professionals include
predatory lending, annuity schemes, Medicare scams, and identity theft (e.g. fraudulently
opening a credit card in an elder person's name). Common ways family members exploit
older adults include stealing checks, exploiting joint bank accounts, withholding assets from
needed care and medical services, and threatening to abandon or harm unless the older
person transfers money.14
    The CFPB's analysis of a random sample of 1,051 elder financial exploitation cases re-
vealed that 51% are perpetrated by strangers, 36% by family members, 25% by caregivers,
and 7% by fiduciaries. Around 80% of cases resulted in financial loss. Both the probability
and the amount of the losses are substantially higher when the perpetrator is a known per-
son ($83,600) rather than a stranger ($17,000). In 7% of cases, the loss exceeded $100,000.
These magnitudes are meaningful for most retirees. In addition, female, African American,

  11
      https://www.alz.org/media/documents/alzheimers-facts-and-figures-2019-r.pdf.
  12
      https://www.justice.gov/file/1125706/download.
   13
      Adults that are above 65 years old is projected to grow from 15.2% of total population to 23.4% by 2060.
See https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2018/03/graying-america.html.
   14
      For the purpose of this paper, we use the term "elder financial exploitation" and "elder financial abuse"
interchangeably. However, some definitions might distinguish between two types of elder financial exploita-
tion: financial abuse, in which a relationship of trust has been violated by family members, friends, or others;
and elder fraud, such as scams perpetrated by strangers.



                                                       5
Latino, poor, and isolated older adults were disproportionately victimized.15

2.2. Investment Advisers and Brokers
    In the United States, firms known as registered-investment advisers (RIAs) employ
investment-adviser representatives (IARs). The Investment Advisers Act of 1940 defines
an investment adviser broadly as "Any person who, for compensation, engages in the busi-
ness of advising others, either directly or through publications or writings, as to the value of
securities or as to the advisability of investing in, purchasing, or selling securities, or, who
for compensation and as part of a regular business, issues or promulgates analyses or reports
concerning securities."
    The SEC regulates investment advisers. RIAs and IARs have a fiduciary duty to their
clients. Clients include individuals, high-net-worth persons, pooled-investment vehicles (e.g.,
hedge funds, and mutual funds), pension funds, and governments. Common names for
investment advisers include asset managers, investment counselors, investment managers,
portfolio managers, and wealth managers.
    FINRA oversees brokers. The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 defines a broker as "any
person or company engaged in the business of buying and selling securities on behalf of its
clients, for its own account (as dealer), or both." Brokers typically receive commissions and
product fees, whereas investment advisers earn fees based on hours of service and assets
under management (AUM). Also, brokers are held to a weaker suitability standard, which
requires a broker to take into account a client's financial situation and investment needs, but
does not require that they put the client's interests before their own. Because of different
forms of compensation and fiduciary duty, the conflicts of interest are potentially higher for
brokers than advisers.
    Approximately 50% of broker representatives are dual-registered as investment advisers
and about 80% of investment adviser representatives are also registered as brokers. A com-
monly expressed concern by regulators is that clients may not be able to determine whether
an individual is operating as an investment adviser with a fiduciary standard or as a broker,
especially because brokers are often referred to as financial advisers. In the remainder of the
paper, we will make this distinction carefully in our analysis.

3. Legislation Protecting Elders

   We study two regulatory changes that granted financial professionals the power to halt
disbursements of funds that they deemed suspicious. Both rules did not provide explicit

 15
      See https://www.justice.gov/file/852856/download.


                                                    6
incentives that required participation. Before these rules were passed, professionals were
required to report suspicious behavior. But, because monies were often hard to recover
during investigations, simple reporting did little to limit financial loss.16 The two rules vary
in terms of their implementation and the types of financial professionals covered. These
differences are summarized in Table 1 and detailed below.

3.1. The Model Act
    The North American Securities Administrators Association (NASAA) is a self-regulatory
organization made up of state and provincial securities regulators from the United States,
Canada, and Mexico. NASAA drafts model rules that guide various state and provincial
legislatures. The NASAA Model Legislation or Regulation to Protect Vulnerable Adults from
Financial Exploitation (hereinafter, "Model Act") originated as an initiative of the NASAA's
Committee on Senior Issues and Diminished Capacity. On September 29, 2015, a draft of the
Model Act was released for a 30-day public comment period. On January 22, 2016, NASAA
members voted to approve the Model Act.
    The NASAA Model Act applies to both broker-dealers and registered investment ad-
visers, including certain qualified employees (e.g. broker-dealer agents, investment adviser
representatives, and persons serving in a supervisory, compliance, or legal capacity for a
broker-dealer or investment adviser). The key provision that enhances the ability of these
financial professionals to protect the elderly is the authority to delay disbursements of funds.
Broker-dealers and investment advisers may delay disbursement of funds from a senior's ac-
count for up to 15-25 days if they reasonably believe that such disbursement will result in
the financial exploitation of the senior.17 The broker-dealer or investment adviser halting
the disbursement must direct that the funds be held in temporary escrow pending resolution
of the disbursement decision.
    The ability to delay a disbursement of funds allows for an investigation to occur prior
to any loss of funds due to exploitation. If a disbursement is delayed, the broker-dealer
or investment adviser must initiate an internal investigation of the suspect disbursement
and provide the results of such investigation to the state securities administrator and Adult

  16
      See interview with Michael Pieciak (Deputy Commissioner, Vermont Securities Division, NASAA) during
the SEC Meeting of the Advisory Committee on Small and Emerging Companies.
   17
      The Model Act defines financial exploitation as "the wrongful or unauthorized taking, withholding,
appropriation, or use of money, assets or property of an eligible adult, or any act or omission taken by a
person, including through the use of a power of attorney, guardianship, or conservatorship of an eligible
adult, to: i. Obtain control, through deception, intimidation or undue influence, over the eligible adults
money, assets or property to deprive the eligible adult of the ownership, use, benefit or possession of his or
her money, assets or property; or ii. Convert money, assets or property of the eligible adult to deprive such
eligible adult of the ownership, use, benefit or possession of his or her money, assets or property."



                                                      7
Protection Services (APS) agencies. At the discretion of the state securities regulator or APS
agencies, the broker-dealer or investment adviser may extend the delay for an additional 10
days if necessary.
    We identify state-level acts, laws, statutes, and regulations that are based on the Model
Act or contain similar provisions to the Model Act across U.S. states. For each state, we
obtain the name of the relevant legislation or regulations, the passage date, and the effective
date from the state's legislature website.
    As shown in Table 2, as of September 2019, 25 states have enacted legislation that
contains many of the provisions found in the Model Act. Prior to the passage of the Model
Act in 2016, three states--Delaware, Missouri, and Washington --already enacted laws that
contain provisions similar to the Model Act.18 Following the passage of the Model Act in
January 2016, three states --Alabama, Indiana, and Vermont --adopted laws based on the
Model Act. Following that, ten states adopted these laws in 2017, six states in 2018, and
four states in 2019. Figure 1 Panel A shows graphically the staggered adoption of the Model
Act or similar provisions across U.S. states.
    Although state-level legislation was often inspired and guided by the Model Act, states
exercised autonomy in determining the exact scope of the legislation. For example, 15 states
required mandatory reporting of suspected financial abuse cases to state APS offices just as
required by the Model Act, whereas 11 states made this reporting voluntary. In addition,
although the majority of the states enacted regulations that applied to broker-dealers and
investment advisers, five states expanded the scope to include all financial institutions and
one state limited the scope to include only broker-dealers.

3.2. FINRA Rule 2165
    State regulation of broker-dealers exists in parallel with the Financial Industry Regu-
latory Authority (FINRA), a federally-sanctioned self-regulatory organization. In March
2017, FINRA adopted Rule 2165, "Financial Exploitation of Specified Adults", that allowed
broker-dealers to place temporary holds on disbursements of funds or securities from a se-
nior customer's account when there is a reasonable belief that financial exploitation is taking
place.19 Upon placing a hold, Rule 2165 requires the broker-dealer to immediately initiate

  18
     Judy Shaw, the president of NASAA in 2016, commented that the motivation for the Model Act was
based on the early experiences Delaware, Missouri, and Washington had with various elements of the Model
Act. States adopted the policy in a staggered fashion, which depended on the timing of legislative sessions
and capacity. We examine the timing of adoption more completely in Section 5.1.
  19
     Jim Wrona, vice president and associate general counsel at FINRA, gave the following example: A client
will say, "I won the lottery, but I need to pay the taxes upfront before I can claim the award". If the client
demands the money even after the broker has explained that its a scam, he or she can then temporarily
pause the disbursement and investigate further.

                                                      8
an internal review of the facts and circumstances.20 On February 5, 2018, the rule was ap-
proved by the SEC and became effective nationwide. The essence of the FINRA Rule 2165
is similar to that of the Model Act, but is distinct in several aspects. A comparison of these
two rules is in Table 1.

4. Data and Sample
4.1. Elder Financial Exploitation
     We obtained data on elder financial exploitation from the Suspicious Activity Reports
maintained by the U.S. Department of Treasury's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
(FinCEN). As established by the federal Bank Secrecy Act of 1970, financial institutions
such as banks, registered investment advisers, brokers and dealers, money service businesses,
and insurance companies must file Suspicious Activity Reports with FinCEN if they know
or suspect that a transaction has no apparent lawful purpose or is not the sort in which
the particular customer would normally be expected to engage.21 The filing is mandatory
when a suspicious transaction involves above $5,000 in funds or assets, and voluntary if the
transaction is below the such threshold.
     In April 2012, FinCEN introduced electronic suspicious activity reporting with a des-
ignated category for "elder financial exploitation." We collect variables such as the total
number of reported cases in a county in a month, the type of reporting institution, the type
of financial product, the instrument of transaction, and the regulatory authority. Reports
are tied to the county in which the victim resides.22 Examples of financial products used
are credit cards, debit cards, insurance and annuity products, and securities. Examples of
transaction types are funds transfer, checks, and money orders.
     Important to our analysis is that the reporting requirements of financial professionals to
FinCEN did not change with a state's adoption of the Model Act or with FINRA's adoption

  20
     Although the rule applies to the disbursement of securities, it does not apply to transactions in securities.
For example, Rule 2165 would not apply to a customers order to sell his shares of a stock. However, if a
customer requested that the proceeds of a sale of shares of a stock be disbursed out of his account, then the
rule could apply to the disbursement of the proceeds.
  21
     See 31 U.S.C. § 5311 et seq. and 31 C.F.R. Chapter X. Criminal penalties can be assessed for willful
Bank Secrecy Act regulation violations. Any individual found guilty of this is subject to criminal fines
of up to $250,000 or five years in prison, or both. If the individual commits a willful Bank Secrecy Act
violation while breaking another law or committing other criminal activity, he or she is subject to a fine of
up to $500,000 or ten years in prison, or both. Violations of certain Bank Secrecy Act provisions or special
measures can make an institution subject to a criminal money penalty up to the greater of $1 million or
twice the value of the transaction.
  22
     Counties are defined by zip codes as provided by the filing institution indicating where the suspicious
activity occurred.




                                                        9
of Rule 2165.23

4.2. Investment Advisers and Brokers
    Because the Model Act operates through investment advisers, we obtain individual-level
data on investment adviser representatives from the SEC's Investment Adviser Public Disclo-
sure (IAPD) database. Representatives are required to file Form U4 with the IAPD annually
or when there are material changes. The data is survivorship-bias free for at least the past
ten years. The data includes the firm an adviser works for, the branch office the adviser
works in (city, state), and the dates an adviser worked at that branch. Full employment and
registration histories are available. Thus, this data allow us to calculate a time series of the
per capita number of investment advisers in a county. We also have the date, resolution, and
detailed text of each customer complaints filed against an adviser, regulatory actions taken
against each adviser, and other disclosures such as criminal proceedings that must be made
to clients.
    We also obtain data on registered investment adviser (RIA) firms through a Freedom of
Information Act filed with the SEC. RIAs are required to file Form ADV annually, which
records information such as firm ownership structure, total asset under management, num-
ber of employees, clientele composition (individual vs. institution), locations, conflicts of
interests, and a variety of disclosures such as customer complaints and regulatory actions.
We do not have Form ADV data for RIAs managing less than $100 million because in 2012
Dodd-Frank shifted oversight responsibilities for such advisers from the SEC to the states
(Charoenwong et al., 2019).
    Because FINRA's rule change and the Model Act both empower broker-dealers and broker
representatives, we gathered similar data from the BrokerCheck database that we gathered
for investment advisers from the IAPD. We again have the ability to know which firm a
broker works for, what branch the broker works in, and for what dates the broker worked
there.
    Both the IAPD and BrokerCheck are managed by FINRA and thus use the same identi-
fiers for individuals. We can therefore observe which investment adviser representatives are
dual-registered as brokers.

4.3. Experian Credit Score Data
   To explore the economic consequences of financial exploitation on the senior population,
we use a panel dataset of individual credit bureau records from 2012 to 2018. The data

  23
     Judy Shaw, the president of NASAA explained to us that "reporting to APS is separate and in addition
to FinCen requirements. Some of the state APS reporting requirements have been in place for years, some,
like Maine, have been put in place as a result of adoption of the NASAA Model Act."

                                                   10
contain a 1% representative sample of all U. S. residents selected based on the last two digits
of their social security number. This sampling procedure produces a random sample of
individuals because the Social Security Administration sequentially assigns the last 4 digits
of social security numbers to new applicants regardless of geographical location.
    The dataset contains detailed individual demographic and economic characteristics, such
as age, sex, marital status, dwelling status, credit score, estimated income, and debt char-
acteristics including auto loans, mortgages, credit card debt, and medical debt. For our
purposes, we use the subsample of individuals that are above 65 years old to examine the
credit market impacts of reduced financial fraud targeted at seniors. This dataset also pro-
vides additional information about time-varying county demographic and economic trends
that are difficult to obtain from other data sources. We construct control variables such as
county average debt-to-income ratio, average credit score, fraction of subprime borrowers,
and fraction of married population.

4.4. U.S. Religion Census
    We use data from the 2010 U.S. Religion Census to measure the number of religious
adherents and religious congregations in each county. Every 10 years, the Association of
Statisticians of American Religious Bodies (ASARB) compiles data from national surveys on
religious affiliation in the United States. Based on the results from these surveys, the ASARB
prepares the "U.S. Religion Census: Religious Congregations and Membership Study", which
reports county-by-county data on the number of congregations and total adherents by re-
ligious affiliation.24 These proxies for religiosity are standard in the literature (Hout and
Greeley, 1998; Grullon et al., 2009).

4.5. Factiva
    We use Factiva to investigate the media coverage of advisers and brokers that halt sus-
picious transactions. Factiva is a global news search engine produced by Dow Jones &
Company. It provides access to more than 32,000 global media sources, including national,
international, and regional newspapers, newswires, TV and radio podcasts, news and busi-
ness information websites, blogs, message boards, and more.

4.6. U.S. Census Bureau
    We use data on counties from the U.S. Census Bureau as control variables. These data
include the number of persons of 65 years of age or older, gender makeup, ethnic composition,
average retirement income, and total income.


 24
      More details regarding the census can be found here: http://www.usreligioncensus.org/datacol.php.

                                                    11
4.7. Summary Statistics
    Our sample includes monthly observations for 2,557 counties from April 2012 to July
2019, resulting in 225,016 total number of observations. Table 3 presents summary statistics
for the counties in our sample over the sample period. The average number of reported
senior financial exploitation cases in a county-month is 0.8, with a standard deviation of 2.7.
Approximately 82% of counties have zero reported cases in a month. The 99th percentile of
reported senior financial fraud in a county-month is 14.
    In terms of access to financial professionals, the average number of investment advisers
(brokers) per 1,000 individuals is 0.6 (1.1). Their per capita presence varies from 0 to 3.8
for advisers and 0 to 7.6 for brokers. There is a large distribution in access to financial
professionals as the standard deviations of these variables are twice as large as the mean.
Approximately, 80% of advisers are dual-registered as brokers, whereas about 50% of brokers
are dual registered as advisers. These numbers have meaningful cross-sectional variation,
demonstrated by a standard deviation of 60% and 30%, respectively.
    In an average county, roughly 18% of the population is 65 years of age or older. This
statistic varies substantially across states, ranging from around 11% in Utah to 22% in
Florida. In our analysis, we control for this variation to adjust for the base of the senior
population. In terms of economic conditions, the counties average $74,400 in household
income, $22,348 in retirement income, and a credit score of 673. An average county has
42% subprime borrowers (credit score below 660) and an average debt-to-income ratio of
approximately 12.

5. Results
5.1. Empirical Specification
   We employ a generalized difference-in-differences approach. This approach exploits the
staggered passage of regulations across states empowering financial professionals to halt
suspicious disbursements of funds from the accounts of the elderly. More specifically, we
exploit differences across states in the timing of passage of the Model Act (affecting both
brokers and investment advisers) and the timing of FINRA's national rule change (affecting
brokers). Table 2 details when states adopted the Model Act. As noted before, there was
no concomitant change in the reporting requirements of suspicious transactions to the U.S.
Treasury, and we are unaware of any other confounding events or rule changes that took
place simultaneously with the adoption of these policies.
   We estimate models of the following form:

                   OU T COM Ect =  + P OSTst +  Xct + c + t +            ct                (1)


                                              12
We index county by c, state by s, and month by t. P OSTst is an indicator variable that
equals to one when any financial professional in a state is first permitted to halt suspicious
transactions. Figure 1 Panel B shows variations in this date across states. The  on P OSTst
measures the effect of the rule change.25 Xct denotes a vector of time-varying county demo-
graphic and economic characteristics, such as the number and average credit score of persons
65 years of age or older in a county. Our main specification includes a set of county fixed
effects, denoted by c , to absorb any unobserved persistent county characteristics. We also
include month fixed effects, denoted by t , to account for nationwide trends. We cluster
standard errors at the county level.
    The key identifying assumption underlying our empirical strategy is that states' timing of
adoption is independent of factors that might otherwise affect elder financial abuse. We take
a variety of measures to substantiate this assumption. First, Figure 2 shows, in event time,
no unusual changes in elder financial exploitation prior to the rule change, and a noticeable
drop only upon passage.
    Second, for the 25 Model Act states, we find no relationship between the timing of adop-
tion by individual states and a wide range of state economic and demographic characteristics,
such as the preexisting level of elder abuse, the fraction of seniors in the population, average
household income and credit scores, and the share of the population that is male or married.
In Figure 3 and Appendix Table A1, we show both graphically and in regressions that none
of these variables predict the timing of adoption. Moreover, because we rely on monthly
variation in the timing of adoption within a relatively short time window (2-3 years), small
differences in timing likely results from idiosyncratic conventions by state legislators to meet
at different times to set the effective dates for new laws.
    Figure 2 does show that the effect of the policy is not complete in the quarter of adoption.
For staggered difference-in-differences designs, an incomplete response to the policy works
against identifying a result, because when the "already treated" counties are used as a control
group, the control group's elder abuse cases are trending in the same direction - that is still
dropping (Goodman-Bacon, 2018). Its not surprising that the policy's effect is not complete
immediately, as it takes time for advisers and brokers to learn about the legislation and
develop protocols for implementation. Moreover, the deterrence effect of allowing financial
professionals to halt transactions may take time to become known among the perpetrators.


  25
     The staggered difference-in-difference approach uses three distinct sources of variations: the difference
in treatment timing across the timing group, the timing group compared with the never-treated group, and
the timing group compared with the always-treated group. See Appendix B for a decomposition of this effect
by the source of variation, as outlined in Goodman-Bacon (2018).




                                                     13
5.2. Main Effects
    We find that deputizing appears to be effective at deterring financial exploitation of the
elderly. Table 4 panel A shows the results. The outcome variable is the natural logarithm
of one plus the number of suspected elder financial exploitation cases in a county in a
month.26 Column (1) shows a 6.2% decrease in financial exploitation in treated states.
Column (2) shows a 3.0% decrease when including county-level demographic and economic
control variables. These controls increase the adjusted R2 from 7% to 39%. In columns (3)
and (4), we further control for a set of state fixed effects and county fixed effects, respectively,
to account for geographic time-invariant characteristics.
    The economic magnitudes in Panel A suggest an annual reduction of between 866 and
1,732 elder financial exploitation cases across the U.S.27 Overall, the estimated decline in fi-
nancial exploitation remains statistically significant at the 1% level and quantitatively similar
across specifications.
    Table 4 Panel B further presents the results in terms of the extensive margin. The
outcome variable is an indicator variable that equals to one if a county has one or more
cases of senior financial exploitation in a given month. The policy reduces the monthly
probability of exploitation by 1.7-3.4 percentage points, depending on the specification. This
effect represents about 10-20% of the unconditional probability of having at least one senior
financial fraud case in a county-month, which is approximately 18%.
    Admittedly, while we show parallel pre -treatment trends in Figure 2, the parallel trend
assumption--that treated and control groups would have experienced parallel changes post -
treatment--is inherently untestable. To investigate this further, we repeat a difference-in-
differences specification with a subsample of counties that are matched on pre-treatment
characteristics. Matching should ensure that counties achieve covariate balance on observed
attributes and hopefully also brings them closer on unobserved dimensions to help reduce
the risk of non-parallel trends.
    We use the following minimum distance matching procedure: for each county, we calculate
its geometric distance to all other counties based on a vector of covariates (the control
variables in Table 4).28 So that each covariate receives an equal weight, we standardize them

  26
     While our outcome variable of interest is the number of suspected elder abuse cases,
a Consumer Financial Protection Bureau report suggests that 80% of the suspected cases
do involve a financial loss to the elderly.              https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb
suspicious-activity-reports-elder-financial-exploitation report.pdf
  27
     A 3-6% reduction on an average of 0.8 cases per county-month is a reduction of 0.024-0.048 cases per
county-month. Multiplying this value by 12 months a year and by 3,007 counties in the U.S. gives between
866 and 1,732 cases per year.
  28
     Geometric distance is the square root of the sum of the squares of the differences in
covariates between two counties.           Mathematically, the geometric distance metric is dij =


                                                    14
to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. Next, for each county, we select
a pair-county that has the smallest geometric distance, is located in a different state, and
receives treatment at a different point in time.
    We perform the difference-in-difference regressions, including a set of matched-pair fixed
effects to ensure that treatment effects are identified from within-pair comparisons. Table 5
Panel A shows that the estimates using matched county pairs are statistically significant and
economically similar to those presented in Table 4. Table 5 Panels B-E report the covariate
balance tables for each of the distance thresholds we employ, which show that paired counties
are similar in observable aspects.
    The drop in abuse that we have documented in both sets of tests is also robust to other
specifications. In Appendix Figure A1, we show the main effect in Table 4 Panel A Column
(4) is robust to dropping any state. Appendix Table A2 further shows a similar drop when
the sample is cut off in January 2018, prior to enactment of FINRA 2165.

5.3. Who did the policy protect more?
    Certain demographic and socioeconomic groups may be more vulnerable to financial
exploitation, such as women, minorities, and less-educated people (e.g. Lusardi and Mitchell,
2011; Lusardi et al., 2018a,b). To this end, we gather variables that measure the demographic
composition of seniors in a county, such as gender, race, educational attainment, and marital
status, and their corresponding economic characteristics such as income and credit score. We
interact P ostst with indicator variables that take a value of one if the variable is above the
national median as of December 2015, the month prior to the finalization of Model Act.
    Table 6 presents the results. Columns (1) through (2) show that the policy was primarily
effective in counties with higher income levels and higher retirement incomes. Column (3)
suggests that the effect may also be stronger in counties with higher average credit scores.
There are two possible explanations for this result. First, individuals with higher wealth
have better access to financial professionals that can now protect them. Second, it is possible
that people with higher wealth are more attractive targets for exploitation. In the elderly
population, where all people are susceptible to decline, wealth is not necessarily a proxy for
financial literacy.
    Table 6 Columns (4) and (5) show that the effect of the policy is greater for elderly who
are not married and are female. Indeed, widows and single elderly people should be more
vulnerable to exploitation ex ante. In Column (6), we find no evidence that the effect is
stronger in areas in which a higher fraction of the elderly are 85 years of age and above.

   (x1i - x1j )2 + (x2i - x2j )2 + ... + (xN i - xN j )2 , where x1 , x2 , ..., xN are standardized covariates, and
i and j denote counties.

                                                        15
In Column (7), the effect is larger in counties in which a higher proportion of adults have
a bachelor's degree or higher. Columns (8) through (11) show that the policy benefits
minorities to a greater extent, who may be less able to protect themselves from financial
exploitation.

5.4. Welfare Implications
    We next investigate the welfare implications of deputizing financial professionals by as-
sessing the effect of the rule changes on personal bankruptcies by elderly people. Consumer
bankruptcy is well-known to result in substantial damages to individuals and is a dead-weight
loss to society (e.g. Athreya, 2002; Chatterjee and Gordon, 2012).
    For this test, we use individual-level credit information from Experian for a random
sample of 1% of individuals 65 years of age or older. We keep individuals in the sample once
they reach the age of 65. We then follow these elderly individuals through time; our data
spans 2010 to 2019. For each individual, we have annual credit information and the county
of residence.
    Table 7 presents the results. The outcome variable is an indicator that equals 100 if the
individual experienced a bankruptcy in a given year. Post is the fraction of the year that the
policy was in effect in the state the individual lives that year. Column (1) includes Post as
well as county and year fixed effects. Column (2) adds controls for an individual's credit score,
age, estimated household income, marriage status, and gender. Column (3) adds person fixed
effects. The estimated effect on bankruptcies is negative and economically meaningful across
these specifications. According to Column (3), the rule change reduced the probability of
bankruptcy by 0.12 percentage points, which is about 4.5% of the unconditional probability
of bankruptcy of 2.75%.

6. Mechanisms

    Our results so far suggest that the newly-passed elderly protection laws were effective
at deterring abuse, even without an explicit incentive provision. The success of the laws,
therefore, had to rely on existing mechanisms such as reputational concerns, preserving fees
from AUM, moral imperatives, ethical codes, social awareness, or relationships. In this
section, we explore these various possible mechanisms to explain why deputization appeared
to work.

6.1. Law as Public Signal
  Sunstein (1996) and McAdams (1997) suggest that laws signal societal values to a com-
munity, express generally-held beliefs about what is right and wrong, and shape desirable

                                               16
social norms. Hence, the values the laws express can induce compliance, independently from
the sanctions the laws threaten or the rewards the laws provide. For example, laws that
require clean-up after one's pet can strengthen the norm of cleaning up, even in the absence
of enforcement. Laws banning smoking signal to smokers a societal consensus that exposing
others to smoke is offensive, triggering smokers to refrain from smoking in public places.
    Following a similar line of thinking, we might expect that the laws we study in this
paper signal or strengthen a negative societal perception of elder abuse, motivating financial
professionals to serve as protectors. This hypothesis would suggest that both investment
advisers and brokers should engage in halting suspicious transactions and preventing abuse,
given that they would be equally exposed to the law-induced change in the perception of
abuse.
    To test this hypothesis, in Table 8, we analyze whether both advisers and brokers respond
to the new laws and help decrease elder abuse. We calculate the per capita number of brokers
and investment advisers operating at branches in every county each month. We then define
indicator variables that equal one if a county's per capita number of brokers or advisers
exceeds the national median. Unsurprisingly, the coefficients in Columns (1) and (2) suggest
that the laws reduce financial exploitation primarily in counties with above-median per capita
advisers and brokers.
    However, Column (3) shows that the reduction in financial exploitation occurs only in
counties with above-median advisers per capita rather than above-median brokers per capita.
Specifically, after conditioning on the presence of advisers in a county, the policy does not
generate a statistically different effect in counties with high and low presence of brokers.
Relatedly, Column (4) shows that the effect is weaker when a higher fraction of advisers
in a county are dual-registered as brokers. Such advisers may have a more transactional
relationship with clients than pure advisers. This dichotomy suggests that the advisers, not
the brokers, respond to the policy change. The distinction appears to be inconsistent with
a signaling role of the new regulations.
    An alternative signaling story could be that adoption of the new laws signals increased
regulatory concern with elder financial exploitation and thus increased oversight and moni-
toring of advisers and brokers. Again, the differential effects on advisers and brokers seem
inconsistent with this argument. We also examine monitoring more directly in Table 9 by
gathering all of the disclosures individual advisers and brokers must make. In Column (1), we
do not observe a statistically significant increase in disclosures of regulatory actions taken
against advisers and brokers. If regulators became more active, we would have expected
an increase in regulatory actions. In Columns (2) and (3), we do not find evidence that
misconduct by advisers and brokers decreases. More specifically, there is no drop in crim-


                                             17
inal activities or activities that result in customer complaints. We would have expected a
reduction in misconduct if regulatory scrutiny increased.29

6.2. Ethical Code vs Social Awareness
    The success of deputization could depend on the deputies' intrinsic incentives to do
the right thing for others. Many thought leaders in economics have suggested that agents
often conform to ethical codes rather than act egoistically (e.g. Arrow, 1988; Brennan, 1994;
Akerlof, 2007).30 Potentially, these intrinsic motivations could stem from moral beliefs,
relationships in the local community, or both.
    To explore this, we examine whether the laws are more effective in areas with higher
religious adherents per capita and in areas with higher religious congregations per capita.
Religion has been argued to promote ethical behavior.31 In contrast, conditional on the
overall religiosity of a particular area, a larger number of congregations might suggest that
the community is more socially fractured and less well-connected.
    Our data on a county's number of religious adherents and congregations come from the
2010 U.S. Religion Census conducted by the ASARB. A congregation is generally defined as
a group of people who meet regularly (typically weekly or monthly) at a preannounced time
and location. Congregations may be churches, mosques, temples, or other meeting places.
Adherents include all people with an affiliation to a congregation (children, members, and
attendees who are not members).
    In Table 10, the coefficient estimates in Column (1) suggest that the laws have a similar
effect in counties with an above- and below-median number of religious adherents per capita.
However, Columns (2) and (3) show that the effect of the law is significantly weaker in coun-
ties with an above-median number of congregations per capita, even conditional on adherents
(Column (3)). These results provide support for a mechanism based on relationships with
clients and the community, rather than a mechanism based on moral imperatives.

  29
      Due to data limitations, we conduct Table 9 tests on the subsample of advisers that are dual-registered
as brokers, which comprise 80% of the entire universe of advisers. This sample restriction should bias our
results towards finding supportive evidence for the monitoring hypothesis, because Charoenwong et al. (2019)
shows that the behavior of brokers are more sensitive to changes in regulatory oversight than the behavior
of advisers.
   30
      As far back as Aristotle (in Nicomachean Ethics), it was proposed that individuals in a civilized society
incorporate ethical standards into the decisions that they make (Aristotle, 2004). This has been studied
in psychology (Judge and Ilies, 2002), law (Shavell, 2002), politics (Kaplow and Shavell, 2007), economics
(Frank, 1987; Noe and Rebello, 1994), and finance (Carlin and Gervais, 2009). See Carlin et al. (2009) and
Sapienza et al. (2013) for an analysis of trust formation in markets.
   31
      Adam Smith emphasized the influence of religious morality in engendering feelings of guilt or pride as
a motivator of proper behavior (Smith, 2010). Though still a question of continuing interest and debate,
there is empirical evidence supporting the role of religion in deterring unethical behaviors in economics and
finance. For example, see Guiso et al. (2003) and Grullon et al. (2009).

                                                      18
    The relationship mechanism may be important for a few reasons. First, more connected
communities involve stronger personal relationships that may help financial professionals
identify unusual activity. Second, professionals in such communities and relationships are
more likely to derive utility from the increases in welfare of others (Leider et al., 2009).
Third, social norms and morality may only be applicable to a narrow community, such
as a congregation (Tabellini, 2008). Fourth, stronger communities entail more reciprocal
exchange, creating incentives to protect clients from abuse (Kranton, 1996).
    There are a two additional results that support a relationship mechanism. First, the
fact that the policy works through advisers rather than brokers is consistent with a rela-
tionship mechanism (Table 8). More specifically, brokers likely have more arm's length and
transactional relationships with clients. By contrast, advisers likely have stronger personal
relationships with clients as a result of regular financial planning sessions that document
clients' circumstances and objectives. Moreover, because regulators hold advisers to a fidu-
ciary standard, which requires advisers to put a client's interests first, advisers likely develop
deeper and more intimate relationships with clients.32 By contrast, brokers likely develop a
weaker sense of duty to clients as regulators hold brokers to a weaker suitability standard,
which allows brokers to put their interests before their clients' interests.
    A second piece of evidence consistent with the relationship mechanism is that the policy
primarily operates through advisers that are more rooted in a community. Our individual-
level panel dataset of advisers allows us to measure how many months each adviser has
worked in a certain county. We define an indicator variable High Time in County that
equals one when the average time advisers have been in a county exceeds the national
median. Table 11 Panel A Column (1) shows that the decline in financial exploitation of
the elderly is about 6% in counties with more rooted advisers who have been in the county
longer and only 2% in counties with less rooted advisers. Relatedly, in Column (4), we also
show the decline is weaker in counties in which the average adviser is registered to operate
in more states. When advisers register in more states, their clients are likely more dispersed.
    A possible alternative explanation is that advisers who have spent longer in the county
have also spent more time in the profession and are more experienced. More experienced
finance professionals may be better able to spot financial exploitation. Columns (2) and (5)
rule out this hypothesis and shows that time in the county is what matters, not time in the
profession. Also, more time in the county could proxy for more time at a firm, which may
correlate with the quality of the adviser and the adviser's familiarity with the firm's systems.
However, columns (3) and (5) also rule out this alternative.


 32
      See https://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/2019/ia-5248.pdf.


                                                    19
6.3. Egoistic Incentives
    Certainly, most economic thought is founded on the principle that agents are egoistic and
must be given incentives to act.33 In this setting, advisers might have served as deputies for
their own monetary gain, which may include incentives to preserve fees that they earn from
managing assets or by getting publicizing themselves as protectors of the community.
    At the level of a single client, the amount of business (AUM) that would be protected
when a fiduciary acts as a deputy is small relative to the costs of doing so. Before investigating
this formally, consider the following back-of-the-envelope calculation. In our sample, the
average assets under management for an individual is $30,000. Even if all of the capital
were at risk, and the adviser were to earn 1% per year for their services, deputization would
preserve $300 per year. Compared to the time cost of dealing with regulators and the
implementation of monitoring systems required by law, halting transactions is unlikely to be
lucrative.
    We explore the egoism mechanism more formally in a number of ways. First, we test
whether the decline in exploitation is larger in counties with more misbehaving financial pro-
fessionals. Misbehaving professionals may prioritize fees over client well-being. We measure
misconduct by counting the ex-ante number of disclosures a financial professional makes on
her Form U4 filing. Disclosures include customer complaints, regulatory actions, civil and
criminal events, and terminations. Table 8 Column (5) shows that the decline in abuse is
unrelated to whether financial professionals in a county misbehave more than the national
median.
    Second, in Table 12, we examine how the policy's effect relates to the type of fees firms
charge clients. This data comes from the Form ADV filed annually by each registered
investment adviser firm with the SEC. For each county, we match all individual advisers
with their firm's characteristics and then take an average, so that a county's measures are
weighted by the number of individual advisers operating in that county.
    If revenue preservation explains the incentive to be a deputy, the effect of the policy
should be stronger when advisers have a more valuable fee stream to protect. This would
be higher with a recurring fee stream from AUM than with one-off services that are billed
hourly. Column (1) of Table 12, however, shows that the effect is unrelated to the degree to
which advisers charge clients a percentage of AUM. Also, Column (2) shows that the policy's
effect does not relate with the extent to which advisers charge hourly fees. Column (3) shows
the effect is unrelated to whether firms charge clients commissions, which tend to be charged

  33
   Key papers that formally develop this idea in the theory of agency include Ross (1973), Jensen and
Meckling (1976), Harris and Raviv (1979), and H¨
                                               olmstrom (1979).



                                                 20
by advisery firms dual-registered as broker-dealers. Overall, there is little evidence that the
type of compensation arrangements advisers have with clients relates to the policy's effect.
    Finally, deputies could also have egoistic incentives that stem from publicizing their repu-
tation. If, through halting suspicious transactions, advisers and brokers earn the reputation
of protecting clients, then they could leverage the new regulation to expand their client base.
This alternative mechanism would be plausible if there are systematic ways for advisers and
brokers to "market" the delay of transactions to the general public. However, neither the
Investment Adviser Public Disclosure (IAPD) website nor FINRA's BrokerCheck website
disclose such information regarding brokers and advisers.
    To investigate this further, we searched Factiva's news database to analyze the frequency
with which the local and national media cover an adviser's or broker's efforts to protect
elders from financial exploitation. If this channel were important, we would expect to find
many articles that publicized either individual heroism for protecting people or poor press
for allowing clients to be injured.
    We searched for articles that include the following set of words: "adviser" or "advisor",
"halt" or "delay", and "financial abuse" or "financial exploitation." We find only 67 such
articles released during 2015 to 2020 across the United States. This frequency is equivalent
to an average of 0.3 articles per state per year. Inspection of these articles reveals that none
specifically mention a particular adviser or broker by name, but rather only include general
discussions of the problem of elder financial exploitation or the new regulation. As such,
publicizing reputation through the media does not appear to be a way in which individual
advisers or brokers manage their reputations about the extent to which they protect elders
from financial exploitation.34

7. Conclusion

    Before implementing the new rules, it was unclear whether empowering financial profes-
sionals to be monitors would be effective in curbing senior financial exploitation, without
providing explicit incentives. The new rules did not include penalties for not participating
or monetary incentives for catching abusers, but instead relied on existing social or market
mechanisms.
    Our results suggest that deputization was successful in reducing the abuse of seniors,
especially for those who are most at risk. The channels that appeared to be responsible were
social awareness, community connectedness, and deeper personal relationships. Egoistic

  34
    We use various other combinations of texts to identify articles. We present the detailed texts, dates,
regions, and timestamps of the searches in the Appendix Table A4.



                                                   21
incentives to preserve commissions, legal motivations, and publicity appeared to be less
important.
    Overall, our findings give hope for the use of deputization in the future in other venues. If
it works in the finance industry, we are sanguine about its success in more altruistic settings.




                                               22
References

Akerlof, George A, 2007, The missing motivation in macroeconomics, American Economic
  Review 97, 5­36.

Aristotle, 2004, The Nicomachean Ethics (Penguin Books, London).

Arrow, Kenneth J, 1988, Business codes and economic efficiency, Ethical Theory and
  Business .

Athreya, Kartik B, 2002, Welfare implications of the bankruptcy reform act of 1999, Journal
  of Monetary Economics 49, 1567­1595.

Brennan, Michael J, 1994, Incentives, rationality, and society, Journal of Applied Corporate
  Finance 7, 31­39.

Carlin, Bruce, and Simon Gervais, 2009, Work ethic, employment contracts, and firm value,
  Journal of Finance 64, 785­821.

Carlin, Bruce Ian, Florin Dorobantu, and Sean Viswanathan, 2009, Public trust, the law,
  and financial investment, Journal of Financial Economics 92, 321­341.

Charoenwong, Ben, Alan Kwan, and Tarik Umar, 2019, Does regulatory jurisdiction affect
 the quality of investment-adviser regulation?, American Economic Review 109, 3681­3712.

Chatterjee, Satyajit, and Grey Gordon, 2012, Dealing with consumer default: Bankruptcy
 vs garnishment, Journal of Monetary Economics 59, S1­S16.

Clifford, Christopher P, and William Christopher Gerken, 2017, Investment in human capital
  and labor mobility: Evidence from a shock to property rights, SSRN 3064204 .

DeLiema, Marguerite, Martha Deevy, Annamaria Lusardi, and Olivia S Mitchell, 2020,
  Financial fraud among older americans: Evidence and implications, The Journals of
  Gerontology: Series B 75, 861­868.

Dimmock, Stephen G, and William C Gerken, 2012, Predicting fraud by investment man-
  agers, Journal of Financial Economics 105, 153­173.

Dimmock, Stephen G, William C Gerken, and Nathaniel P Graham, 2018, Is fraud conta-
  gious? Coworker influence on misconduct by financial advisors, Journal of Finance 73,
  1417­1450.



                                            23
Egan, Mark, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru, 2019, The market for financial adviser miscon-
  duct, Journal of Political Economy 127, 233­295.

Frank, Robert H, 1987, If homo economicus could choose his own utility function, would he
  want one with a conscience?, American Economic Review 593­604.

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew, 2018, Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing,
 Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Grullon, Gustavo, George Kanatas, and James Weston, 2009, Religion and corporate
  (mis)behavior, SSRN 1472118 .

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2003, People's opium? religion and eco-
 nomic attitudes, Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 225­282.

Harris, Milton, and Artur Raviv, 1979, Optimal incentive contracts with imperfect informa-
  tion, Journal of Economic Theory 20, 231­259.

 olmstrom, Bengt, 1979, Moral hazard and observability, Bell Journal of Economics 74­91.
H¨

Hout, Michael, and Andrew Greeley, 1998, What church officials' reports don't show: An-
  other look at church attendance data, American Sociological Review 63, 113­119.

Jensen, Michael, and William Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior,
  agency costs, and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305­360.

Judge, Timothy A, and Remus Ilies, 2002, Relationship of personality to performance moti-
  vation: A meta-analytic review, Journal of Applied Psychology 87, 797­807.

Kaplow, Louis, and Steven Shavell, 2007, Moral rules, the moral sentiments, and behavior:
 Toward a theory of an optimal moral system, Journal of Political Economy 115, 494­514.

Kesner, John E, 2002, Teachers as mandated reporters of child maltreatment: Comparison
  with legal, medical, and social services reporters, Children & Schools 24, 222­231.

Kranton, Rachel E, 1996, Reciprocal exchange: A self-sustaining system, American Economic
  Review 86, 830­851.

Leider, Stephen, Markus M Mobius, Tanya Rosenblat, and Quoc-Anh Do, 2009, Directed
  altruism and enforced reciprocity in social networks, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124,
  1815­1851.



                                            24
Levinson, Bruce, 2008, Unwarranted deputization: Increased delegation of law enforcement
  duties to financial institutions undermines American competitiveness, SSRN 2711938 .

Lin, Shirley, 2009, States of resistance: The Real ID Act and constitutional limits upon
  federal deputization of state agencies in the regulation of non-citizens, New York City
  Law Review 12, 329­354.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S Mitchell, 2011, Financial literacy and planning: Implica-
  tions for retirement wellbeing, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Olivia S Mitchell, and Noemi Oggero, 2018a, The changing face of debt
  and financial fragility at older ages, AEA Papers and Proceedings 108, 407­11.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Olivia S Mitchell, and Noemi Oggero, 2018b, Understanding debt at
  older ages and its implications for retirement well-being .

McAdams, Richard H, 1997, The origin, development, and regulation of norms, Michigan
 law review 96, 338­433.

Michaels, Jon D, 2011, The Homeland Security deputization dilemma, Administrative &
 Regulatory Law News 37, 5­28.

Michaels, Jon D, 2018, Tech giants at the crossroads A Hoover Institution Essay Series Paper
 No. 1809.

Mitter, Alexandra L, 2011, Deputizing internet service providers: How the government avoids
 fourth amendment protections, New York University Annual Survey of American Law 67,
 235­276.

Noe, Thomas H, and Michael J Rebello, 1994, The dynamics of business ethics and economic
 activity, American Economic Review 531­547.

Ross, Stephen A, 1973, The economic theory of agency: The principal's problem, American
  Economic Review 63, 134­139.

Sapienza, Paola, Anna Toldra-Simats, and Luigi Zingales, 2013, Understanding trust,
  Economic Journal 123, 1313­1332.

Shavell, Steven, 2002, Law versus Morality as Regulators of Conduct, American Law and
  Economics Review 4, 227­257.

Smith, Adam, 2010, The theory of moral sentiments (Penguin).

                                            25
Sunstein, Cass R, 1996, On the expressive function of law, University of Pennsylvania Law
  Review 144, 2021­2053.

Tabellini, Guido, 2008, The scope of cooperation: Values and Incentives, Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 123, 905­950.




                                           26
                                    Figure 1: Staggered Adoption
Panel A shows the staggered adoption of the Model Act or similar provisions across states. In Panel B, we
plot the date after which financial professionals are first empowered to halt suspicious transactions, either
because a state adopts the Model Act or FINRA passes Rule 2165.

                                 Panel A: Model Act Adoption Date




                                                                                            2019m6 - 2019m9 (4)
                                                                                            2019m1 - 2019m6 (0)
                                                                                            2018m7 - 2018m12 (2)
                                                                                            2018m1 - 2018m6 (3)
                                                                                            2017m7 - 2017m12 (7)
                                                                                            2017m1 - 2017m6 (3)
                                                                                            2016m7 - 2016m12 (3)
                                                                                            Before 2016m6 (3)
                                                                                            Not Adopted Yet (25)




                 Panel B: First Adoption Date: Model Act or FINRA Rule 2165




                                                                                            2018m1-2018m2 (34)
                                                                                            2017m7 - 2017m12 (7)
                                                                                            2017m1 - 2017m6 (3)
                                                                                            2016m7 - 2016m12 (3)
                                                                                            Before 2016m6 (3)




                                                     27
                    Figure 2: Annual Difference-in-Difference Coefficient Plot
This figure shows the annual difference-in-difference coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals based
on standard errors clustered at the county level. The red vertical line indicates the month of treatment.
The outcome variable is Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases), the natural logarithm of one plus the
number of elder financial exploitation cases in a county-month.




                                                     28
                                                   Figure 3: Do state characteristics predict the timing of adoption?
Figure 3 shows the scatter plots of the timing of the policy adoption against state characteristics for the 24 states that adopted the
senior protection legislation in a staggered manner during our sample period (April 2012 - September 2019). The corresponding
regression results are reported in the Appendix Table A1. The variable plotted on the y-axis, Group of Adoption, is equal
to 1 for the earliest adopting state, 2 for the second earliest adopting state, and so on. State labels are displayed next to
each data point. The coefficients and p-values of the slopes are reported at the top-right corner of each figure. Number of
Elder Exploitation Cases Per 1000 measures the number of elder exploitation cases per 1,000 population that are age 65 and
above. Frac Pop Abovve 65 measures the fraction of population that are age 65 and above. Average Household Income (Credit
Score) measures the average household income (credit score) in a state. Fraction of Married (Male) measures the fraction of
population in a state that is married (male). All variables on the x-axis are measured as of 2015, the year before the Model
Act was finalized.
                 20




                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                      Coef. = -0.006 P-value = 0.92                                                                                                Coef. = 0.177 P-value = 0.71

                                         NH
                                          ME                                                                                                                                                                                 NH                  ME
                                          AZ                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AZ
   Group of Adoption (1=Earliest)




                                                                                                                                    Group of Adoption (1=Earliest)
                                                                                                  VA                                                                                                    VA
                             15




                                                                                                                                                              15
                                                    MN                                                                                                                                                    MN
                                                              KY                                                                                                                                                  KY
                                               UT                                                                                                                          UT
                                                    OR                AK                                                                                                   AK                                               OR
                                              MD                                                                                                                                                         MD
                10




                                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                     TX                                                                                  TX
                                         ND              AR                                                                                                                                  ND                       AR
                                               NM         CO MS                                                                                                                             CO               MS     NM
                                                                           TN                                                                                                                                      TN
                                          MT                                                                                                                                                                                 MT
    5




                                                    LA                                                                               5                                                                  LA
                                         VT          AL                    IN                                                                                                                                IN        AL          VT
                                                                          MO                                                                                                                                           MO
                                         DE                                                                                                                                                                                       DE
                 0




                                                                                                                                                  0




                                    0                 20                40                 60                             80                                         10           12               14          16                      18              20
                                                    Number of Elder Exploitation Cases Per 1000                                                                                                   Frac Pop Above 65 (%)
                 20




                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                       Coef. = 0.154 P-value = 022                                                                                                     Coef. = 0.058 P-value = 0.29

                                                                                                 ME                       NH                                                                                                            ME            NH
                                                                         AZ                                                                                                                 AZ
   Group of Adoption (1=Earliest)




                                                                                                                                    Group of Adoption (1=Earliest)




                                                                                            VA                                                                                                                     VA
                             15




                                                                                                                                                              15




                                                                                                        MN                                                                                                                                                      MN
                                                   KY                                                                                                                                       KY
                                                                                       UT                                                                                                                                   UT
                                                                                             OR
                                                                                              AK                                                                                                             AK                   OR
                                                                                                                     MD                                                                                                  MD
                10




                                                                                                                                                 10




                                                                    TX                                                                                                                 TX
                                                   AR                                            ND                                                                                   AR                                                                        ND
                                              MS                    NM                                                CO                                                    MS         NM                                                        CO
                                                          TN                                                                                                                                      TN
                                                                                            MT                                                                                                                                        MT
    5




                                                                                                                                     5




                                                        LA                                                                                                                  LA
                                                   AL                         IN                                VT                                                               AL                                    IN                         VT
                                                                      MO                                                                                                                                                MO
                                                                                                   DE                                                                                                             DE
                 0




                                                                                                                                                  0




                                    60                             70                    80                               90                                         640                    660                       680                             700
                                                                   Average Household Income                                                                                                           Average Credit Score
                 20




                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                                                     Coef. = 0.135 P-value = 0.615                                                                                                      Coef. = 0.629 P-value = 0.57

                                                                     ME               NH                                                                                                                          ME                        NH
                                                                     AZ                                                                                                                                                                     AZ
   Group of Adoption (1=Earliest)




                                                                                                                                    Group of Adoption (1=Earliest)




                                                                     VA                                                                                                                                                 VA
                             15




                                                                                                                                                              15




                                                                                                      MN                                                                                                                                              MN
                                                                                KY                                                                                                                                          KY
                                                                                                                     UT                                                                                                                                    UT
                                                                               OR                          AK                                                                                                     AK                   OR
                                                                         MD                                                                                                                                                      MD
                10




                                                                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                 TX                                                                                                                                                    TX
                                                                   AR                                                ND                                                                                                AR                               ND
                                                   MS              NM                       CO                                                                                   MS                                                         CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NM
                                                                         TN                                                                                                                                                                  TN
                                                                                             MT                                                                                                                                             MT
    5




                                                                                                                                     5




                                                                              LA                                                                                                                       LA
                                                                    AL              VTIN                                                                                                         AL                                                   IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VT
                                                                                   MO                                                                                                                                                                  MO
                                                                     DE                                                                                                                     DE
                 0




                                                                                                                                                  0




                                    50                   55                    60                     65                  70                                         46                47                      48                      49                   50
                                                                     Fraction of Married (%)                                                                                                          Fraction of Male (%)




                                                                                                                               29
            Table 1: Comparison Between NASAA Model Act and FINRA Rule 2165

This table presents a detailed comparison between the institutional features of the NASAA Model Act and FINRA Rule 2165,
along dimensions such as adoption status, applicable institutions, adults covered, temporary holds, the granting of immunity,
reporting requirement to APS, record sharing, and training. A more detailed discussion can be found in Section 3.


                        NASAA Model Act                                    FINRA Rule 2165
Adoption status         Staggered adoption by state                        Nationwide adoption on Feb 5, 2018
Applies to Whom         Agents, broker-dealers, and investment advis-      FINRA-registered broker-dealers
                        ers
Adults Covered          A person 65 years of age or older or a person      A person age 65 and older or a person age 18
                        subject to a state APS statute                     and older with mental or physical impairment
Holds Applicability     Disbursements of funds                             Disbursements of funds or securities
Holds Period            The sooner of (a) a determination that the dis-    15 business days unless (1) otherwise termi-
                        bursement will not result in financial exploita-   nated or extended by a state regulator, or
                        tion of the eligible adult; or (b) 15 business     agency of competent jurisdiction, or a court
                        days after the date on which disbursement of       of competent jurisdiction; or (2) extended by
                        the funds was delayed, unless APS or the Com-      the member firm for no longer than 10 business
                        missioner of Securities requests an extension of   days.
                        the delay, in which it shall expire no more than
                        25 business days after the date on which the
                        disbursement was first delayed.
Immunity                Agents, Broker-Dealers, and Investment Ad-         N/A
                        visers
Reporting to APS        Mandatory                                          Voluntary
Record Sharing          Mandatory with APS and law enforcement             Mandatory upon FINRA request
Training                N/A                                                Pursuant to Supplementary Material .02
                                                                           (Training), a FINRA member firm relying on
                                                                           Rule 2165 must develop and document train-
                                                                           ing policies or programs reasonably designed
                                                                           to ensure that associated persons comply with
                                                                           the requirements of Rule 2165.




                                                              30
                            Table 2: Staggered Adoption of NASAA Model Act

This table shows the staggered adoption of NASAA Model Act across U.S. states from 2010 to 2019. We identify state-level
acts, laws, statutes, and regulations that are based on the Model Act or contain similar provisions to those in the Model Act.
For each state, we obtain the the passage date, the effective date, and the applicable institutions from state's legislature website.
States with a * next to them are states that adopted provisions similar to those in the Model Act before the Model Act was
proposed.


State      Passage Date          Effective Date        Applies to Whom
AL         4/15/2016             7/1/2016              Broker-dealers and investment advisers
AK         4/17/2017             1/1/2018              Broker-dealers and investment advisers
AZ         5/13/2019             8/27/2019             Broker-dealers and investment advisers
AR         3/27/2017             8/7/2017              Broker-dealers and investment advisers
CO         6/2/2017              7/1/2017              Broker-dealers and investment advisers
DE*        9/30/2014             9/30/2014             Financial Institutions
DE         8/29/2018             11/27/2018            Broker-dealers and investment advisers
IN         3/21/2016             7/1/2016              Broker-dealers
IN         4/24/2017             7/1/2017              Investment advisers
KY         4/10/2018             7/14/2018             Financial institutions (Including broker-dealers   and investment advisers)
LA         6/17/2016             1/1/2017              Broker-dealers and investment advisers
ME         4/2/2019              9/19/2019             Broker-dealers and investment advisers
MD         5/27/2017             10/1/2017             Broker-dealers and investment advisers
MN         5/19/2018             8/1/2018              Broker-dealers and investment advisers
MO*        6/12/2015             8/28/2015             Broker-dealers
MS         3/27/2017             7/1/2017              Broker-dealers and investment advisers
MT         3/22/2017             3/22/2017             Broker-dealers and investment advisers
NH         7/10/2019             9/8/2019              Broker-dealers and investment advisers
NM         4/6/2017              7/1/2017              Broker-dealers and investment advisers
ND         4/10/2017             8/1/2017              Broker-dealers and investment advisers
OR         6/29/2017             1/1/2018              Broker-dealers and investment advisers
TN         5/18/2017             5/18/2017             Broker-dealers and investment advisers
TX         6/1/2017              9/1/2017              Financial institutions (Including broker-dealers   and investment advisers)
UT         3/16/2018             5/8/2018              Broker-dealers and investment advisers
VT                               7/1/2016              Broker-dealers and investment advisers
VA          3/18/2019            7/1/2019              Financial institutions (Including broker-dealers   and investment advisers)
WA*         3/19/2010            6/10/2010             Financial institutions (Including broker-dealers   and investment advisers)




                                                                31
                                             Table 3: Summary Statistics

This table reports county-level summary statistics for variables related to elder financial exploitation, the presence of investment
advisers and brokers, and demographic and economic characteristics. The unit of observation is a county-month. The sample
includes all counties that have at least one elder financial exploitation case reported to the Department of Treasury from April
2012 to September 2019. Elder Financial Exploitation Cases is the county-month count of transactions that are suspected
to result in the financial exploitation of an elderly person and are reported to the Department of Treasury. Elder Financial
Exploitation Probability is an indicator variable that equals to one if a county-month count of elder financial exploitation cases
is above zero. Advisers Per 1,000 is the number of investment advisers in a county divided by the total number of persons that
are 16 years of age or older, multiplied by 1,000. Brokers Per 1,000 is the number of broker-dealers in a county divided by the
total number of persons that are 16 years of age or older, multiplied by 1,000. Fraction of Dual-Registered Advisers (Brokers) is
the fraction of advisers (brokers) in a county that are dual-registered as brokers (advisers). Population Above 65 is the number
of persons above the age of 65. Fraction of Population Above 65 is the number of persons above the age of 65 divided by the
total population. Vantage Score is the average credit score in a county-month based on a 1% representative sample of credit
bureau records. Fraction of Subprime is the fraction of residents with a credit score below 660. Fraction of Low Income is
the fraction of residents with income below the national median. Average Age is the average age of all residents in a county.
Fraction of Male is the fraction of male residents. Fraction of Married is the fraction of married residents. Household Income
is the average household income in a county. Household Debt-to-Income Ratio is the average household debt-to-income ratio
in a county. Average Retirement Income is the average personal retirement income for retirees.

                                                                (1)       (2)      (3)     (4)      (5)       (6)
                   Variables                                   Mean       SD       p10     p50      p90        N

                   Elder Financial Exploitation Cases          0.8     2.7         0.0      0.0      2.0    225,016
                   Elder Financial Exploitation Probability    0.2     0.4         0.0      0.0      1.0    225,016
                   Advisers Per 1,000                          0.6     1.0         0.0      0.3      1.3    225,016
                   Brokers Per 1,000                           1.1     2.1         0.1      0.7      2.2    225,016
                   Fraction of Dual-Registered Advisers       0.8       0.6        0.0      0.9      1.0    225,016
                   Fraction of Dual-Registered Brokers         0.5     0.3         0.2      0.5      0.7    211,355
                   Population Above 65                      18,516.7 48,185.0    1,805    6,226    39,617   225,016
                   Fraction of Population Above 65             0.2      0.0         0.1     0.2      0.2    207,117
                   Vantage Score                             673.2     26.1       638.7    674.0    707.2   225,016
                   Fraction of Subprime                        0.4      0.1        0.3      0.4      0.6    225,016
                   Fraction of Low Income                      0.5      0.1        0.4      0.5      0.7    225,016
                   Average Age                                52.8      2.9       49.1     52.8     56.6    225,016
                   Fraction of Male                            0.5      0.0         0.4     0.5      0.5    225,016
                   Fraction of Married                         0.6      0.1        0.5      0.6      0.7    225,016
                   Household Income                           74.4     12.4        60.3    72.7     90.4    225,016
                   Household Debt-to-Income Ratio             11.9     1.8         9.6     11.8     14.3    225,016
                   Average Retirement Income                22,347.8 5,280.8     16,566   21,402   29,264   225,016
                   Religious Adherent Per 1000               501.1    167.0      301.5    485.6    713.9    225,016
                   Religious Congregation Per 1000             2.1      1.1        0.8      1.9      3.5    225,016




                                                                32
                   Table 4: Effects of Deputization on Elder Financial Exploitation

This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the deputizing financial professionals on elder financial
exploitation. The sample includes monthly observations for 2,557 counties from April 2012 to September 2019. In Panel A,
the outcome variable is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of elder financial exploitation cases in a county-month.
In Panel B, the outcome variable is an indicator variable that equals to one if a county-month has above zero elder financial
exploitation cases. Post is an indicator variable that equals to one after financial professionals are first empowered to halt
suspicious transactions, either because a state adopts the Model Act or FINRA passes Rule 2165. A detailed description of the
control variables can be found in Table 3's legend. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the county level, are reported in
parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively

                           Panel A: Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases)
                                            (1)              (2)               (3)                                (4)
Post                                    -0.062            -0.030          -0.043                             -0.038
                                         (0.025)           (0.014)          (0.009)                            (0.009)
Log Pop Above 65                                          0.270            0.279                              1.112
                                                           (0.008)          (0.008)                            (0.193)
Vantage Score                                            -0.059            -0.036                             0.077
                                                           (0.014)          (0.015)                            (0.016)
Fraction of Subprime                                        0.006            0.009                           -0.026
                                                           (0.013)          (0.012)                            (0.010)
Fraction of Low Income                                    0.050            0.041                              0.022
                                                           (0.009)          (0.008)                            (0.006)
Average Age                                               -0.013           -0.011                            -0.085
                                                           (0.005)          (0.005)                            (0.009)
Fraction of Male                                            0.005            0.000                             0.006
                                                           (0.003)          (0.003)                            (0.004)
Fraction of Married                                       0.011              0.001                            0.012
                                                           (0.005)          (0.005)                            (0.004)
Household Income                                          0.091           0.055                               0.039
                                                           (0.011)          (0.012)                            (0.016)
Household Debt-to-Income Ratio                           -0.026           -0.032                                -0.001
                                                           (0.005)          (0.005)                            (0.005)
Fraction with Bachelor or Higher                          0.174           0.174                               0.196
                                                           (0.010)          (0.010)                            (0.010)
Constant                                0.270             0.261           0.265                               0.263
                                         (0.010)           (0.005)          (0.005)                            (0.002)
Year-Month FE                              Yes               Yes              Yes                                Yes
State FE                                    No                No              Yes                                 No
County FE                                   No                No               No                                Yes
Adjusted R2                                0.07              0.39             0.40                               0.50
# Counties                                2557              2557             2557                                2557
Observations                             225016            225016           225016                             225016




                                                               33
                            Panel B: I(Elder Financial Exploitation Cases)>0
                                            (1)                (2)              (3)         (4)
Post                                     -0.034           -0.019           -0.019      -0.016
                                          (0.013)           (0.006)          (0.005)     (0.005)
Log Pop Above 65                                           0.160            0.166      0.905
                                                            (0.003)          (0.003)     (0.074)
Vantage Score                                             -0.029             -0.014    0.021
                                                            (0.008)          (0.008)     (0.008)
Fraction of Subprime                                         -0.000            0.001      -0.006
                                                            (0.007)          (0.007)     (0.005)
Fraction of Low Income                                    0.018             0.014       0.008
                                                            (0.004)          (0.004)     (0.003)
Average Age                                                -0.005            -0.004    -0.023
                                                            (0.002)          (0.002)     (0.004)
Fraction of Male                                             0.001            -0.001       0.002
                                                            (0.002)          (0.002)     (0.002)
Fraction of Married                                          0.003            -0.000    0.008
                                                            (0.002)          (0.002)     (0.002)
Household Income                                           0.038            0.018        -0.011
                                                            (0.005)          (0.005)     (0.007)
Household Debt-to-Income Ratio                             -0.005          -0.007         -0.001
                                                            (0.002)          (0.002)     (0.002)
Fraction with Bachelor or Higher                           0.079            0.079       0.079
                                                            (0.004)          (0.004)     (0.004)
Constant                                 0.187             0.183            0.183       0.182
                                          (0.006)           (0.002)          (0.002)     (0.001)
Year-Month FE                               Yes               Yes               Yes         Yes
State FE                                    No                 No               Yes         No
County FE                                   No                 No               No          Yes
Adjusted R2                                0.07               0.32             0.33        0.37
# Counties                                 2557               2557             2557        2557
Observations                              225016            225016           225016      225016




                                                      34
                   Table 5: Effects of Deputization on a Matched Sample of Counties

In this table, we perform the difference-in-difference analysis in Table 4 on a subsample of matched counties by including fixed
effects for each matched-pair. We use the following minimum distance matching procedure: for each county, we calculate
its geometric distance to all other counties based on a vector of covariates. The covariates include the natural logarithm of
population 65 years of age or older, average credit score, fraction of subprime borrowers, fraction of low income individuals,
average age, fraction of male individuals, fraction of married individuals, household income, household debt-to-income ratios, and
fraction with bachelor or higher. Geometric distance is calculated as the square root of the sum of the squares of the differences
in covariates between two counties. Mathematically, it is expressed as dij = (x1i - x1j )2 + (x2i - x2j )2 + ... + (xN i - xN j )2 ,
where x1 , x2 , ..., xN are standardized covariates, and i and j denote counties. All covariates are standardized to have a mean of
zero and a standard deviation of one to receive equal weights. Next, for each county, we select a pair county that has the smallest
geometric distance to the county, locates in a different state, and receives the treatment at a different point in time. Then, to
ensure we use only high-quality matches, we keep the county pairs that have a geometric distance below a certain threshold.
We use the 10th , 25th , 50th , and 75th percentiles of the distance distribution as different thresholds and our estimates of the
effect are largely similar. Last, we use the subsamples of matched county pairs to perform difference-in-difference regressions,
while including a set of matched-pair fixed effects. We present the regression results using different thresholds in Panel A. We
also present the covariate balance tests on the matched sample of counties in Panels B-E, where Treat is an indicator variable
that equals to one if a county is the early-adopter within a pair. Post is an indicator variable that equals to one after financial
professionals are first empowered to halt suspicious transactions, either because a state adopts the Model Act or FINRA passes
Rule 2165. Definitions of the control variables can be found in the Table 3 legend. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at
the county level, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively

                                             Panel A: Regression Results
                                        Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases)
                                                 (1)                  (2)                (3)                         (4)
Geometric Distance Threshold:            10th Percentile     25th Percentile     50th Percentile             75th Percentile
Post                                         -0.047              -0.038               -0.026                     -0.031
                                              (0.021)             (0.015)             (0.013)                     (0.013)
Log Pop Above 65                              1.197              1.743               2.181                       1.877
                                              (0.617)             (0.351)             (0.278)                     (0.244)
Vantage Score                                 0.106                0.071             0.059                       0.070
                                              (0.057)             (0.038)             (0.028)                     (0.023)
Fraction of Subprime                            0.034              -0.005              -0.014                      -0.009
                                              (0.041)             (0.026)             (0.019)                     (0.015)
Fraction of Low Income                          0.008               0.007              0.016                     0.021
                                              (0.027)             (0.017)             (0.012)                     (0.010)
Average Age                                 -0.144              -0.113              -0.090                      -0.090
                                              (0.036)             (0.024)             (0.016)                     (0.013)
Fraction of Male                                0.008               0.005              0.006                       0.005
                                              (0.016)             (0.010)             (0.007)                     (0.005)
Fraction of Married                            -0.007               0.004              0.002                       0.010
                                              (0.018)             (0.012)             (0.009)                     (0.007)
Household Income                             0.145               0.098               0.075                      0.068
                                              (0.069)             (0.042)             (0.029)                     (0.023)
Household Debt-to-Income Ratio                 -0.006             -0.020              -0.014                     -0.013
                                              (0.017)             (0.011)             (0.008)                     (0.006)
Fraction with Bachelor or Higher            0.324               0.270                0.241                      0.230
                                              (0.034)             (0.024)             (0.017)                     (0.015)
Constant                                       -0.016              -0.121           -0.160                         0.043
                                              (0.207)             (0.098)             (0.061)                     (0.034)
Pair FE                                          Yes                 Yes                 Yes                        Yes
Year-Month FE                                    Yes                 Yes                Yes                         Yes
County FE                                        Yes                 Yes                Yes                         Yes
Adjusted R2                                     0.37                 0.39               0.43                        0.45
# Counties                                       255                 639                1279                        1918
Observations                                   44880              112464              225104                      337568




                                                                35
         Panel B: Covariate Balance: 10th Percentile Threshold
                                    Treat = 0    Treat = 1
                                   Mean SD Mean SD P-value Std. Diff.
Elder Financial Exploitation Cases 0.40 (0.57) 0.34 (0.49) (0.20)   -0.08
Log Population Above 65            0.31 (0.68) 0.32 (0.69) (0.85)   0.01
Vantage Score                      -0.43 (0.65) -0.43 (0.63) (0.98) -0.00
Fraction of Subprime                0.40 (0.67) 0.39 (0.63) (0.83)  -0.01
Fraction of Low Income             0.41 (0.74) 0.41 (0.72) (0.99)   -0.00
Average Age                        -0.16 (0.53) -0.17 (0.53) (0.84) -0.01
Fraction of Male                   -0.07 (0.49) -0.07 (0.50) (0.97)  0.00
Fraction of Married                -0.08 (0.63) -0.08 (0.60) (0.97) -0.00
Household Income                   -0.40 (0.59) -0.41 (0.58) (0.89) -0.01
Household Debt-to-Income Ratio     0.05 (0.65) 0.05 (0.65) (0.99)   0.00
Fraction with Bachelor or Higher    0.33 (0.56) 0.32 (0.56) (0.78)  -0.02
Observations                        255          255

        Panel C: Covariate Balance: 25th Percentile Threshold
                                  Treat = 0    Treat = 1
                                 Mean SD Mean SD P-value Std. Diff.
Log Population Above 65           0.26 (0.71) 0.26 (0.73) (0.97)   0.00
Vantage Score                    -0.35 (0.71) -0.35 (0.70) (0.94)  0.00
Fraction of Subprime              0.32 (0.72) 0.32 (0.69) (0.92)  -0.00
Fraction of Low Income            0.37 (0.77) 0.36 (0.77) (0.87)  -0.01
Average Age                      -0.07 (0.62) -0.09 (0.61) (0.47) -0.03
Fraction of Male                 -0.02 (0.62) -0.01 (0.61) (0.87)  0.01
Fraction of Married              -0.07 (0.67) -0.07 (0.66) (1.00) -0.00
Household Income                 -0.34 (0.67) -0.33 (0.65) (0.89)  0.01
Household Debt-to-Income Ratio -0.01 (0.66) 0.02 (0.66) (0.44)     0.03
Fraction with Bachelor or Higher 0.36 (0.64) 0.35 (0.66) (0.87)   -0.01
Observations                      639          639

        Panel D: Covariate Balance: 50th Percentile Threshold
                                  Treat = 0    Treat = 1
                                 Mean SD Mean SD P-value Std. Diff.
Log Population Above 65           0.20 (0.78) 0.21 (0.77) (0.83)   0.01
Vantage Score                    -0.25 (0.81) -0.27 (0.79) (0.53) -0.02
Fraction of Subprime              0.23 (0.81) 0.24 (0.78) (0.77)   0.01
Fraction of Low Income            0.28 (0.84) 0.28 (0.83) (0.95)  -0.00
Average Age                      -0.07 (0.69) -0.10 (0.69) (0.25) -0.03
Fraction of Male                 -0.02 (0.68) -0.00 (0.68) (0.56)  0.02
Fraction of Married              -0.04 (0.73) -0.04 (0.71) (0.97) -0.00
Household Income                 -0.26 (0.72) -0.26 (0.71) (0.95)  0.00
Household Debt-to-Income Ratio -0.03 (0.72) 0.00 (0.72) (0.21)     0.04
Fraction with Bachelor or Higher 0.40 (0.72) 0.39 (0.74) (0.74)   -0.01
Observations                     1,279        1,279

        Panel E: Covariate Balance: 75th        Percentile Threshold
                                  Treat = 0      Treat = 1
                                 Mean SD        Mean SD P-value Std. Diff.
Log Population Above 65           0.13 (0.83)    0.12 (0.82) (0.90)  -0.00
Vantage Score                    -0.17 (0.89)   -0.20 (0.85) (0.29)  -0.02
Fraction of Subprime              0.15 (0.89)    0.17 (0.84) (0.35)   0.02
Fraction of Low Income            0.21 (0.89)    0.20 (0.89) (0.76)  -0.01
Average Age                      -0.02 (0.81)   -0.05 (0.79) (0.23)  -0.03
Fraction of Male                 -0.00 (0.79)    0.01 (0.78) (0.77)   0.01
Fraction of Married               0.00 (0.78)    0.02 (0.76) (0.59)   0.01
Household Income                 -0.18 (0.80)   -0.19 (0.78) (0.71)  -0.01
Household Debt-to-Income Ratio -0.05 (0.81)     -0.02 (0.81) (0.19)   0.03
Fraction with Bachelor or Higher 0.41 (0.76)     0.40 (0.78) (0.67)  -0.01
Observations                     1,918          1,918

                                     36
                                                                    Table 6: Who did the policy help more?

     This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of the heterogeneous effect of deputization on elder financial exploitation. The sample includes monthly observations for
     2,557 counties from April 2012 to September 2019. Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of elder financial exploitation
     cases in a county-month. Post is an indicator variable that equals to one after financial professionals are first empowered to halt suspicious transactions, either because a state
     adopts the Model Act or FINRA passes Rule 2165. All variables that are interacted with Post are indicator variables that equal to one if a county characteristic is above the
     national median. Income Larger 200k is an indicator variable that equals to one if a county has an above-median fraction of individuals with income higher than $200-thousand
     dollars. Mean Retirement Income (Vantage Score) is an indicator variable that equals to one if the average retirement income (credit score) in a county is above the national
     median. Married (Female) is an indicator variable that equals to one if a county has above-median fraction of married (female) seniors. Pop 85 Above/Pop 65 Above is an
     indicator variable that equals to one if a county has an above-median fraction of 85+ population among its 65+ population. Bachelor or Higher is an indicator variable that
     equals to one if a county has an above-median fraction of adults with a bachelor degree or higher. White, Asian, Black, and Hispanic are indicator variables that equal to one
     if a county has an above-median fraction of White, Asian, Black, and Hispanic population, respectively. A detailed description of the control variables can be found in Table 4
     legend. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the county level, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
     respectively.

                                                                                         Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases)
                                                (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)       (11)        (12)
     Post                                    -0.019         0.001    -0.040      -0.063 -0.033 -0.042               -0.017 -0.083             0.007    -0.027        -0.001    -0.031
                                              (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.010)     (0.014)    (0.013)   (0.013)     (0.009)     (0.015)     (0.007)     (0.012)     (0.008)   (0.034)
     Post x Income Larger 200k               -0.047                                                                                                                              0.001
                                              (0.019)                                                                                                                         (0.020)
     Post x Mean Retirement Income                      -0.072                                                                                                                 -0.023
                                                          (0.019)                                                                                                             (0.018)




37
     Post x Vantage Score                                               -0.020                                                                                                 -0.029
                                                                       (0.019)                                                                                                (0.020)
     Post x Married                                                              0.053                                                                                         0.034
                                                                                  (0.017)                                                                                     (0.018)
     Post x Female                                                                            -0.026                                                                           -0.002
                                                                                             (0.018)                                                                          (0.017)
     Post x Pop 85 Above/Pop 65 Above                                                                      0.008                                                                 0.006
                                                                                                         (0.018)                                                              (0.018)
     Post x Bachelor or Higher                                                                                     -0.049                                                      -0.022
                                                                                                                     (0.019)                                                  (0.019)
     Post x Pop White                                                                                                          0.079                                          0.058
                                                                                                                                (0.018)                                       (0.029)
     Post x Asian                                                                                                                         -0.070                               -0.016
                                                                                                                                            (0.019)                           (0.017)
     Post x Black                                                                                                                                     -0.049                   -0.003
                                                                                                                                                        (0.018)               (0.029)
     Post x Hispanic                                                                                                                                              -0.063       -0.019
                                                                                                                                                                    (0.019)   (0.017)
     Year-Month FE                               Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
     County FE                                   Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes
     Adjusted R2                                0.50        0.50         0.50        0.50      0.50        0.50        0.50        0.50        0.51       0.50         0.50       0.52
     # Counties                                 2557        2557         2557        2557      2557        2557        2557        2557        2557       2557         2557       2557
     Observations                             225016      225016       225016      225016    225016      225016      225016      225016      225016     225016       225016   225016
                                                Table 7: Welfare Effects

This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of deputization on senior financial outcomes. The sample
includes annual observations for 762,709 individuals that are 65 years of age or older from 2010 to 2019. I(Bankruptcy)*100 is
an indicator variable that equals to 100 if an individual files for bankruptcy in a given year. Post is the fraction of months in a
year that the elder protection policy is in effect in the state the individual lives. Vantage Score is the individual's credit score.
Age is the individuals age in years. Est. HH Income is Experian's estimate of the individual's household income. Married and
Female are indicator variables that equal to one if an individual is married or female, respectively. Standard errors, adjusted
for clustering at the individual level, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                                 I(Bankruptcy)*100
                                                (1)                      (2)                      (3)
             Post                               -0.076                -0.104                  -0.116
                                               (0.050)                 (0.050)                  (0.038)
             Vantage Score                                           -2.984                   -0.602
                                                                       (0.028)                  (0.033)
             Age                                                     -5.882                   -2.866
                                                                       (0.054)                  (0.304)
             Est. HH Income                                          -0.937                        0.011
                                                                       (0.021)                  (0.029)
             Married                                                  0.133                       -0.010
                                                                       (0.028)                  (0.017)
             Female                                                     0.064
                                                                       (0.033)
             Constant                        2.808                   11.532                    6.505
                                              (0.022)                  (0.087)                  (0.359)
             Individual FE                         No                        No                     Yes
             Census Tract FE                      Yes                       Yes                     Yes
             Year FE                              Yes                       Yes                     Yes
             Adjusted R2                         0.06                      0.09                    0.76
             # Individuals                     762709                   762709                   762709
             Observations                    4629098                  4629098                  4629098




                                                                38
                             Table 8: Role of the Investment Advisery Industry

This table studies the role of the investment advisery industry in curbing senior financial exploitation. The sample includes
monthly observations for 2,557 counties from April 2012 to September 2019. Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases) is the
natural logarithm of one plus the number of elder financial exploitation cases in a county-month. Post is an indicator variable
that equals to one after financial professionals are first empowered to halt suspicious transactions, either because a state adopts
the Model Act or FINRA passes Rule 2165. High Per Capita Investment Advisers (Brokers) is an indicator variable that
equals to one if a county has an above median per capita investment advisers (brokers). High % Dual-Registered Advisers is an
indicator variable that equals to one if a county has an above-median fraction of investment advisers dual-registered as brokers.
High Complaints-Per-Adviser is an indicator variable that equals to one if a county has an above median number of complaints
per adviser. All regressions include additional time-varying county control variables, including the natural log of the number
of persons 65 years of age or older, average credit score, fraction of subprime borrowers, fraction of low income individuals,
average age, fraction of male individuals, fraction of married individuals, household income, household debt-to-income ratios,
and fraction with bachelor or higher. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the county level, are reported in parentheses.
***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                    Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases)
                                                  (1)           (2)             (3)                     (4)            (5)
Post                                          -0.006          -0.011          -0.005                -0.038           -0.003
                                              (0.008)        (0.008)         (0.008)                 (0.011)        (0.009)
Post x High Per Capita Investment Advisers    -0.069                       -0.068                   -0.054         -0.071
                                              (0.020)                        (0.024)                 (0.018)        (0.020)
Post x High Per Capita Brokers                              -0.054            -0.003
                                                             (0.020)         (0.024)
Post x High % Dual-Registered Advisers                                                              0.054
                                                                                                     (0.015)
Post x High Complaints-Per-Adviser                                                                                   -0.007
                                                                                                                    (0.020)
Controls                                             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Year-Month FE                                        Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
County FE                                            Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Adjusted R2                                          0.50             0.50            0.51            0.51            0.51
# Counties                                           2557             2557            2557            2557            2557
Observations                                         225016          225016          225016          225016         225016




                                                               39
               Table 9: Was there increased monitoring from regulatory authorities?

This table studies whether empowerment of financial professionals to halt suspicious disbursements coincides with increases in
monitoring by regulatory authorities of investment advisers and brokers. More specifically, we test whether there are coinciding
increases in regulatory actions, customer complaints, and criminal charges filed against advisers and brokers. The sample
includes monthly observations for 2,557 counties from April 2012 to September 2019. Ln(1+Regulatory Actions) is the natural
logarithm of one plus the number of regulatory actions taken against advisers and brokers. A regulatory action is a sanction
taken by the regulator against an adviser or broker, for example, permanently barring him or her from registering with a state's
security division. Ln(1+Customer Complaints) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of customer complaints filed
against advisers and brokers. Ln(1+Criminal Activities) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of criminal charges
filed against advisers and brokers. Criminal charges include tax fraud and mail fraud. Post is an indicator variable that equals
to one after financial professionals are first empowered to halt suspicious transactions, either because a state adopts the Model
Act or FINRA passes Rule 2165. All regressions include additional time-varying county control variables, including the natural
log of the number of persons 65 years of age or older, average credit score, fraction of subprime borrowers, fraction of low
income individuals, average age, fraction of male individuals, fraction of married individuals, household income, and household
debt-to-income ratios. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the county level, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and *
represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                   (1)                                 (2)                                 (3)
                       Ln(1+Regulatory Actions)           Ln(1+Customer Complaints)            Ln(1+Criminal Activities)
Post                             0.00050                             0.00072                            -0.00006
                                (0.00036)                           (0.00126)                           (0.00022)
Controls                           Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes
Year-Month FE                      Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes
County FE                          Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes
Adjusted R2                        0.05                                0.32                               0.01
# Counties                         2557                               2557                                2557
Observations                     225016                              225016                              225016




                                                              40
                             Table 10: Religious Adherents and Congregations

This table studies whether and how the effect of deputization varies with counties' religious adherents per capita and religious
congregations per capita. The sample includes monthly observations for 2,557 counties from April 2012 to September 2019.
Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of elder financial exploitation
cases in a county-month. Post is an indicator variable that equals to one after financial professionals are first empowered
to halt suspicious transactions, either because a state adopts the Model Act or FINRA passes Rule 2165. High Adherents
(Congregations) Per 1000 is an indicator variables that takes a value of one if a county has above median number of religious
adherents (congregations) per thousand population. All regressions include additional time-varying county control variables,
including the natural log of the number of persons 65 years of age or older, average credit score, fraction of subprime borrowers,
fraction of low income individuals, average age, fraction of male individuals, fraction of married individuals, household income,
household debt-to-income ratios, and fraction with bachelor or higher. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the county
level, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively

                                   Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases)
                                                          (1)               (2)                      (3)
            Post                                      -0.059            -0.065                   -0.074
                                                        (0.015)           (0.017)                  (0.019)
            Post x High Adherents Per 1000              0.045                                         0.020
                                                        (0.018)                                    (0.017)
            Post x High Congregations Per 1000                           0.069                    0.065
                                                                          (0.018)                  (0.018)
            Controls                                         Yes               Yes                      Yes
            Year-Month FE                                    Yes               Yes                      Yes
            County FE                                        Yes               Yes                      Yes
            Adjusted R2                                     0.50              0.51                     0.51
            # Counties                                      2557              2557                     2557
            Observations                                 225016            225016                   225016




                                                               41
                        Table 11: Tenure in the Profession and in the Community

This table studies whether the effect of deputization varies with advisers' (Panel A) and brokers' (Panel B) tenure in the
profession, tenure in the county, and tenure at a firm. The sample includes monthly observations for 2,557 counties from April
2012 to September 2019. Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of elder
financial exploitation cases in a county-month. Post is an indicator variable that equals to one after financial professionals are
first empowered to halt suspicious transactions, either because a state adopts the Model Act or FINRA passes Rule 2165. High
Time in County, High Time in Profession, and High Time at Firm are indicator variables that equal to one if the average time
advisers or brokers have been in the county, profession, or firm, respectively, is above the national median as of December 2015.
High # of State Registrations Per Adviser is an indicator variable that equals to one if the average number of states advisers
are registered to work in exceeds the national median as of December 2015. Note, we do not have these state-registration data
for brokers. All regressions include additional time-varying county control variables, including the natural log of the number
of persons 65 years of age or older, average credit score, fraction of subprime borrowers, fraction of low income individuals,
average age, fraction of male individuals, fraction of married individuals, household income, household debt-to-income ratios,
and fraction with bachelor or higher. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering by county, are reported in parentheses. ***, **,
and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                              Panel A: Investment Advisers
                                          Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases)
                                                               (1)        (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)
       Post                                                    -0.016  -0.021       -0.021        -0.074       -0.053
                                                             (0.011)     (0.010)    (0.012)         (0.014)      (0.015)
       Post x High   Time in County                        -0.048                                                  -0.037
                                                             (0.018)                                             (0.023)
       Post x High   Time in Profession                                -0.036                                       0.007
                                                                         (0.018)                                 (0.025)
       Post x High   Time at Firm                                                  -0.036                          -0.015
                                                                                    (0.018)                      (0.024)
       Post x High   # of State Registrations Per Adviser                                          0.084        0.083
                                                                                                    (0.016)      (0.017)
       Controls                                                   Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
       Year-Month FE                                              Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
       County FE                                                  Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes
       Adjusted R2                                               0.50        0.50        0.50          0.51          0.51
       # Counties                                                2557        2557        2557          2557          2557
       Observations                                            225016      225016      225016        225016       225016


                                                  Panel B: Brokers
                                      Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases)
                                                        (1)        (2)           (3)                (4)
                   Post                              -0.042     -0.038       -0.048              -0.045
                                                      (0.016)    (0.015)       (0.018)            (0.019)
                   Post x High Time in County           0.007                                       0.004
                                                      (0.021)                                     (0.021)
                   Post x High Time in Profession                 -0.002                           -0.028
                                                                 (0.020)                          (0.025)
                   Post x High Time at Firm                                       0.015             0.034
                                                                               (0.024)            (0.031)
                   Controls                                Yes        Yes           Yes                Yes
                   Year-Month FE                           Yes        Yes           Yes                Yes
                   County FE                               Yes        Yes           Yes                Yes
                   Adjusted R2                            0.50       0.50          0.50               0.50
                   # Counties                            2557       2557           2557              2557
                   Observations                       225016     225016         225016            225016




                                                               42
                                         Table 12: Form ADV Interactions

This table studies whether the effect of deputization on elder financial exploitation varies with how advisers charge clients
for services. Characteristics of registered investment adviser firms are matched to individual adviser representatives and then
averaged over individuals working in a specific county. We only have Form ADV data for advisers with more than $100M of assets
under management, as smaller firms do not register with the SEC. We omit counties when we have no data on representatives'
firms. The sample includes monthly observations for 2,225 counties from April 2012 to September 2019. Ln(1+Elder Financial
Exploitation Cases) is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of elder financial exploitation cases in a county-month.
Post is an indicator variable that equals to one after financial professionals are first empowered to halt suspicious transactions,
either because a state adopts the Model Act or FINRA passes Rule 2165. High Compensation % AUM is an indicator variable
that equals to one if the firm charges fees based on the assets under management. High Compensation Hourly is an indicator
variable that equals to one if the firm charges an hourly fee for services. High Compensation Commissions is an indicator
variable that equals to one if the firm charges commissions. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering by county, are reported in
parentheses. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                    Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases)
                                                              (1)              (2)                     (3)
            Post                                           -0.070            -0.067                  -0.049
                                                            (0.035)          (0.038)                (0.037)
            Post   x High Compensation % AUM                 0.040            0.036                   0.029
                                                            (0.037)          (0.036)                (0.036)
            Post   x High Compensation Hourly                                 0.005                   0.012
                                                                             (0.020)                (0.023)
            Post   x High Compensation Commissions                                                   -0.028
                                                                                                    (0.022)
            Controls                                              Yes               Yes                Yes
            Year-Month FE                                         Yes               Yes                Yes
            County FE                                             Yes               Yes                Yes
            Adjusted R2                                           0.52              0.52              0.52
            # Counties                                            2225              2225              2225
            Observations                                         195800            195800           195800




                                                               43
Appendix A. Robustness


                           Figure A1: Main Effect Dropping Each State
This figure shows the distribution of the estimated policy effect in Table 4 Column (4) when dropping one
state at a time. The y-axis is the fraction of the sample that has a coefficient that falls within a specific
bin's range. The figure shows that the result is not driven by any one state.




                                                     44
           Table A1: Timing of Adoption of the Model Act and State Characteristics

In this table, we model the timing of when states adopt the Model Act using state characteristics. We limit the analysis to the
24 states that have adopted the Model Act by 2019. States adopted senior protection legislation in a staggered manner during
our sample period (April 2012 - September 2019). The outcome variable, Group of Adoption, is equal to 1 for the earliest
adopting state, 2 for the second earliest adopting state, and so on. If multiple states adopt the Model Act in the same month,
then those states receive the same group number. Number of Elder Exploitation Cases Per 1000 measures the number of elder
exploitation cases per 1,000 population that are age 65 and above. Frac Pop Abovve 65 measures the fraction of population
that are 65 years of age or older. Average Household Income (Credit Score) measures the average household income (credit
score) in a state. Fraction of Married (Male) measures the fraction of population in a state that is married (male). All variables
on the x-axis are measured as of 2015, the year before the Model Act was finalized.

                                                                             Group of Adoption (1 = Earliest)
                                                         (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)       (6)
Elder Financial Exploitation Cases Per Capita          -0.006
                                                      (0.060)
Fraction of Population 65+                                            0.178
                                                                     (0.465)
Average Household Income                                                            0.155
                                                                                   (0.123)
Average Credit Score                                                                             0.058
                                                                                                (0.053)
Fraction of Married                                                                                          0.135
                                                                                                            (0.265)
Fraction of Male                                                                                                       0.629
                                                                                                                      (1.104)
R2                                                     0.00           0.01           0.07        0.05        0.01      0.01
# States                                                24             24             24          24          24        24




                                                                45
Table A2: Effects of Deputization on Elder Financial Exploitation: Pre-FINRA Rule 2165

This table presents difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of the deputizing financial professionals on elder financial
exploitation. The sample only includes months prior to February 2018, the effective month for the FINRA Rule 2165. Post is
an indicator variable that equals to one after a state adopts the Model Act. The outcome variable is the natural logarithm of
one plus the number of elder financial exploitation cases in a county-month. A detailed description of the control variables can
be found in Table 4 legend. Standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the county level, are reported in parentheses. ***, **,
and * represent statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively

                               Ln(1+Elder Financial Exploitation Cases)
                                             (1)                   (2)                             (3)                      (4)
Post                                      -0.062               -0.034                          -0.052                  -0.048
                                           (0.025)              (0.014)                          (0.010)                 (0.010)
Log Pop Above 65                                               0.227                            0.235                   1.159
                                                                (0.007)                          (0.007)                 (0.196)
Vantage Score                                                 -0.046                            -0.029                  0.077
                                                                (0.013)                          (0.014)                 (0.015)
Fraction of Subprime                                             0.007                            0.012                 -0.020
                                                                (0.012)                          (0.011)                 (0.009)
Fraction of Low Income                                         0.048                            0.042                   0.028
                                                                (0.008)                          (0.007)                 (0.006)
Average Age                                                   -0.013                            -0.012                 -0.059
                                                                (0.005)                          (0.005)                 (0.008)
Fraction of Male                                                0.005                             0.000                 0.008
                                                                (0.003)                          (0.003)                 (0.003)
Fraction of Married                                             0.011                             0.001                0.018
                                                                (0.005)                          (0.004)                 (0.004)
Household Income                                               0.082                            0.057                     0.009
                                                                (0.010)                          (0.011)                 (0.014)
Household Debt-to-Income Ratio                                -0.022                           -0.027                     0.001
                                                                (0.005)                          (0.005)                 (0.005)
Fraction with Bachelor or Higher                               0.157                           0.156                   0.163
                                                                (0.009)                          (0.009)                 (0.009)
Constant                                  0.209               0.235                            0.234                   0.251
                                           (0.007)              (0.004)                          (0.004)                 (0.003)
Year-Month FE                                Yes                  Yes                              Yes                     Yes
State FE                                      No                   No                              Yes                      No
County FE                                     No                   No                              No                      Yes
Adjusted R2                                  0.07                 0.36                            0.37                     0.47
# Counties                                  2557                 2557                             2557                    2557
Observations                               178990               178990                           178990                  178990




                                                               46
Appendix B. Decomposition of Staggered Diff-in-Diff Coefficient

    Recent developments in the econometric literature give us guidance on how to best im-
plement the generalized difference-in-difference empirical strategy. We follow the suggestions
of Goodman-Bacon (2018) on how to decompose our difference-in-difference estimator, and
find qualitatively similar results when we rely on different sources of variation.
    According to Goodman-Bacon (2018), the generalized difference-in-difference model dif-
fers from canonical models that contain only two time periods ("pre" and "post") and two
groups ("treatment" and"control"). In the generalized difference-in-difference setting, re-
searchers explore three distinct sources of variations: the difference in treatment timing
across the timing group, the timing group compared with the never-treated group, and the
timing group compared with the always-treated group. Goodman-Bacon (2018) shows that
the generalized difference-in-difference estimator is a weighted average of all possible two-
group/two-period difference-in-difference estimators in the data. As in any least squares
estimator, the weights are proportional to group sizes and the variance of the treatment
dummy within each pair. Treatment variance is highest for groups treated in the middle of
the panel and lowest for groups treated at the extremes.
    Summing the weights on the timing comparisons versus treated/untreated comparisons
quantifies how much of the variation comes from timing. Using Goodman-Bacon (2018)'s
decomposition code, we find that our estimator is mainly driven by variations within the
timing group. As shown in Table A3 Panel A, the sum of weight on the 2x2 estimators
within the timing group is 92%, and the average coefficient estimate is -0.04. The estimators
derived from differences between the timing group and the always-treated group receives a
weight of only 8%, and an average coefficient estimate of -0.22.35
    In the current specification, we do not have any never-treated states in the data. As a
robustness test, we implement another specification where we drop all periods after February
2018, the month of the FINRA policy implementation, and hence all states that are treated
after the FINRA policy effectively become control states (i.e. never-treated group). Using
this specification, in Table A3 Panel B and Figure A2, we find a 5.1% reduction in county-
month number of senior financial exploitation cases. The decomposition shows that the
main source of variation comes from the differences between the timing group and the never-
treated group, which receives a weight of 80% and an average 2x2 difference-in-difference
coefficient estimate of -0.07. Instead, the average coefficient within the timing group is -0.02,

  35
    We use the Stata package "bacondecomp" written by Andrew Goodman-Bacon to conduct the decom-
position analysis. We are able to replicate all results using a different Stata package, "ddtiming", written by
Thomas Goldring.



                                                      47
with a weight of 18%. The consistently negative coefficient estimates across specifications
and sources of variations lend robustness to our empirical finding.




                                            48
                            Table A3: Goodman-Bacon Decomposition

This table shows the Goodman-Bacon decomposition of staggered difference-in-difference regression coef-
ficient estimates (Goodman-Bacon, 2018). We provide a detailed description of the methodology in the
Appendix B. In Panel A, we include all time periods in our sample to conduct this analysis. The empirical
specification is the same with the specification used in Table 4 Panel A Column (4). In Panel B, we exclude
all observations after February 2018, the date of the FINRA Rule 2165 adoption, to allow for an additional
source of variation coming from the "Never Treated" group.

                                          Panel A: Entire Sample
                     Variation                    Beta           Weight
                     Timing Groups               -0.0408         0.9178
                     Always v. Timing            -0.2227         0.0803
                     Within                       7.9540         0.0019

                     Panel B: Excluding Observations after February 2018
                     Variation                 Beta            Weight
                     Timing Groups            -0.0257           0.1774
                     Always v. Timing         -0.1737           0.0175
                     Never v. Timing          -0.0738           0.8012
                     Always v. Never         10.6672            0.0000
                     Within                   4.1242            0.0038




                                                    49
                           Figure A2: Goodman-Bacon Decomposition
This table shows graphically the Goodman-Bacon decomposition of staggered difference-in-difference regres-
sion coefficient estimate (Goodman-Bacon, 2018). We provide a detailed description of the methodology in
the Appendix B. The empirical specification used to produce the graph is the specification used in Table A3
Panel B. When we ran the specification used in Panel A, the Stata package "bacondecomp" produces only
table outputs (shown in Table A3 Panel A) but no graph.




                                                    50
Appendix C. Factiva Searches

                           Table A4: Details Regarding Factiva Searches

In this table, we present the text, date, region, timestamp, and other details of the searches that we conduct
on Factiva's global news search engine. "And" and "Or" are operational words.

Panel A
Text               (adviser Or advisor) And (halt Or delay) And (financial abuse Or financial exploitation)
Date               In the last 5 years
Source             All pictures Or All publications Or All web news Or All multimedia Or All blogs
Author             All authors
Company            All companies
Industry           All Industries
Region             United States
Language           English
Results Found      67
Timestamp          19 April 2020 1:58 GMT
Panel B
Text               (adviser Or advisor) And (suspicious transaction) And (financial abuse Or financial
                   exploitation)
Date               In the last 5 years
Source             All pictures Or All publications Or All web news Or All multimedia Or All blogs
Author             All authors
Company            All companies
Industry           All Industries
Region             United States
Language           English
Results Found      2
Timestamp          16 April 2020 23:16 GMT
Panel C
Text               (adviser Or advisor) And (elder financial exploitation Or elder financial abuse Or elder
                   financial fraud)
Date               In the last 5 years
Source             All pictures Or All publications Or All web news Or All multimedia Or All blogs
Author             All authors
Company            All companies
Industry           All Industries
Region             United States
Language           English
Results Found      209
Timestamp          16 April 2020 23:08 GMT




                                                     51
