                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE SEEDS OF IDEOLOGY:
HISTORICAL IMMIGRATION AND POLITICAL PREFERENCES IN THE UNITED STATES

                                        Paola Giuliano
                                        Marco Tabellini

                                      Working Paper 27238
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27238


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We thank Sam Bazzi, Ben Enke, Vicky Fouka, Ross Mattheis, Jim Snyder, and Yannay Spitzer
for useful conversations. We are grateful to Sandra Sequeira, Nathan Nunn, and Nancy Qian for
sharing with us data on railroad connectivity at the county level. Pier Paolo Creanza, Silvia
Farina, and Monia Tomasella provided outstanding research assistance. All remaining errors are
ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Paola Giuliano and Marco Tabellini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Seeds of Ideology: Historical Immigration and Political Preferences in the United States
Paola Giuliano and Marco Tabellini
NBER Working Paper No. 27238
May 2020
JEL No. D64,D72,H2,J15,N32,Z1

                                          ABSTRACT

We test the relationship between historical immigration to the United States and political
ideology today. We hypothesize that European immigrants brought with them their preferences
for the welfare state, and that this had a long-lasting effect on the political ideology of US born
individuals. Our analysis proceeds in three steps. First, we document that the historical presence
of European immigrants is associated with a more liberal political ideology and with stronger
preferences for redistribution among US born individuals today. Next, we show that this
correlation is not driven by the characteristics of the counties where immigrants settled or other
specific, socioeconomic immigrants' traits. Finally, we conjecture and provide evidence that
immigrants brought with them their preferences for the welfare state from their countries of
origin. Consistent with the hypothesis that immigration left its footprint on American ideology
via cultural transmission from immigrants to natives, we show that our results are stronger when
inter-group contact between natives and immigrants, measured with either intermarriage or
residential integration, was higher. Our findings also indicate that immigrants influenced
American political ideology during one of the largest episodes of redistribution in US history --
the New Deal ­ and that such effects persisted after the initial shock.


Paola Giuliano
Anderson School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
C517 Entrepreneurs Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and IZA
and also NBER
paola.giuliano@anderson.ucla.edu

Marco Tabellini
Harvard Business School
279 Morgan Hall
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
and CEPR
mtabellini@hbs.edu
1       Introduction
The US is a nation of immigrants: since 1850, America has received more than 80
million foreign born individuals, and, as of 2018, 13.7 percent of its population was
born abroad.1 The recent rise in international migration has renewed interest in the
longstanding debate on immigrants' ability and willingness to assimilate economically
and culturally. In fact, both today and in the past, advocates of immigration restrictions
have argued that immigrants' lack of assimilation is a threat to social cohesion and to
American values.2 However, defining national identity and ideology in a country where
immigration played such a fundamental role is complicated by the fact that today's
culture is likely to be shaped precisely by past migration flows. Where does American
ideology come from? How did historical immigration influence American political values
in the long run?
    In this paper, we address these questions, and study the long run effects of the
1910-1930 migration of millions of Europeans on political ideology of American born
individuals today. Our empirical strategy exploits cross-county variation in exposure to
historical (1910-1930) immigration, and correlates it with preferences for redistribution
and political behavior of a large set of respondents in the Cooperative Congressional
Election Study (CCES) today. To identify the causal effect of immigration, we follow
the immigration literature and construct a version of the shift-share instrument (Card,
2001). This instrument rests on the empirical regularity that immigrants cluster ge-
ographically in receiving countries, and newcomers tend to settle where their ethnic
community is larger, due to family ties and social networks.
    Formally, the instrument interacts the share of individuals from each sending country
living in a given US county in 1900 with the number of new immigrants moving to the
US during a decade. Summing over all European groups in the county and averaging
across the three decades (1910, 1920, and 1930), we recover the average predicted
number of immigrants living in a county, which we then scale by baseline population
to construct the average (predicted) immigrant share between 1910 and 1930. To limit
concerns of endogeneity, we follow the suggestion in Adao et al. (2019) and, similar
to Tabellini (2020), construct a "leave-out" version of the shift-share instrument, by
apportioning national flows from each sending region to a county net of the individuals
who eventually settled in that same county.
    1
     See statistics provided from the Migration Policy Institute at https://www.migrationpolicy.
org/programs/data-hub/us-immigration-trends.
   2
     Abramitzky and Boustan (2017) provide a comprehensive description of immigration in American
history, including the recurrent concerns about immigrants' assimilation. Higham (1955) is a classic
reference for American nativism in the past, while Vigdor (2010) focuses on the more recent period.
See also Abramitzky et al. (2019a) for a comparison of immigrants' assimilation during the historical
and the more recent immigration waves.


                                                 1
     The Age of Mass Migration is not only the largest episode of immigration in Ameri-
can history (Abramitzky and Boustan, 2017), but also offers an important advantage for
the purposes of identification. Between 1910 and 1930, immigration flows from different
European countries were differentially impacted by nation-wide shocks that were ar-
guably exogenous to cultural, political, or economic conditions prevailing in individual
US counties at the time. First, between 1915 and 1918, World War I (WWI) gener-
ated a significant break in European immigration, which was stronger for immigrants
coming from countries that were directly involved in the War and were not part of the
Allies (Greenwood and Ward, 2015; Tabellini, 2020). Second, and perhaps more im-
portantly, in 1921 and 1924, US Congress passed the Immigration Act that drastically
reduced immigration, especially for Southern and Eastern European countries, which
had sent more migrants in the previous two decades (Abramitzky and Boustan, 2017;
Abramitzky et al., 2019d). These shocks induced a sharp change in the persistence
of immigrant inflows from specific countries to specific US counties. As a result, they
significantly reduce the concern raised by Jaeger et al. (2018) who note that, for the
more recent period, the same local areas receive large flows of immigrants (often from
the same sending region) for multiple decades. The exogenous nature of national shocks
that differentially affected migration flows of different sending countries, coupled with
immigrants' tendency to cluster geographically along ethnic lines, also reduces concerns
about the validity of shift-share designs, as discussed formally in Borusyak et al. (2018).
     Even if the flows used to predict local immigrant arrivals were exogenous, one may
still be concerned that the initial settlements of different European groups were cor-
related with factors that in turn influenced American ideology and preferences for re-
distribution in the long run. Note that, for this concern to have bite, it must be that
immigration from specific countries was booming (at the national level) precisely when
the specific characteristics that had attracted early settlers from those countries to
a county became important for the evolution of long run culture. To overcome this
concern, we perform a number of robustness checks.
     First, we verify that our analysis is robust to including a host of baseline county char-
acteristics, such as the urban and manufacturing share of the population, the fraction
of blacks, the male labor force participation, and occupational income scores. Second,
to deal with the possibility that our instrument were correlated with other factors that
jointly determined long run ideology, we control for railroads connectivity and for a
measure of (predicted) industrialization ­ two variables that were highly correlated
with historical migration patterns (Sequeira et al., 2020). Geographical coordinates are
also included in our analysis to proxy more broadly for any type of geographical location
advantage. Third, we replicate our results by separately controlling for the 1900 shares
of immigrants from each European country (i.e., the "Bartik shares" in Borusyak et al.,

                                              2
2018, and Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2018). This exercise tests whether the variation
behind the instrument is disproportionately influenced by specific destination-origin
combinations, which may also be spuriously correlated with the long run evolution of
cultural values and political ideology across US counties (Goldsmith-Pinkham et al.,
2018).
    Using this instrument, we find that respondents who, today, live in counties with
higher historical immigration are significantly more likely to oppose spending cuts, to
prefer higher taxes to finance the fiscal deficit, and to support both welfare spending
and a higher minimum wage. These effects are quantitatively large: according to our
estimates, relative to respondents living in a county at the 25th percentile of the his-
torical immigrant share, individuals in a county at the 75th percentile are 5.2% more
likely to support welfare spending and 4.6% more likely to oppose spending cuts. Con-
sistent with these patterns, immigration also has a strong, long run impact on liberal
ideology and support for the Democratic Party. For instance, a 5 percentage point ­ or,
40% of the inter-quartile range ­ increase in the average immigrant share is associated
with a 6.2% higher likelihood that a respondent in the CCES sample identifies with the
Democratic Party.
    In the second part of the paper, we seek to isolate the mechanisms through which
historical immigration influenced natives' preferences for redistribution and their polit-
ical ideology. The first, perhaps most obvious explanation is that immigrants reduced
natives' employment and lowered wages, in turn increasing demand for government
spending. However, contrary to this explanation, Sequeira et al. (2020) document that
European immigration had a positive and quantitatively large impact on economic de-
velopment and income per capita across US counties in the long run. Moreover, such
positive effects appeared already in the short run, and were unlikely to be accompanied
by increased inequality (Tabellini, 2020). Thus, if anything, the direct economic effects
of immigration should lead to lower ­ rather than higher ­ preferences for redistribution
(e.g. Meltzer and Richard, 1981).
    Next, we consider the possibility that the socioeconomic characteristics brought
about by immigration caused the long run shift towards a left-leaning ideology among
natives. In contrast with this idea, we show that results are unchanged when controlling
for the (instrumented) 1910-1930 occupational income scores, manufacturing share,
English proficiency, and literacy of immigrants.3 Also, and more importantly, none of
these economic characteristics is correlated with respondents' attitudes today.
    A third possibility is that immigrants' selection is responsible for the positive effect
   3
    Before 1940, the US Census did not collect data on income or wages. Hence, following the litera-
ture (Abramitzky et al., 2014), we rely on the occupational income scores, which are constructed by
assigning to an individual the median income of his job category in 1950, and are typically considered
a proxy for lifetime earnings.

                                                  3
of immigration on desire for redistribution. However, this explanation seems unlikely
given that existing evidence shows that, at least during the Age of Mass Migration,
migrants tended to be more individualistic (Knudsen, 2019). Furthermore, those who
chose to stay were typically positively selected (Abramitzky et al., 2019b), and thus
more likely to believe in "effort" rather than "luck" (Piketty, 1995). As for the direct
economic effects of immigration, these observations suggest that immigrants' selection
should have a negative, and not a positive, effect on left-leaning ideology of natives.
Finally, using data from Abramitzky et al. (2019c), we document that the degree of
intergenerational mobility of European immigrants during the Age of Mass Migration
has no effect on either preferences for redistribution or ideology of natives today.
    Having ruled out a number of economic mechanisms, we turn to our most preferred
interpretation. We argue that immigration left its footprint on American ideology
via cultural transmission from immigrants to natives. We corroborate this hypothesis
by showing that immigrants brought with them their preferences for redistribution ­
proxied by the years of exposure to the generosity of the welfare state in their country
of origin. To measure exposure to the welfare state, we use the year of introduction
of education reforms in each European country in our sample prior to 1910 (when we
start measuring immigration in US counties). We focus on education reforms because
these represent the first systematic instance of public policies; other types of welfare
reforms (such as health and pensions) were instead introduced much later in time,
often after the immigrants' period of arrival in the US that we consider in our paper.
We then construct an index of exposure to the welfare state at the county level by: i)
multiplying the country specific value of the index with the average share of immigrants
from that country in a given US county between 1910 and 1930; and ii) summing over
all immigrant groups in a county.
    Defining the index so that higher values refer to stronger preferences for redistri-
bution, we find that, even after controlling for the direct effect of immigration, higher
exposure to social welfare reforms is strongly predictive of preferences for redistribu-
tion and liberal ideology today. Next, splitting the sample in counties with historical
exposure to welfare reforms above and below the median, we show that the effects of
immigration are significantly stronger in counties with higher values of the index.
    These findings are consistent with the idea that immigrants brought their values with
them and, in the long run, influenced natives' preferences and ideology. While anecdo-
tal and historical accounts suggest that immigrants influenced American culture in the
domains of music, cinema, and cuisine (Hirschman, 2013), to the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to systematically document a similar impact on economic preferences
and on political ideology. We provide suggestive evidence on the mechanisms of cultural
transmission by exploring the heterogeneity of our results according to two measures

                                           4
of inter-group contact: intermarriage and residential integration. Both measures can
promote the diffusion of immigrants' ideology through vertical and horizontal cultural
transmission (Bisin and Verdier, 2001). Intermarriage facilitates horizontal transmis-
sion between spouses, and subsequently vertical transmission from parents to children.
Residential integration can foster horizontal socialization by increasing the frequency
of inter-group contact with neighbors and friends. Consistent with our hypothesis, the
effect of European immigration on American political ideology is larger in counties with
higher historical immigrants' integration.
    In all our specifications, we correlate the historical presence of immigrants with
ideology today. In the last section of the paper, we follow the evolution of American
ideology over time. Our results indicate that the presence of immigrants had a very
strong effect on one of the largest instances of redistribution in US history ­ the New
Deal ­ and that such effect persisted after this initial shock. Andersen (1979) notes
that immigrants were fundamental in explaining the New Deal electoral alignment.
She proposes a "mobilization" theory according to which support for Roosevelt had its
roots in the 1928 elections, when Alfred Smith ­ the first Roman Catholic to run for
presidency in American history, who also had an immigrant background ­ was able to
attract a large segment of the immigrant urban electorate to the Democratic Party.
    The realignment continued in subsequent years, partly helped by the fact that im-
migrants were among the groups hit hardest by the Great Depression (Andersen, 1979;
Clubb and Allen, 1969; Degler, 1964; Lubell, 1952). We test this hypothesis by looking
at the correlation between the historical presence of immigrants and the the Democratic
vote share. While the presence of immigrants did not matter for political behavior prior
to 1928, it had a large and significant effect, which persisted over time, starting with
the 1928 elections, consistent with the "mobilization" hypothesis.
    We examine the role of higher preferences for redistribution (brought about by Eu-
ropean immigrants) further, by testing if counties with more European immigrants were
more likely to receive more generous welfare spending during the New Deal. Consistent
with our previous results, we find that, holding constant the severity of the Great De-
pression, counties with a higher fraction of immigrants received significantly larger relief
expenditures during the New Deal. While one may be surprised that culture travels so
quickly from immigrants to natives, two observations can help explain these findings.
First, at the time of the New Deal, (naturalized) immigrants and their kids, who likely
inherited values from their parents, represented a non-trivial share of the electorate
(Keyssar, 2009). Second, the Great Depression was such a dramatic episode that might
have induced a drastic change in culture, and this is precisely when one might expect
the new values brought about by immigration to matter (Becker and Woessmann, 2008;
Cantoni, 2012; Giuliano and Nunn, 2017).

                                             5
    Our paper speaks to different strands of the literature. First, a large set of papers
have documented that ethnic diversity is negatively correlated with liberal ideology and,
in particular, with preferences for redistribution (Alesina et al., 1999, 2018a,b; Dahlberg
et al., 2012; Luttmer, 2001). We contribute to this literature by showing that the short
and the long run effects of diversity might be different, if immigrants' values can be
transmitted to natives. From this perspective, our findings provide support for the
"contact hypothesis" (Allport, 1954), according to which repeated interactions between
different groups can, under certain circumstances, favor inter-group relations and the
transmission of values from one group to the other.4 We speculate that, even if ethnic
diversity brought about by European immigrants initially triggered natives' backlash
(Tabellini, 2020), it might have eventually led to stronger cohesion partly because it
was "not too high", and it was possible for European immigrants and natives to feel
part of the same, racial group.5
    Second, we complement the literature on immigrant assimilation. On the one hand,
many papers have studied the pace at which immigrants assimilate economically and
culturally (Abramitzky et al., 2012, 2019a,c; Borjas, 1985). On the other, several works
have documented that immigrants' culture persists across generations (Alesina et al.,
2013; Fern´ andez and Fogli, 2009; Grosjean, 2014), and analyzed the effectiveness of
different assimilation policies (Abdelgadir and Fouka, 2019; Fouka, 2019, 2020; Lleras-
Muney and Shertzer, 2015). We take a different perspective, and show that immigrants'
culture can be transmitted to natives. While immigrants' contribution to American
economic development, trade, entrepreneurship, and innovation has been largely doc-
umented (Sequeira et al., 2020; Fulford et al., 2020; Burchardi et al., 2019; Kerr and
Mandorff, 2015; Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle, 2010; Moser et al., 2014), to the best of
our knowledge, our paper is the first systematic analysis on the long run effects of
immigration on ideology and socio-economic preferences of Americans.
    Third, our paper speaks to the vast literature on the determinants of preferences
for redistribution (Alesina and Giuliano, 2011; Giuliano and Spilimbergo, 2014). We
highlight a novel channel ­ namely, the transmission of values from immigrants to
natives ­ that can shape individuals' views of the welfare state. Finally, we contribute
to the growing literature on the Age of Mass Migration. Many papers have studied
the short run effects of this migration episode on both economic and political outcomes
(Abramitzky and Boustan, 2017; Abramitzky et al., 2019d; Goldin, 1994; Tabellini,
2020). Recent work by Sequeira et al. (2020) investigates the long run economic effects
   4
     See also Bazzi et al. (2019), Calderon et al. (2019), Lowe (2020), and Steinmayr (2018) among
others for the positive effects of immigration and inter-group contact on inter-group relations.
   5
     Findings in Fouka et al. (2018) suggest that the 1915-1930 Great Migration of African Americans
from the South to the North of the United States reduced perceived differences between native whites
and European immigrants, in turn favoring the Americanization of the latter.


                                                 6
of European immigration. We complement these papers by instead focusing on the long
run effects of European immigration on American ideology.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the histor-
ical background, and discusses the mechanisms through which immigrants might have
influenced natives' ideology in the long run. Section 3 presents our data, and Section
4 lays out the empirical strategy. Section 5 shows the main results, and summarizes
the key robustness checks, which are described in more detail in the appendix. Section
6 explores the mechanisms behind our main findings, and Section 7 presents the rela-
tionship between the historical presence of immigrants and the evolution of political
behavior in the US over the twentieth century. Section 8 concludes.


2     Historical Background
This section first describes the Age of Mass Migration (Section 2.1), and then discusses
the possible mechanisms through which European immigrants might have influenced
American ideology in the long run (Section 2.2).


2.1    The Age of Mass Migration
Between 1850 and 1920, almost 50 million Europeans moved to the New World, and
around 30 millions of them chose to settle in the United States (Hatton and Williamson,
1998), at a time when no legal restrictions to European immigration existed.6 This
unprecedented movement of people, typically referred to as the Age of Mass Migration,
was influenced by the innovation in steam technology, which drastically reduced the cost
of shipping, and made it easier for Europeans to move to the Americas (Keeling, 1999).
At first, most immigrants came from Northern and Western European countries, but
gradually, as both transportation costs fell and income rose, more and more migrants
left poorer countries in Southern and Eastern Europe (Abramitzky and Boustan, 2017).
This pattern is shown in Figure 1: in 1870, almost 90% of the foreign born stock in
the US originated from Northern and Western Europe; by 1920, however, the share of
Southern and Eastern European immigrants was almost as high as 45%.
    Immigration skyrocketed after 1900 (Figure 2). This, together with the composi-
tional shift towards new, culturally more distant sending countries, increased concerns
about both immigrants' assimilation and the negative consequences on wages and em-
ployment of native workers. The political climate grew more and more hostile towards
   6
     Immigration to the US was instead restricted for Chinese and Japanese immigrants, following
the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act and the 1908 Gentleman's Agreement respectively (Abramitzky and
Boustan, 2017).



                                               7
European immigrants. After several attempts, in 1917, US Congress introduced a lit-
eracy test that required all immigrants arriving to the US to be able to read and write
(Goldin, 1994). Interestingly, the literacy test was introduced when European immi-
gration had already been drastically reduced by the onset of WWI (Figure 2). After
the end of the war, between 1919 and 1921, immigration flows went back to their 1910
levels, fueling natives' fears of a new "invasion". Eventually, in 1921, the Quota Emer-
gency Act introduced a temporary cap to immigration, which was made permanent
and more stringent in 1924, with the passage of the National Origins Act (Abramitzky
and Boustan, 2017; Goldin, 1994). The quotas were explicitly designed with the goal of
reducing inflows from Southern and Eastern Europe, whose immigrants were considered
culturally far and unwilling and unable to assimilate (Higham, 1955).7
    The combined effects of WWI and the quotas were dramatic: immigration to the
US dropped and remained negligible until the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965
(Figure A.1 in the Appendix). A key feature of both shocks is that different nationalities
were affected differentially. On the one hand, WWI had a larger impact on countries
that were more directly involved in the War (with the German case being an emblematic
one). On the other, the quotas reached their goal and disproportionately restricted the
inflow of immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe. This is depicted in Figure
A.2, which plots the share of European immigrants entering the US in each year from
"high" and "low" restriction countries, as classified in Abramitzky et al. (2019d).8
    The quotas ­ and to some extent WWI ­ restricted immigration especially from
countries that had sent disproportionately more immigrants between 1900 and 1914,
thereby creating a trend-break in the country-mix of immigrants moving to the US.
Since immigrants cluster geographically in receiving countries (Card, 2001), such changes
in turn led to substantial changes in both the number and the "mix" of immigrants
received by different US counties between 1910 and 1930. Following the strategy im-
plemented in a number of recent papers (Abramitzky et al., 2019d; Tabellini, 2020), we
exploit such variation in our analysis, as described in detail below.
   7
     The 1921 Emergency Quota Act mandated that the number of European immigrants from each
country entering the US in a given year could not exceed 3% of the stock from that country living in
the US in 1910. With the 1924 National Origins Act, the limit was lowered to 2%, and the base year
was moved to 1890, so as to further restrict immigration from "new sending countries". Furthermore,
the total number of immigrants that could be admitted in a given year was capped at 150,000 (Goldin,
1994).
   8
     The list of countries with high and low restrictions can be found in Abramitzky et al. (2019d),
Appendix Table A1.




                                                 8
2.2     European Immigrants and American Ideology
Abundant evidence exists on the contribution of European immigrants to the US econ-
omy and to the American society more broadly. As noted by historian Maldwyn Jones,
American economic development was "...due in significant measure to the efforts of
immigrants...[who] supplied much of the labor and technical skill needed to tap the
underdeveloped resources of a virgin continent" (Jones, 1992, pp. 309­310). Echoing
Jones, John F. Kennedy wrote that immigrants contributed to "every aspect of the
American economy" (Kennedy, 1964, p. 88). Sequeira et al. (2020) discuss extensively
the various channels through which European immigrants might have fostered eco-
nomic development ­ from their contribution to science and innovation to the provision
of agricultural know-how, to the supply of cheap labor for an expanding manufactur-
ing sector.9 In their analysis, the authors show that, not only European immigrants
brought short-run economic prosperity, but also, that such effects persisted and are still
evident today.
    Given the contribution of European immigrants to a wide range of domains, there
are reasons to expect that immigration had a long-lasting impact on American ideology
and on social and economic preferences of natives as well. The most obvious channel
through which immigration could have affected ideology is income. Given the long run
impact of immigration on income per capita documented in Sequeira et al. (2020), one
would expect less support for left-leaning ideology, possibly driven by a reduced demand
for government spending and lower desire to redistribute (Meltzer and Richard, 1981).
    Another factor is immigrants' selection. If, as shown in Knudsen (2019), more indi-
vidualistic individuals were more likely to migrate, they might have transmitted such
ideology to natives, reinforcing beliefs in effort rather than luck, and reducing prefer-
ences for redistribution (Piketty, 1995). This mechanism might have been reinforced by
the fact that more successful immigrants were more likely to stay in the US (Abramitzky
et al., 2019b). Moreover, immigrants' social mobility in the United States might have
influenced American ideology. If immigrants experienced a high degree of social mo-
bility in the past, this could have determined their lower preferences for redistribution
in the past and today, and therefore their left-leaning ideology (Alesina and Angeletos,
2005; Alesina and Glaeser, 2004; Piketty, 1995; Ravallion and Lokshin, 2000).
    Finally, immigrants might have shaped American ideology and preferences for re-
distribution by increasing ethnic and racial diversity. Alesina and Glaeser (2004) argue
that one of the main reasons why the welfare state is smaller in the US than in Europe
is that the US is a more racially and ethnically diverse country. Consistent with this
   9
   See also Akcigit et al. (2017) and Moser and San (2019) among others for studies on the effects of
European immigrants on science and innovation in the United States.



                                                 9
idea, Tabellini (2020) finds that European immigration led to a reduction in redistri-
bution across American cities between 1910 and 1930. One might thus conjecture that
such effects persisted and perhaps became stronger over time. A related argument,
discussed in Lipset and Marks (2000), is that socialism never succeeded in the United
States partly because of the (ethnically) heterogeneous background of the American
working class.
    For different reasons, all the channels discussed above suggest that historical immi-
gration may have lowered preferences for redistribution of Americans in the long run.
However, it is a priori possible that the opposite happened, and that, despite the short
run effects documented in Tabellini (2020), European immigrants led to a more liberal
ideology and to stronger preferences for redistribution over time. At the time of ar-
rival, many Europeans had been exposed to social welfare programs in their countries
of origin. For example, already at the end of the nineteenth century, Germany provided
to its citizens both public education and retirement income (Flora, 1983). Similarly,
as of 1890, public education was offered in France, Italy, Sweden, and in many other
European countries (Bandiera et al., 2018). In addition, pensions and social welfare
reforms were introduced across Europe in the first two decades of the twentieth century
(Galasso and Profeta, 2018).
    Exposure to social welfare programs in their home country might have increased im-
migrants' expectations about and demand for similar policies in the US as well. Adding
to the direct effects of immigrants' demand, over time, preferences of Europeans might
have gradually "spilled over" into local American culture and preferences. While the
literature typically views assimilation as driven by immigrants converging towards na-
tives' culture (Abramitzky et al., 2019a; Advani and Reich, 2015; Eriksson, 2019), in
principle, it is possible for the opposite to happen. In the US context, Hirschman
(2013) describes several examples where immigrants' preferences and culture spilled
over onto those of natives ­ from Jazz music to the film industry, to sports and cui-
sine. In many cases, immigrants were (cultural) "innovators", who set standards that
persisted throughout the decades, eventually becoming integral parts of the American
culture. Beyond culture, there is evidence of immigrants' contribution also in a number
of specific institutions. For instance, the kindergarten was imported to the US by the
German immigrant Friederich Fr¨     obel (Ager and Cinnirella, 2016). Similarly, the uni-
versity system adopted by US states built extensively on the Prussian model (Faust,
1916).
    This discussion suggests that the long run effects of immigration on American ide-
ology are ex-ante ambiguous. On the one hand, a number of factors ­ income effects,
immigrants' selection, ethnic heterogeneity, and natives' reactions ­ are consistent with
a negative relationship between immigration and preferences for redistribution. On

                                           10
the other, if immigrants arrived with a more liberal ideology and with stronger prefer-
ences for redistribution (relative to natives), and if such preferences were transmitted
to natives, counties that received more European immigrants during the Age of Mass
Migration might be expected to house individuals with higher demand for social welfare
and with more liberal attitudes today.


3      Data
To study the long run effects of European immigration on American ideology, we com-
bine a variety of datasets. Section 3.1 describes the data assembled to construct expo-
sure to historical immigration at the county level and all the other historical charac-
teristics. Then, Section 3.2 presents the variables used to measure different aspect of
current ideology obtained from the CCES.


3.1     Historical Data
Immigrant share and immigrants' characteristics. We collect data on the num-
ber of European immigrants at the county level in each decade from 1910 to 1930 from
the full count US Censuses made available by Ruggles et al. (2020). Using the same
source we also construct several variables on immigrants' characteristics for the period
between 1910-1930, such as occupational income score and the share of immigrants
who are: English speakers; literate; working in manufacturing; in the labor force; and,
employed.10

Historical county characteristics. Relying on the full count data from Ruggles et
al. (2020), we also construct several 1900 county characteristics. These are: the share
of population living in urban areas; the fraction of blacks living in the county; the male
labor force participation; the employment share in manufacturing; average occupational
scores; and geographic coordinates (latitude and longitude). We also include a measure
of railroad connectivity for 1850-1900 (from Sequeira et al., 2020), and a measure of
industry growth for the period between 1900-1930 as in Tabellini (2020).

Exposure to the welfare state in the countries of origin. To measure exposure
to the welfare state in the countries of origin, we use the year of introduction of education
  10
     When constructing the economic characteristics of immigrants, we restrict the sample to men in
the age range 15-64, who were not in school. Since prior to 1940 no data on wages or income was
reported in the US Census, we follow Abramitzky et al. (2014) and subsequent work, and rely on
occupational income scores, which are constructed by assigning to an individual the median income of
his job category in 1950.



                                                11
reforms in each European country in our sample (see Table A.1). The data come from
Bandiera et al. (2018), except for Germany and Austria for which we instead rely on
the original data in Flora (1983).11 We consider education reforms because other types
of welfare reforms (such as health and pensions) were introduced much later in time,
often after 1910 ­ the first year considered in our analysis to measure the historical
presence of immigrants across US counties.
    We count the number of years between 1910 and the year in which a country intro-
duced education reforms.12 We then interact this variable with the 1910-1930 county
average share of immigrants from each country, and sum over all European countries
to obtain a weighted average of exposure to education reforms inherited by European
immigrants, with weights equal to the share of immigrants (relative to the foreign born
population) from each origin in each US county.13 In formulas, denoting the index
of exposure to education reforms for immigrant group j with prj , and the 1910-1930
average immigrant share of that group (relative to all immigrants in the county) with
jc , the county-specific index of exposure can be written as:14

                                         P Rc = j jc  prj                                            (1)

    To ease the interpretation of coefficients, in our analysis we standardize this index
by subtracting its mean and dividing it through its standard deviation. In this way,
results can be interpreted as the effects of one standard deviation increase in the index
of (historical) exposure to social welfare reforms on education.
    We use exposure to education reform in the country of origin as a proxy for his-
torical preferences for redistribution, as surveys are not available for that period of
time. Luttmer and Singhal (2011) show that preferences for redistribution are highly
persistent. In Appendix Figure A.3, we report the correlation (after controlling for
  11
      Bandiera et al. (2018) also build their dataset from Flora (1983), but attribute to Germany and
Austria education reforms carried out in the eighteenth century. We instead prefer to consider the
reforms of the late nineteenth century, since these in our view capture more centralized (and thus, for
our purposes meaningful) reforms. One country that is hard to code is Russia. According to Willcox
(1929), for the period 1889-1924 around 40% of Russian immigrants were classified in the immigration
national statistics as being of Hebrew race. These numbers are similar to those estimated in Spitzer
(2015). Since Jewish immigrants had historically higher preferences for redistribution, we classify as
Jewish (immigrant) any individual born in Russia with at least one member of the household reporting
either Hebrew or Yiddish as mother tongue, and then assign to them the highest preference for welfare
state by using the first education reform in our sample (1814 for Denmark). Reassuringly, all our results
are robust to either excluding Jewish immigrants or considering Russia as a single ethnic group.
   12
      If a country did not introduce any education reform prior to 1910, we set this variable to zero.
   13
      Results remain unchanged when constructing this variable allowing immigrants arriving in different
decades (e.g. 1910 vs 1920) to be exposed for a different number of years to education reforms.
   14
      Specifically, for each decade t, we first compute the share of immigrants from each country j
in county c, relative to all immigrants in the county: jct = Immjct /j Immjct . Then, we take the
average across years (for 1910, 1920, and 1930).



                                                   12
GDP) weighted by the number of respondents between preferences for redistribution
of immigrants coming from the European countries in our sample and the year of in-
troduction of education reforms.15 Reassuringly, there is a statistically significant and
negative relationship between the year of introduction of the reform and current im-
migrants' preferences for redistribution, implying that immigrants from countries that
introduced welfare reforms earlier display stronger support for generous welfare policies.
We replicate these results by estimating individual level regressions and controlling for
a large number of individual controls. Results, reported in Appendix Table A.3, confirm
the correlation presented in Figure A.3.16

Summary statistics Detailed information about each variable and its sources is
provided in Appendix Table A.2. For all our variables, since county boundaries change
over time, we apply the harmonization procedure in Perlman (2016), fixing them to
1930.
    Panel A of Table 1 presents the summary statistics of our main historical variables.
The 1910-1930 immigrant share for the average county in our sample is 5.5%, but this
masks substantial heterogeneity across space, as depicted in Figure 3. Consistent with
the description in Abramitzky and Boustan (2017), immigrants were concentrated in
the North-East and in the Mid-West as well as in California. Much fewer European im-
migrants were instead living in the US South at the time. Importantly for our analysis,
which only exploits within-state variation, the historical presence of European immi-
grants varied substantially also across counties within the same state, as documented
in Figure A.4.
    On average, the urban share of the population in 1910-1930 was around 14%, but,
again, this variable displays significant variation, ranging from 0 for some of the entirely
rural counties in the Mid-West to 1 for urban counties like Cook County (IL) or the
boroughs of New York City. Table 1, Panel B, also documents that around 85% and
92% of immigrants in 1910-1930 were, respectively, able to speak English and literate.
However, these average values mask substantial heterogeneity, with immigrants from
Southern and Eastern Europe being significantly less skilled and less proficient in En-
glish than those from "old" sending countries like Germany, the UK, or Scandinavia
(Abramitzky and Boustan, 2017).
  15
     As in Luttmer and Singhal (2011), we use data from the European Social Survey. Consistent
with the literature, preferences for redistribution are calculated using the following question: "The
government should take measures to reduce differences in income levels". Respondents are asked if
they agree strongly, agree, neither agree nor disagree, disagree or disagree strongly. See Appendix C
for more details.
  16
     Details about the empirical analysis and variable definitions can be found in Appendix C.




                                                 13
3.2     Cooperative Congressional Election Study (CCES)
To measure political ideology and preferences for redistribution, we rely on nationally
representative survey data from the Cooperative Congressional Election Study (CCES).
Specifically, for ideology and political behavior we use the Cumulative CCES Common
Content dataset (Kuriwaki, 2018), which combines all surveys between 2006 and 2018,
for a total of more than 450,000 respondents. For all other questions, we instead combine
surveys for each individual year.17
    The CCES is an online survey conducted in November of every year since 2005
that asks a wide range of questions ­ from political ideology and voting behavior to
preferences for redistribution and views on the role of government, to attitudes towards
minorities and several socioeconomic issues such as gun control, gay rights, and abortion
­ and has been used extensively in political science and political economy (Ansolabehere
and Kuriwaki, 2019; Hopkins et al., 2019; Acharya et al., 2016). The CCES also asks a
large number of demographic and socioeconomic questions such as nativity, age, gender,
marital status, income, and education. Moreover, and crucially for our purposes, the
CCES reports the county of residence of respondents and, due to its vast sample size,
allows us to exploit cross-county variation in attitudes.18
    We restrict attention to American born individuals living in counties for which
European immigration and the other historical variables described in Section 3.1 are
available. We measure political ideology and preferences for redistribution using a total
of eight questions ­ four for the former, and four for the latter. All questions are coded
so that higher values refer to more liberal (i.e. closer to the Democratic Party) ideology
and stronger preferences for redistribution, respectively. The exact wording of each
question, the range of the corresponding answer, and the years in which each question
is available are reported in Appendix Table A.4.
    In Table 1, Panels C and D, we report the summary statistics for each of the eight
outcomes, while Appendix Table A.5 presents the individual level characteristics of
respondents in our sample. The number of respondents varies, since not all questions
were asked in all years and because not all individuals answered all questions, ranging
from a minimum of around 186,000 (support for an increase in the minimum wage)
to a maximum of more than 422,000 (party affiliation). As it appears from Table 1,
the average ideology score is 2.88, while 38% and 51% of respondents identify with
the Democratic Party and voted for a Democratic candidate in the last Presidential
  17
     See     https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi%3A10.7910/DVN/
II2DB6 for more details and to access the dataset. The Cumulative dataset includes a sub-set of
questions that are common to all survey waves, and whose answers can be more easily interpreted.
  18
     Differently from most other surveys, such as the American National Election Studies (ANES) or
the General Social Survey (GSS), the CCES offers a key advantage: its sample size is very large and
nationally representative even at the county level.


                                                14
elections respectively. Around 40% of respondents in our sample oppose spending cuts
and are in favour of financing the deficit with taxes, while more than 70% of them are
in favor of increasing the minimum wage.


4      Empirical Strategy
This section describes our empirical strategy. We first introduce our baseline estimating
equation (Section 4.1), and we then construct the instrument for historical European
immigration at the county level (Section 4.2).


4.1     Baseline Estimating Equation
To study the long run effects of European immigration on American ideology, we esti-
mate a specification of the form:

                         yicst = s + t + immcs + Xcs + Wicst + uicst                                   (2)

where yicst refers to ideology or preferences for redistribution of respondent i living in
county c at time t. The key regressor of interest is the average European immigrant
share of the county population between 1910 and 1930, immcs . We always control
for state and survey wave fixed effects, s and t , for individual characteristics of
respondents, Wicst , as well as for a set of historical county variables, included in Xcs .
Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
    Individual characteristics, Wicst , include a quadratic in age, gender, race dummies
(white, black, and other), marital (single, married, separated, and widowed) and em-
ployment (employed, unemployed, and out of the labor force) status, educational at-
tainment (less than high school, high school, and more than high school) and income
dummies.19 The set of historical county controls, Xcs , is described in Section 3.1, and
discussed in detail again when presenting our results below.20


4.2     Instrument for Historical Immigration
To attach a causal interpretation to the relationship between the historical immigrant
share and American ideology today, the location of European immigrants in the first
three decades of the twentieth century should be orthogonal to factors that might have
  19
     There are 12 income categories ­ from less than 10,000 to more than 150,000 US dollars. We
include dummies for each of them. Details for each category are provided in Table A.5.
  20
     We never include contemporaneous county controls, since any variable for the current period might
be directly or indirectly affected by historical immigration (see, for instance, Sequeira et al., 2020). As
such, these would be "bad controls" that could bias our estimates (Angrist and Pischke, 2008).


                                                    15
independently contributed to shape long run preferences and values of natives. One
specific concern is that immigrants might have settled in counties that were booming at
the time of their arrival, and that such thriving economic conditions persisted over time,
directly influencing Americans' preferences for redistribution and ideology.21 Similarly,
immigrants might have been attracted to areas with more liberal views towards immi-
gration, which may in turn be correlated with socioeconomic preferences and ideology
today.
    To overcome these and similar concerns, in addition to controlling for historical
economic and political county characteristics and for state fixed effects, we follow the
immigration literature, and construct a version of the shift-share instrument originally
introduced by Altonji and Card (1991) and subsequently refined by Card (2001). The
instrument predicts the number of immigrants received by US counties in each decade
from 1910 to 1930 by interacting 1900 settlements of different ethnic groups with sub-
sequent migration flows from each sending (European) country. Similarly to Burchardi
et al. (2019) and Tabellini (2020), as suggested in Adao et al. (2019), we construct a
"leave-out" version of the shift-share instrument, by excluding immigrants from each
country who eventually settled in a given county.
    Formally, the predicted number of immigrants received by county c in decade  is
given by

                                      ~cs =
                                      Z              shjc Immj                                      (3)
                                                 j

where shjc is the share of immigrants from country j living in county c as of 1900
(relative to all immigrants from country j in the US) and Immj is the number of
immigrants arrived from country j in the US between decade  - 1 and decade  , net
of those that eventually settled in county c. Since we are interested in predicting the
total number of immigrants in the county, we add the 1900 immigrant stock to the
predicted flows for 1910, and then recursively sum the flows for subsequent decades
predicted by Z ~cs . Finally, we compute the average number of predicted immigrants
in the county for the three decades 1910, 1920, and 1930, and scale it by 1900 county
population.22 We denote the predicted average immigrant share in county c with Zcs ,
and we use it to instrument for the average immigrant share, immcs , in equation (2).
  21
     In fact, results in Sequeira et al. (2020) suggest that immigrants were more likely to endogenously
select in otherwise declining counties, possibly due to congestion costs and discrimination.
  22
     So as not to contaminate the instrument with endogeneity, we follow the suggestion in Card and
Peri (2016), and use baseline ­ rather than contemporaneous ­ population to construct the fraction of
immigrants. Results are unchanged when scaling the instrument by 1910 (rather than 1900) population.




                                                     16
4.2.1   Sources of Variation

The shift-share instrument exploits two complementary sources of variation. First,
cross-sectional variation in the distribution of 1900 immigrants' enclaves of different
countries across US counties. Second, time-series variation in the number of immi-
grants from different European countries moving to the United States across decades.
Figure 4 plots the share of immigrants from different European countries living in across
US counties in 1900, and confirms the substantial degree of clustering across places
for different immigrant groups already documented in the literature (Abramitzky and
Boustan, 2017; Card, 2001).
    For instance, while Italians were highly concentrated in large cities such as Chicago
and New York, they were significantly less likely to settle in mid-western states like
Minnesota. Even stronger geographic concentration is observed for Portuguese immi-
grants, who had a large community in the Boston area (Middlesex County), but were
practically absent from most other regions. Clustering was not specific to "new" Euro-
pean sending countries. In fact, similar patterns can be found for Swedish and German
settlements, which were concentrated in northwestern and mid-western states, and es-
pecially for Germans, in New York City. Focusing on Massachusetts, Figure A.5 in the
Appendix verifies that a similar degree of variation exists also for counties within the
same state. Since our empirical analysis always conditions on state fixed effects, within
state variation in ethnic enclaves is a necessary condition for the instrument to have
predictive power.
    The shift-share instrument combines this geographic variation with changes in nation-
wide immigration across sending regions. As already discussed in Section 2.1, the
decades between 1900 and 1930 were characterized by nation-wide shocks ­ WWI and
the Immigration Acts ­ exogenous to county-specific economic or political conditions,
that dramatically changed both the level and the composition of immigrants moving to
the United States over time (Figures 1 and 2).

4.2.2   Instrument Validity and Identifying Assumptions

As noted in other work (Abramitzky et al., 2019d; Tabellini, 2020), WWI and the
Immigration Acts make this setting particularly suitable for the use of the shift-share
instrument, since these shocks induced a sharp change in the immigration patterns pre-
vailing until 1915, which had also contributed to the formation of the 1900 immigrant
settlements (Figure A.2). This is important because it significantly reduces the serial
correlation in migration flows from the same country of origin to the same local desti-
nation ­ a feature that might invalidate the shift-share design by conflating the short



                                          17
and the long run effects of immigration (Jaeger et al., 2018).23 The differential impact
of such exogenous, nation-wide shocks across European countries is also key to reduce
more general concerns about the validity of shift-share designs, as discussed formally
in Borusyak et al. (2018).
    Even if the WWI and quota shocks introduced an exogenous trend-break in im-
migration flows, one may still be worried that (conditional on state fixed effects) the
county characteristics that attracted more immigrants from selected European coun-
tries before 1900 might be correlated both with trends in country-specific immigration
between 1910 and 1930 and with long run ideology and preferences of native-born Amer-
icans. For instance, before 1900, early settlers from Scandinavia or Germany may have
selected counties where natives' preferences for redistribution became stronger (for rea-
sons other than immigration) during the 1920s, when migration from these countries
grew, relative to that from other sending areas. A related concern is that, prior to
1900, specific immigrant groups (e.g. Italians) settled in counties that experienced a
stronger change in economic fundamentals when immigration from that specific origin
was booming (e.g. in the 1910s).
    While we cannot observe the ideology of native-born individuals at the county level
at the beginning of the twentieth century, we proxy for political preferences with the
vote share of the Democratic Party in Presidential elections at baseline.24 We document
that our results are unchanged when controlling for these political variables. Moreover,
all our specifications include county latitude and longitude as well as a large set of 1900
county-specific controls, such as the urban and the black share of the population, aver-
age occupational scores, employment to population ratio, and the share of employment
in manufacturing. In addition, we seek to isolate even more directly the variation in
immigrants' composition exploited by the shift-share instrument, by separately con-
trolling for the initial shares of immigrants from each European country. This exercise
tests whether the variation behind the instrument is disproportionately influenced by
specific destination-origin combinations, which may also be spuriously correlated with
the long run evolution of preferences across US counties (Goldsmith-Pinkham et al.,
2018).
    Yet another concern is that the instrument could be spuriously correlated with
shocks (e.g. the arrival of railroads or the expansion of specific industries) hitting
US counties that both affected long run local economic and political conditions and
   23
      For instance, while the correlation in predicted immigration within the same destination over time
is around .95 for the period between 1980 and 2010 (Jaeger et al., 2018), it is lower than .3 in our
context. Using a somewhat different empirical strategy, but focusing on the same period, Abramitzky
et al. (2019d) find that such correlation is as low as -.16.
   24
      We define the "baseline" election years in different ways (e.g. 1900; 1904; combining 1900 and
1904 together), and results always remain unchanged.



                                                  18
influenced emigration patterns across European countries. To assuage this concern,
all our specifications include a measure of predicted labor demand, constructed by
interacting the 1900 industrial composition of US counties with the national growth
rate of different industries between 1910 and 1930 (Tabellini, 2020). We also control
for the measure of railroad connectivity constructed in Sequeira et al. (2020).


5     Main Results
This section presents our main results. Section 5.1 shows that American born respon-
dents who today live in counties that received more immigrants between 1910 and 1930
have a more liberal political ideology and hold stronger preferences for redistribution.
Section 5.2 summarizes the robustness checks we conducted, which are then described
in detail in Appendix B.


5.1    Historical presence of immigrants and American Ideology
We begin our analysis by investigating the long run effects of European immigration on
political ideology and preferences for redistribution of American born individuals today.
Before presenting our formal regression results, we show the variation in the raw data
in Figure A.6. Here, we plot the quintiles of the distribution of the voting-Democrat
dummy in presidential elections (Panel A) and of support for welfare spending (Panel
B), after partialling out state fixed effects. Two patterns emerge. First, for both out-
comes, we observe a strong variability throughout the country. Second, the distribution
of both support for the Democratic Party and preferences for redistribution seems to
positively correlate with the historical presence of European immigrants (partialled out
from state fixed effects), which is reported in Figure A.4.
    We now focus on the regression analysis. In Table 2, we estimate a parsimonious
version of equation (2), which includes only individual respondents' characteristics and
state and survey-year fixed effects. Panel A presents OLS results, whereas Panels B and
C report 2SLS and first stage coefficients respectively. OLS estimates for both ideology
and preferences for redistribution reveal that there is a strong, positive relationship
between the 1910-1930 share of European immigrants in a county and the probability
that, today, an individual identifies as liberal, Democrat or voted for a Democratic
candidate in the last presidential election (columns 1-4). A very similar pattern emerges
when focusing on support for welfare spending, opposition to spending cuts, support
for minimum wage increases, and preferences to fund state deficit using taxes instead
of reducing expenditures (columns 5-8). In all cases, individuals living in counties with
a larger historical presence of immigrants are more likely to view redistribution more


                                           19
favorably.
    We then turn to instrumental variable estimation, presenting 2SLS and first stage
results in Panels B and C respectively. Starting from the first stage, there is a positive
and statistically significant relationship between predicted and actual immigration, and
the KP F-stat for weak instruments is well above conventional levels (Panel C). First
stage coefficients imply that a 10 percentage point increase in the predicted 1910-1930
average immigrant share is associated with a 14.2 percentage point increase in the actual
immigrant share.25
    2SLS estimates (Panel B) confirm OLS results ­ both quantitatively and quali-
tatively ­ and indicate the existence of a strong link between historical immigration
and left-leaning, liberal ideology among native born individuals today. In Table 3, we
present results for a more stringent specification, which, in addition to state and survey
wave fixed effects and the individual characteristics of Table 2, also includes a large
number of historical controls. In particular, we add the 1900: urban and black share,
male labor force participation, employment share in manufacturing, and average oc-
cupational income scores. We also add geographical coordinates, an index of industry
growth between 1910 and 1930 as in Tabellini (2020), and railroad connectivity from
Sequeira et al. (2020).26
    The size of coefficients, for both the 2SLS and OLS estimates, is smaller than in
Table 2, but remains always significant and of sizeable magnitudes. Similarly, the
point estimate for the first stage, reported in Panel C, becomes slightly lower, but
remains highly statically significant. Appendix Figure A.7 presents the residualized
(bin) scatterplot for first stage regressions aggregated at the county level across survey
waves and weighted by the average number of respondents, after partialling out state
fixed effects and all county controls included in Table 3. The graph confirms the strong
relationship between actual and predicted immigration already documented in Panel C
of Table 3.
    Focusing on 2SLS estimates for political ideology, a 5 percentage point increase in
the average immigrant share ­ equivalent to roughly 40% of the inter-quartile range ­
is associated with a 1.2% higher probability of reporting a liberal ideology (column 1)
and with a 6.2% higher likelihood of identifying with the Democratic Party (column 3),
relative to the sample mean. Results are similar for preferences for redistribution: rela-
tive to respondents living in a county at the 25th percentile of the historical immigrant
share, individuals in a county at the 75th percentile are 4.6% more likely to oppose
  25
     The exact point estimate varies slightly across columns because the number of respondents is
different for each question, and this implicitly changes the weighting scheme behind each regression.
Reassuringly, results are always very stable. In unreported regressions, we also verified that the first
stage remains strong when estimating county-level, unweighted regressions.
  26
     Results appear robust to also including each of these controls individually.


                                                  20
spending cuts and 5.2% more likely to support welfare spending, relative to the sample
mean (columns 5 and 6).27 The effects of immigration on support for an increase in the
minimum wage and for funding state deficit through taxes (rather than via spending
cuts) are quantitatively very similar.
    OLS and 2SLS coefficients are very close, and never statistically different from each
other ­ a pattern similar to that documented in Tabellini (2020) for the short run effects
of European immigration across US cities. One possible explanation for this is that the
pull factors that might have attracted immigrants to a specific county (e.g. strong labor
demand) were offset by congestion costs that induced immigrants to select otherwise
declining places. Alternatively, it is possible that immigrants chose their location based
on local economic conditions prevailing at the time, and that these were not correlated
with cultural preferences of natives (either in the past or today).
    Coefficients on the individual controls (reported in Appendix Table A.6) are in line
with those estimated in the literature (Alesina and Giuliano, 2011). Race is probably
the single most important variable to explain individual preferences for redistribution
and political behavior in the US. For our measures of political ideology, the historical
fraction of immigrants has a beta coefficient that is roughly 40% relative to the effect of
being black. For preferences for redistribution, the coefficient on historical immigration
is the same order of magnitude of being black for all questions, except for support
for the minimum wage increase, for which the size is twice as large. In our sample,
higher income is associated with lower desire for redistribution (in line with Meltzer
and Richard, 1981), and the size of the beta coefficient of historical immigration is
approximately equal to the effect of having an income in the range of $80,000-$100,000
relative to having an income of less than $10,000 for all questions.28
    Summing up, this section has documented a strong effect of historical European
immigration on today's preferences for redistribution and liberal ideology of American
born individuals. Moreover, our estimates are quantitatively large, and comparable in
size to other, more standard determinants of preferences for redistribution and political
behavior in the United States, such as race and income. In Section 6, we explore the
mechanisms behind these results. Before doing so, in the next paragraph, we briefly
summarize the robustness checks conducted in our analysis, which are then reported
and discussed in detail in Appendix B.
  27
     These numbers are obtained by multiplying the coefficients in columns 5 and 6 of Panel B by the
inter-quartile range of the average fraction of immigrants in our sample (0.125), and dividing it by the
mean of the dependent variable, reported at the bottom of each column in Table 3.
  28
     Only for support for welfare spending the beta coefficient of historical immigration is smaller
(approximately half the size) when we compare the income bracket of $80,000-$100,000 relative to
having an income of less than $10,000.




                                                  21
5.2    Summary of Robustness Checks
As noted above, our most stringent specification already includes a large number of
county-specific variables as well as individual respondents' characteristics, and state
and survey wave fixed effects. In this section, we summarize additional exercises per-
formed to probe the robustness of our findings, which are described in more detail and
presented extensively in Appendix B. First, we verify that our main results, reported in
Table 3, are robust to the inclusion of baseline controls for the Democratic vote share
in Presidential elections (Table B.1). Second, we replicate our results using the average
immigrant share for the full 1850-1930 period (Table B.2). Third, we show that results
are unchanged when dropping the US South, when aggregating the data to the com-
muting zone (CZ) level, and when separately controlling for the (instrumented) ethnic
diversity resulting from European immigrants (Tables B.3, B.4, and B.5). In addition,
we verify that results are unchanged when dropping counties above (resp. below) the
99th and 95th (resp. 1st and 5th) percentile of the 1910-1930 average immigrant share
(Tables B.6 and B.7). Finally, and most importantly, we replicate the analysis by in-
cluding ­ one by one ­ the initial shares of each immigrant group in the county, i.e.
shjc in equation (3). This exercise, reported in Figures B.1 and B.2, reduces concerns
raised by Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2018) that specific combinations of US counties
and European countries of origin might be absorbing most of the variation in our data.
It also deals with the possibility that the initial immigrant shares were not independent
of cross-county pull factors systematically related to settlers' state of origin.


6     Mechanisms
This section explores the mechanisms for the positive effect of historical immigration
on preferences for redistribution and liberal ideology of American voters today. To
our knowledge, there is no systematic evidence on the long-run effects of historical
immigration on political behavior in the US. The existing literature has studied the
effect of contemporaneous immigration or ethnic diversity on political behavior and
preferences for redistribution. Specifically for the US, Mayda et al. (2018) study the
impact of immigration on the Republican vote share using county level data from 1990
to 2010, finding that immigrants' level of skills is an important determinant of natives'
voting behavior. In particular, while high-skilled immigrants decrease the Republican
vote share, the presence of low-skilled immigrants has the opposite effect ­ especially
in low-skilled and rural counties.
    In the context of the Age of Mass Migration, Tabellini (2020) finds that European
immigration to US cities led to lower support for the Democratic Party, to the election


                                           22
of more anti-immigrant legislators, and to the reduction in both public spending and tax
rates. Tabellini (2020) provides evidence that natives' backlash was likely influenced
more by cultural differences between immigrants and natives than by concerns over la-
bor market competition.29 More generally, starting with Easterly and Levine (1997) and
Alesina et al. (1999), many studies have documented, both across and within countries,
that higher ethnic diversity is negatively associated with preferences for redistribution.
More directly related to our work, the inflow of immigrants has been shown to reduce
natives' desire for government spending (Alesina et al., 2018a; Dahlberg et al., 2012)
and to increase support for right-wing parties (Dustmann et al., 2019; Halla et al.,
2017).
    A key distinction between the existing literature and our work, is that the effect in
the long run can be quite different. Even though in the short run ethnic and cultural
diversity might increase the support for right wing parties and lower natives' preferences
for redistribution, it is possible for these effects to gradually dissipate and even flip sign
over time. In the next two sections, we explore potential mechanisms that could help
understand the long run, positive effect of European immigration on liberal ideology
and preferences for redistribution of American voters today.
    We first consider several economic channels, such as direct labor market effects of
immigrants on natives, immigrants' selection, and the type of economic characteristics
that immigrants brought with them to the US. However, in analyzing these economic
mechanisms, we conclude that none of them can explain our main findings. We then
turn to a "social transmission" mechanism. We conjecture that immigrants exposed
to more generous welfare programs in Europe, who likely held stronger preferences for
redistribution, transmitted their values to natives.
    The literature tends to think about immigrants' assimilation as a one-sided process
in which minority groups converge to the habits of the majority (Abramitzky et al.,
2019a; Fouka, 2020). While this is certainly the case in many instances, the melting pot
society that characterizes the United States ­ indeed defined "a nation of immigrants"
in Kennedy (1964) ­ might have induced native-born individuals to, perhaps uncon-
sciously, absorb some aspects of immigrants' culture and values. Immigrants bring their
own values with them (Giuliano, 2007; Fern´       andez and Fogli, 2009; Luttmer and Sing-
hal, 2011), and these may be transmitted to natives. Since culture is, typically, quite
sticky, studies focusing on the short run effects of immigration are unlikely to capture
this process of cultural transmission.
    Focusing on a time horizon that spans more than one hundred years makes it pos-
sible to detect such cultural spillovers, if any. To the extent that immigrants had
  29
    A different interpretation is instead proposed in Goldin (1994), who argues that the main reason
behind the Immigration Acts of the 1920s was labor market competition.


                                                23
relatively stronger preferences for redistribution and a more liberal ideology than their
American born counterparts, the local presence of Europeans might have, gradually,
shifted natives' preferences towards that of a more generous welfare state and conse-
quently a more left-leaning ideology.30 We provide empirical evidence consistent with
this interpretation.


6.1     Economic Mechanisms
Direct economic effects. The first, perhaps most obvious, mechanism for the pos-
itive effects of immigration on preferences for redistribution and ideology is through
the impact of immigrants on the US economy. If immigrants had a negative effect on
natives' employment and wages, it is possible that counties with more immigrants his-
torically demanded more redistribution. However, existing evidence suggests that this
mechanism is unlikely. In fact, Sequeira et al. (2020) find a strong, positive relationship
between European immigration and long run economic development across US counties.
Moreover, consistent with Ager and Hansen (2017), the authors show that immigrants'
benefits emerged almost immediately, indicating that even in the short run demand for
economic protection among natives should not have increased.
    Despite the positive average effects of immigration documented in Sequeira et al.
(2020), it is possible that some groups of natives were made worse off, and that such
groups demanded more economic protection and redistribution. While possible, this
idea is somewhat inconsistent with findings in Tabellini (2020). Exploring the short-
run effects of European immigration on the 180 largest US cities, he shows that, not
only immigration had a strong and positive effect on both natives' employment and
economic activity, but also that even natives working in highly exposed sectors (e.g.
manufacturing) and occupations (e.g. laborers) did not experience significant wage or
employment losses.31 Thus, if anything, the effects of European immigrants on natives'
economic outcomes should have led to weaker ­ rather than stronger ­ preferences for
redistribution (Meltzer and Richard, 1981).

Immigrants' economic characteristics. It is possible that immigrants from differ-
ent regions brought with them specific skills and economic characteristics. These, in
turn, might have contributed to the evolution of natives' preferences for redistribution
and American ideology in the long-run. Relative to natives, immigrants ­ especially
  30
     For example, European immigrants arriving after 1910 had not been exposed to the "frontier
culture" that instead influenced ideology and preferences of many early settlers (Bazzi et al., 2017;
Turner, 1893).
  31
     Tabellini (2020) also shows that immigration did not cause any significant increase in house prices
or in the rents paid by natives.



                                                  24
from Southern and Eastern Europe ­ were significantly more likely to work in the man-
ufacturing sector, to hold unskilled jobs, and to be illiterate (Abramitzky and Boustan,
2017). Similarly, there was substantial variation in the income level of immigrants from
different groups. While Abramitzky et al. (2014) show that not all European immi-
grants faced an earnings penalty relative to natives upon arrival, for many of them
such gap actually existed, and it typically took more than one generation to close it
(Abramitzky et al., 2019c). As a result, it is possible that counties receiving more im-
migrants, in particular from poorer European countries, developed a set of institutions
and norms that were conducive to more generous welfare programs. Once these insti-
tutions were in place, preference of both natives and immigrants might have adapted
to them (Alesina and Angeletos, 2005).
    To test whether immigrants' economic characteristics can explain results presented
in Table 3 above, we construct a set of indexes that account for the economic character-
istics brought about by immigration. Specifically, for each decade and for each county,
we compute i) the immigrants' average occupational income score as well as the share
of immigrants who were: ii) able to speak English; iii) literate; and iv ) employed in
manufacturing.32
    To measure the average value of each characteristic brought about by immigrants in
a given county during 1910-1930, we take the mean of each variable during this period.
We construct a corresponding instrument for this index as follows. We first compute
the average value of the variables described above for each immigrant group between
1910 and 1930 at the national level.33 Next, we interact this country-specific value with
the predicted share of immigrants in a given county in each decade (relative to all other
immigrant groups), sum across groups in that county (in each decade), and finally take
the average over the three decades.34
    We then augment our baseline specification by separately controlling for (the in-
strumented version of) each of these indexes. To ease the interpretation of results,
each index is standardized by subtracting its mean and dividing it through its standard
deviation. 2SLS results are reported in Table 4. In Panel A, we start by controlling
for the share of immigrants who were able to speak English; then, in Panels B, C, and
D we consider, respectively, log occupational income scores, the employment share in
manufacturing, and literacy. Two results stand out.
    First, the main effect of immigration is barely affected: throughout, the coefficient
on immigration remains positive, statistically significant, and quantitatively close to
  32
     When constructing these indexes, we restrict attention to immigrant men of age 15-64 (see Table
A.2), but our results are robust to dropping this restriction.
  33
     Results are unchanged when using either 1910 or 1900 values for each immigrants' characteristic.
  34
     The predicted share of immigrants in each county and decade is constructed using the country-
specific values used to build our main instrument (see equation (3) in Section 4.2).


                                                 25
that reported in our baseline specification. Second, and perhaps more importantly,
no systematic pattern for the effects of each economic characteristic of immigrants
emerges. In Panel E, we present a specification where all immigrants' characteristics
are simultaneously included. Also in this case, the average immigrant share in the
county remains strongly positive and highly significant. Moreover, these results are in
line with those from the baseline specification (Panel B of Table 3).
    As before, in Table 4 we also present the KP F-stat for the joint significance of
all instruments. With the exception of the specification in which we include the occu-
pational income score (Panel B), the F-stat is above conventional levels. While some
caution is needed in interpreting the results with the lower F-stat, we nonetheless find
it reassuring that, even for this specification, the first stage for the fraction of immi-
grants remains strong. In addition, when evaluating the partial AP F-stats for each
individual first stage (Angrist and Pischke, 2008), which we do not report to save space,
we note that they are always well above conventional levels.35 Finally, when we include
all controls simultaneously, in the most demanding specification of Panel E, the KP F-
stat continues to be above conventional levels and the 2SLS coefficient on the average
fraction of immigrants remains positive, quantitatively large, and precisely estimated.
    Overall, the evidence presented in this paragraph indicates that the positive re-
lationship between historical immigration and both preferences for redistribution and
political ideology is unlikely to be explained by the economic characteristics that Eu-
ropean immigrants brought with them at the turn of the twentieth century.

Immigrants' selection. Another mechanism through which immigrants might have
influenced preferences for redistribution of natives is that of selection (Borjas, 1987).
However, if this mechanism were at play, one would probably expect it to lower na-
tives' preferences for redistribution. First, Knudsen (2019) shows that immigrants from
Scandinavia during the Age of Mass Migration were significantly more likely to be indi-
vidualistic, to travel on their own, and to settle in areas where their ethnic community
was smaller.36 These patterns suggest that immigrants were less likely to demand re-
distribution (at least, relative to stayers), and so, if anything, more immigration should
be associated with lower preferences for redistribution.
    Second, return migration during this historical period was extremely high ­ often
above 30% (Bandiera et al., 2013). It seems natural to expect that migrants who chose
to stay were those who succeeded, and were able to realize the "American dream".
  35
     For instance, in the specific case of Panel B, the AP F-stat for the immigrant share and for the
average occupational scores is, respectively, 155 and 66.
  36
     These findings are in line with the "voluntary settlement hypothesis" formulated in Kitayama et al.
(2006), according to which migration typically involves the voluntary movement of highly independent
individuals.


                                                  26
Consistent with this idea, Abramitzky et al. (2019b) document that, among Norwegian
immigrants in the US, those who chose to go back home were negatively selected in terms
of economic characteristics and skills. Hence, European immigrants who permanently
settled in the US likely put more weight on effort instead of luck, in turn preferring a
smaller welfare state (Alesina and Angeletos, 2005).

Immigrants' intergenerational mobility. Finally, the experience of European im-
migrants in the US might have influenced their own preferences for redistribution, and
in turn spilled over into those of natives. In particular, if immigrants did not experience
significant occupational upgrading, or if the degree of intergenerational mobility for their
kids was lower than for kids of natives, counties that received more immigrants histor-
ically might have developed over time stronger preferences for redistribution (Alesina
and Giuliano, 2011).
    We directly address this possibility using data from Abramitzky et al. (2019c), and
construct the county-average rate of immigrants' intergenerational mobility, weighted
by the share of immigrants from each group in each county in each decade between
1910 and 1930. We adopt a strategy similar to that used for the immigrants' economic
characteristics described above. Specifically, for each immigrant group, we interact
its 1910-1930 average share in a county (relative to all other foreign born) with the
group-specific rate of intergenerational mobility computed by Abramitzky et al. (2019c).
When constructing the corresponding instrument, we use the predicted rather than the
actual immigrant share in the county, but the logic remains exactly the same. Then, we
obtain an index at the county level by summing these county-group specific values across
all European groups.37 As before, to ease the interpretation of results, we standardize
the index by subtracting its mean and dividing it by its standard deviation.
    Next, we augment our baseline specification (Panel B of Table 3) by controlling for
the instrumented index of intergenerational mobility of immigrants in the county. 2SLS
results are reported in Table A.7. In line with our previous results, also in this case
the coefficient on the average immigrant share remains positive, statistically significant,
and quantitatively close to that reported in our baseline specification. Moreover, the
point estimate on the index of intergenerational mobility is quantitatively small and
never statistically significant.
  37
    We can construct this index only for the subset of immigrant groups for which data in Abramitzky
et al. (2019c) are available. Reassuringly, the groups for which data are not available represent less
than 10% of all European immigrants moving to the US in this period.




                                                 27
6.2    Immigrants' Preferences and Cultural Transmission
The evidence presented above suggests that neither direct economic effects nor the
economic characteristics brought about by European immigrants can explain the impact
of immigration on natives' preferences for redistribution and ideology. We now explore
an alternative possibility, namely that European immigrants transmitted their social
and cultural preferences to natives. In particular, we test whether, today, American
born respondents hold stronger preferences for redistribution and a more liberal ideology
in counties with a higher historical presence of immigrants who had been more exposed
to welfare programs in Europe.
    As described in Section 3.1, we construct an index that measures the average ex-
posure to education reforms that European immigrants had in their countries of origin
until 1910 (see equation (1)). Figure A.8 plots the distribution of such index across
counties, after partialling out state fixed effects. As expected, the index takes on higher
values, on average, in counties in the Mid-West, where many immigrants from Scan-
dinavia and Germany ­ areas with a relatively high number of years of exposure to
welfare reforms (see Table A.1) ­ had settled (Abramitzky and Boustan, 2017). How-
ever, the index varies substantially across the entire country, suggesting that our test
is unlikely to capture regional patterns (which would be anyway absorbed by the state
fixed effects).
    We then augment our most demanding specification, where we also control for all
instrumented immigrants' economic characteristics (Panel E of Table 4), by including
the index of education reforms, standardized to have zero mean and standard devi-
ation equal to 1. We report 2SLS results in Table 5. As for the various economic
characteristics, the main effect of immigration is unchanged. However, differently from
results in Table 4, the index of education reforms enters positively and significantly.
Moreover, the magnitude of coefficients is quantitatively relevant: for instance, one
standard deviation increase in exposure to education reforms is associated with a 2.1%
and 5.4% higher probability of voting for the Democratic Party (column 4) and support
for welfare spending (column 6), respectively.
    These magnitudes are similar to that implied by a 5 percentage point (equivalent to
the sample mean, or 40% of the inter-quartile range) increase in the average fraction of
immigrants. To more concretely interpret them, consider that one standard deviation
in the years of exposure to education reforms across European countries in our sample is
33 years. This gap is close to the difference between the Italian (33 years of exposure)
and the Swedish (68 years of exposure) experience (see Table A.1). Our estimates
suggest that, holding the number of immigrants in two counties constant, changing their
immigrant population from entirely Italian to entirely Swede would increase support


                                            28
for the Democratic Party and preferences for redistribution by, respectively, 2% and
5%.
     Next, we split the sample for counties above and below the median of immigrants'
exposure to education reforms, and separately estimate the effects of immigration in
each sub-sample (again controlling for all the variables included in Panel E of Table 4).
This test complements the previous one, and asks whether immigration had a stronger
impact on preferences for redistribution of natives in counties where immigrants had
themselves been exposed to more generous welfare programs in their countries of ori-
gin. We report 2SLS estimates in Figure 5, with orange (resp. blue) bars referring to
coefficients for the sample of counties above (resp. below) the median.38
     Consistent with our conjecture, the effects of immigration on preferences for redistri-
bution and liberal ideology are substantially larger in counties with exposure above the
sample median ­ and this difference is almost always statistically significant at the 5%
level. Specifically, when focusing on counties with exposure to education reforms above
the median, 2SLS coefficients on the average immigrant share are always statistically
significant and larger than in the baseline specification reported above. Conversely,
when considering counties with immigrants' exposure to education reforms below the
median, the coefficient on immigration becomes unstable and smaller in magnitude.39
     Taken together, these findings support the hypothesis that the effects of immigration
on preferences for redistribution and ideology of American-born respondents (today) are
at least partly driven by a process of cultural transmission, through which immigrants'
values influenced natives' attitudes. On the one hand, exposure to education reforms
"imported" by immigrants in the early twentieth century is strongly and positively
associated with both preferences for redistribution and support for the Democratic
Party among American born individuals today, even after accounting for the direct
effect of immigration. On the other hand, the impact of immigration is larger in counties
where immigrants had been more exposed to welfare programs in Europe prior to their
arrival.
     It is important to note that the analysis in this section always conditioned on im-
migrants' economic characteristics. This implies that our findings are unlikely to be
driven by the correlation between economic and cultural factors. Specifically, one may
be worried that exposure to education reforms in the country of origin influences po-
litical preferences directly (Glaeser et al., 2007), and not through attitudes towards
public spending. The introduction of education reforms could more simply capture the
effect of differences in human capital on political ideology. The inclusion of controls for
  38
     The corresponding, formal estimates (including the F-stat for weak instruments) are reported in
Appendix Table A.8.
  39
     This pattern is not due to a weak instrument problem. In fact, if anything, the KP F-stat is higher
in the sample below median (see Table A.8).

                                                  29
immigrants' ability to speak English, literacy, and occupational scores ­ the three best
proxies for education prior to 1940 in the US Census ­ weighs against this alternative
interpretation. In addition, to the extent that education is correlated with income,
education should reduce the desire for redistribution (Meltzer and Richard, 1981).40
    Overall, our evidence suggests that exposure to the welfare state in the immigrants'
countries of origin, which likely affected immigrants' preferences and ideology, spilled
over to natives, through a process of cultural transmission. While the literature has
studied how inter-group contact helped promoting the Americanization of immigrants
(Abramitzky et al., 2019a), we argue that it may have also facilitated the transmission
of immigrants' cultural values and beliefs to natives. We now explore this channel.


6.3     Inter-group Contact and Political Ideology
To investigate the possibility that immigrants could have transmitted their ideology to
natives, we explore the heterogeneity of our results according to two measures of inter-
group contact: intermarriage and residential segregation. Both measures could explain
the diffusion of European ideology through vertical and horizontal cultural transmission
(Bisin and Verdier, 2001). Intermarriage should be associated with cultural transmis-
sion inside the family, whereas residential integration should foster horizontal transmis-
sion by increasing contacts with neighbors and friends.
    As in Fouka et al. (2018), we define intermarriage as the share of immigrants who
are married with individuals of native parentage during the 1910-1930 period. We
construct residential segregation, using the very same procedure adopted in Logan and
Parman (2017).41 In order to interpret coefficients in the same direction, we present
results for residential integration, i.e. the opposite of segregation in Logan and Parman
(2017). Figures A.9 and A.10 plot the distribution of both intermarriage and residential
integration, after partialling out state fixed effects. Importantly, not only there is
substantial variation in the two measures across counties, but also their geographic
distribution does not seem to overlap, and is rather different from that of the index of
education reforms reported in Figure A.8. This suggests that the three measures are
unlikely to merely capture the same underlying, latent variable.
    As we did for education reforms, we split the sample for counties above and be-
low the median rate of intermarriage and residential integration during the 1910-1930
period. Then, we separately estimate the effects of immigration in each sub-sample
  40
     Piketty (2018) documents a higher propensity for educated people to vote for the left in France,
Britain and the United States, although only for the most recent period.
  41
     The only difference relative to Logan and Parman (2017) is that, in our case, we focus on natives-
immigrants as the two groups, rather than on whites and blacks. Results are unchanged ­ in fact
stronger ­ if we define residential segregation by including native born Americans with foreign born
parents (i.e. second generation immigrants) in the "immigrant" group.


                                                  30
using 2SLS, to test if immigrants had a stronger effect on natives' ideology in coun-
ties where, historically, inter-group contact was higher. 2SLS estimates are consistent
with our hypothesis: the impact of immigration is significantly stronger in counties
with higher intermarriage (Figure 6) and where immigrants were residentially more
integrated (Figure 7). For most outcomes, 2SLS coefficients for counties with values
of inter-group contact above the median (orange bars) are twice as large as those for
counties below the median (blue bars).42 These patterns also indicate that our findings
are not merely driven by the persistence of immigrants' culture within ancestry. In
fact, if this were to be the case, one would expect a smaller effect of immigration in
areas where immigrants and natives interacted more often. Instead, they indicate that
natives' culture was "horizontally" influenced through socialization with individuals of
other groups (i.e., immigrants).


7      From the Past to the Present
Sections 6.2 and 6.3 provide suggestive evidence that immigrants brought with them
higher preferences for the welfare state, and transmitted them to natives. In this sec-
tion, we examine the historical process that led to such diffusion. Andersen (1979)
argues that immigrants were fundamental in explaining the New Deal electoral realign-
ment. Instead of a "conversion" story in which American voters switched from the
Republican to the Democratic Party, she proposes a "mobilization" theory. According
to this view, support for Roosevelt (in the 1932 elections) had its origins in 1928, when
Alfred Smith, an urban Catholic of immigrant background, was able to mobilize the
immigrant urban vote to the Democratic Party.43 In subsequent years, the process of
realignment continued, reinforced by the fact that immigrants were hit hard during the
Great Depression (Andersen, 1979; Clubb and Allen, 1969; Degler, 1964; Lubell, 1952).
    We formally test the descriptive evidence associated with the view that "Al Smith,
the rags-to-riches scion of the Fulton Fishmarket, was responsible for bringing the
children of "new immigration" into an increasingly welfare-oriented Democratic party"
(Clubb and Allen, 1969) by examining two sets of historical data. First, we look at the
correlation between the Democratic vote share in presidential elections and immigration
at the county level, from 1900 until today. This exercise allows us to inspect when
  42
     Coefficients and F-stats corresponding to Figures 6 and 7 are reported in Tables A.9 and A.10.
For robustness, in Tables A.11 and A.12 we replicate this exercise considering 1900, i.e. prior to the
period we consider to define the share of immigrants.
  43
     Al Smith was the first Roman Catholic to ever run for presidency for the Democratic Party.
Historical accounts (Slayton, 2001) and results in Tabellini (2020) suggest that his religious affiliation
was among the causes of his defeat, as anti-immigrant and anti-Catholic sentiments among natives
favored his opponent, Herbert Hoover.



                                                   31
the "shift" discussed in Clubb and Allen (1969) took place. Second, we study the
relationship between New Deal expenditures and the 1910-1930 immigrant share, to
test if higher immigration was associated with more generous welfare programs at the
local level.
    Figure 8 plots 2SLS coefficients on the 1910-1930 fraction of immigrants in yearly
regressions, where the dependent variable is the Democratic vote share in presidential
elections.44 All regressions include the most stringent set of controls (i.e. the specifica-
tion of Table 4, Panel E), are weighted by 1900 county population, and are estimated
every 4 years, from 1900 until 2016.45 While there is no statistically significant rela-
tionship between the 1910-1930 fraction of immigrants and the Democratic vote share
until 1924 (included), the coefficient abruptly spikes in 1928, when it becomes strongly
positive and highly statistically significant. The lack of a statistically significant rela-
tionship between 1910-1930 immigration and the Democratic vote share before 1928 is
also reassuring as it indicates the lack of "pre-trends" in our sample about the histor-
ical presence of immigrants and political behavior. Although data on voting behavior
broken down by ethnicity (or, nativity) do not exist, we view results displayed in Figure
8 as consistent with the "mobilization" hypothesis proposed by Andersen (1979).
    Next, we study the effects of 1910-1930 European immigration on the generosity of
New Deal spending at the county level. The New Deal represents one of the largest
instances of social reforms in American history. We conjecture that the presence of
European immigrants, with their strong support for government spending and redis-
tribution, influenced the local allocation of relief programs. Data come from Fishback
et al. (2003), who group New Deal expenditures in the following (per-capita) cate-
gories: relief expenditures, public work programs, farm programs, and housing loans
and insurance.46 The relief expenditure program ­ mostly directed to areas with high
unemployment and with a large decline in economic activity in the early 1930s ­ was by
far the most redistributive one. The redistributional content of the other programs was
instead significantly lower. In particular, the farm program allocated more money to
areas with larger farms, higher average incomes, and higher share of wealthier citizens.
Similarly, public work programs tended to target areas with higher average retail sales
per person. Finally, the loan programs distributed more funds in areas with higher
levels of per capita retail sales, and with a higher percentage of households rich enough
to pay income taxes. A priori, we thus expect the effect of immigration ­ if any ­ to be
  44
     Electoral returns at the county level come from Clubb et al. (1990) for 1900-1968, and from Leip's
Atlas (Leip, 2018) for 1972 to 2016.
  45
     We weigh regressions by 1900 population in order to recover the effects of immigration on the
average US county, and to make our county-level analysis comparable to that conducted above when
using individual level survey data. Results are unchanged when estimating unweighted regressions.
  46
     For more details on each specific program, see Fishback et al. (2003).



                                                  32
largest for the relief expenditure programs.
    We estimate 2SLS regressions in Table 6. In all regressions, in addition to state
fixed effects, we always include both the historical (1900) county controls and the in-
strumented immigrants' characteristics also included in Table 4.47 To assess the implied
magnitude of coefficients and to ease comparisons across outcomes, we also report beta
coefficients in square brackets. Consistent with our hypothesis, the 1910-1930 fraction
of immigrants is strongly associated with relief expenditure per capita (column 1) ­
the program with the highest degree of redistribution. For other programs, coefficients
always have a small beta coefficient, which in some cases is even negative (column 2,
for public work programs) or not statistically significant (column 4, for housing loans).
Crucially, as shown in Panel B of Table 6, results are robust to controlling for the sever-
ity of the Great Depression, which we proxy for by using the sales growth rate from
1929-1933 (Feigenbaum, 2015; Fishback et al., 2003). Also in this case, our findings
indicate that redistributive expenditures at the county level were stronger in counties
with a larger presence of European immigrants.


8      Conclusions
Abundant evidence on the contribution of European immigrants to the American econ-
omy exists (Kennedy, 1964; Sequeira et al., 2020). However, much less is known about
the impact that immigrants had on American ideology and political preferences in the
long run. In this paper, we seek to fill this gap by studying the long-term consequences
of historical immigration to the United States during the Age of Mass Migration on
political ideology and preferences for redistribution of American born individuals to-
day. We exploit variation in the presence of European immigrants across US counties
between 1910 and 1930, combining 1900 settlements with the differential rates of immi-
gration from different countries in the three subsequent decades, which were influenced
by plausibly exogenous events such as WWI and the Immigration Acts.
    We find that historical immigration had a strong effect on political ideology and
preferences for redistribution. In particular, US born individuals living in counties
with a higher historical immigrant share are, today, more left-leaning, more likely to
vote for a Democratic candidate, and more supportive of government spending and
redistribution. These results run counter to the large literature on the short-run effects
of ethnic diversity and immigration (Alesina et al., 1999; Dustmann et al., 2019; Halla
et al., 2017). They suggest that, over longer periods of time, immigrants might not
only assimilate, converging to the culture of the new, host country (Abramitzky et al.,
  47
   As for Figure 8, regressions are weighed by 1900 county population, but results are unchanged
when estimating unweighted regressions.


                                              33
2014, 2019a), but also, that they might themselves influence the values and the norms
prevailing receiving country.
    In the second part of the paper, we explore the mechanisms responsible for our main
findings. We first consider the possibility that European immigrants influenced Amer-
ican ideology in the long run through economic channels. However, in analyzing these
mechanisms ­ the direct economic effects of immigrants, their economic characteristics,
and their selection ­ we conclude that none of them is able to explain the positive
effects of immigration on preferences for redistribution and on liberal, left-leaning ide-
ology of American born individuals today. Instead, we advance the hypothesis that
immigrants brought with them their preferences for the welfare state, which were then
transmitted to US born individuals through a process of vertical and horizontal cultural
transmission.
    We provide evidence consistent with this idea in different ways. First, we measure
preferences for the welfare state by using the number of years of education reform expe-
rienced by immigrants in their country of origin prior to the arrival in the United States.
With this proxy at hand, we document that, conditioning on the immigrant share in
a county, places where the "immigrant mix" originated from European countries with
a longer history of education reforms display, today, stronger preferences for redistri-
bution and higher support for the Democratic Party. We also show that immigration
had a stronger effect in counties whose immigrants had been more exposed to welfare
state policies prior to their arrival in the United States. Second, and consistent with a
process of horizontal transmission, we find that the footprint left by immigrants more
than one hundred years ago is stronger (today) in counties with a historically higher
frequency of inter-group contact, measured as intermarriage between immigrants and
natives and as residential integration of immigrants. We conclude by tracing out the re-
lationship between European immigration and the Democratic vote share for the entire
twentieth century. Consistent with Andersen (1979), we find that the 1928 elections,
when Roman Catholic with immigrant background Alfred Smith ran for presidency
for the Democratic Party, were key in the process of political realignment and in the
corresponding incorporation of immigrants in the Democratic Party.
    Findings in this paper highlight the importance of distinguishing between the short
and the long run effects of diversity and immigration on political preferences and ideol-
ogy in receiving countries. Although immigrants might be opposed, generate backlash,
and reduce natives' preferences for redistribution in the near term, they might eventu-
ally lead to higher social cohesion and stronger desire for generous government spending
over a longer horizon of time. Moreover, our results indicate that immigrants' assim-
ilation is not a one-sided process, and that, instead, immigrants' preferences might
spill-over and be transmitted to natives, thereby contributing to a diverse and complex

                                            34
culture, and to the development of a "melting-pot" society.




                                         35
References
Abdelgadir, Aala and Vasiliki Fouka, "Political Secularism and Muslim Integra-
 tion in the West: Assessing the Effects of the French Headscarf Ban," Unpublished
 Manuscript, 2019.

Abramitzky, Ran and Leah Platt Boustan, "Immigration in American Economic
 History," Journal of Economic Literature, 2017, 55 (4).

  , Leah Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson, "Do Immigrants Assimilate More
  Slowly Today than in the past?," American Economic Review: Insights, 2019.

  , , and , "To the new world and back again: Return migrants in the age of mass
  migration," ILR Review, 2019, 72 (2), 300­322.

  , Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson, "Europe's Tired, Poor, Hud-
  dled Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration,"
  American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (5), 1832­56.

  , , and , "A Nation of Immigrants: Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in
  the Age of Mass Migration," Journal of Political Economy, 2014, 122 (3), 467­506.

  , , Elisa J´  acome, and Santiago P´   erez, "Intergenerational Mobility of Immi-
  grants in the US over Two Centuries," NBER Working Paper 26408, 2019.

  , Philipp Ager, Leah Platt Boustan, Elior Cohen, and Casper W Hansen,
  "The Effects of Immigration on the Economy: Lessons from the 1920s Border Clo-
  sure," NBER Working Paper 26536, 2019.

Acharya, Avidit, Matthew Blackwell, and Maya Sen, "The political legacy of
 American slavery," The Journal of Politics, 2016, 78 (3), 621­641.

Adao, Rodrigo, Michal Koles´  ar, and Eduardo Morales, "Shift-share designs:
 Theory and inference," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (4), 1949­
 2010.

Advani, Arun and Bryony Reich, "Melting pot or salad bowl: The formation of
 heterogeneous communities," IFS Working Papers 2015.

Ager, Philipp and Casper Worm Hansen, "Closing Heaven's Door: Evidence from
 the 1920s U.S. Immigration Quota Acts," Working Paper 2017.

   and Francesco Cinnirella, "Froebel's Gifts: How the Kindergarten Movement
  Changed the American Family," Working Paper 2016.

                                        36
Akcigit, Ufuk, John Grigsby, and Tom Nicholas, "The rise of american ingenuity:
 Innovation and inventors of the golden age," NBER Working Paper 23047, 2017.

Alesina, Alberto and Edward Ludwig Glaeser, Fighting poverty in the US and
 Europe: A world of difference, Oxford University Press, 2004.

   and George-Marios Angeletos, "Fairness and Redistribution," American Eco-
  nomic Review, September 2005, 95 (4), 960­980.

   and Paola Giuliano, "Preferences for redistribution," in "Handbook of social
  economics," Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2011, pp. 93­131.

  , Armando Miano, and Stefanie Stantcheva, "Immigration and redistribution,"
  NBER Working Paper 2018.

  , Elie Murad, and Hillel Rapaport, "Immigration and Attitudes toward Redis-
  tribution in Europe," 2018.

  , Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn, "On the origins of gender roles: Women
  and the plough," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (2), 469­530.

  , Reza Baqir, and William Easterly, "Public goods and ethnic divisions," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (4), 1243­1284.

Allport, Gordon W., The Nature of Prejudice, Oxford, England: Addison-Wesley,
 1954.

Altonji, Joseph G and David Card, "The effects of immigration on the labor market
 outcomes of less-skilled natives," in "Immigration, trade, and the labor market,"
 University of Chicago Press, 1991, pp. 201­234.

Andersen, Kristi, The creation of a Democratic Majority 1928-1936, University of
 Chicago Press, 1979.

Angrist, Joshua D and J¨  orn-Steffen Pischke, Mostly harmless econometrics: An
 empiricist's companion, Princeton university press, 2008.

Ansolabehere, Stephen and Shiro Kuriwaki, "Congressional Representation, the
 Constituent's Perspective," Working Paper, 2019.

Bandiera, Oriana, Imran Rasul, and Martina Viarengo, "The making of modern
 America: migratory flows in the age of mass migration," Journal of Development
 Economics, 2013, 102, 23­47.


                                       37
  , Myra Mohnen, Imran Rasul, and Martina Viarengo, "Nation-building
  through compulsory schooling during the age of mass migration," The Economic
  Journal, 2018, 129 (617), 62­109.

Bazzi, Samuel, Arya Gaduh, Alexander D. Rothenberg, and Maisy Wong,
 "Unity in Diversity? How Intergroup Contact Can Foster Nation Building," Ameri-
 can Economic Review, November 2019, 109 (11), 3978­4025.

  , Martin Fiszbein, and Mesay Gebresilasse, "Frontier Culture: The Roots and
  Persistence of" Rugged Individualism" in the United States," NBER Working Paper
  23997, 2017.

Becker, Sascha O and Ludger Woessmann, "Luther and the girls: Religious de-
 nomination and the female education gap in nineteenth-century Prussia," Scandina-
 vian Journal of Economics, 2008, 110 (4), 777­805.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier, "The economics of cultural transmission and
  the dynamics of preferences," Journal of Economic theory, 2001, 97 (2), 298­319.

Borjas, George J, "Assimilation, changes in cohort quality, and the earnings of im-
 migrants," Journal of labor Economics, 1985, 3 (4), 463­489.

  , "Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants," The American Economic Review,
  1987, pp. 531­553.

Borusyak, Kirill, Peter Hull, and Xavier Jaravel, "Quasi-experimental Shift-
 share Research Designs," 2018. Working Paper.

Burchardi, Konrad B, Thomas Chaney, and Tarek A Hassan, "Migrants, An-
 cestors, and Investments," Review of Economic Studies, Forthcoming, 2019.

Calderon, Alvaro, Vasiliki Fouka, and Marco Tabellini, "Racial diversity, elec-
 toral preferences, and the supply of policy: The Great Migration and civil rights,"
 Harvard Business School BGIE Unit Working Paper, 2019, (20-017).

Cantoni, Davide, "Adopting a new religion: the case of Protestantism in 16th century
 Germany," The Economic Journal, 2012, 122 (560), 502­531.

Card, David, "Immigrant inflows, native outflows, and the local labor market impacts
 of higher immigration," Journal of Labor Economics, 2001, 19 (1), 22­64.

   and Giovanni Peri, "Immigration Economics by George J. Borjas: A Review
  Essay," Journal of Economic Literature, 2016, 54 (4), 1333­49.


                                        38
Clubb, Jerome and Howard Allen, "The Cities and the Election of 1928: Partisan
  Realignment?," The American Historical Review, 1969, 74 (4), 1205­1220.

Clubb, Jerome M, William H Flanigan, and Nancy H Zingale, Partisan re-
  alignment: Voters, parties, and government in American history 1990.

Dahlberg, Matz, Karin Edmark, and Hel´         ene Lundqvist, "Ethnic diversity and
 preferences for redistribution," Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (1), 41­76.

Degler, Carl, "American Political Parties and the Rise of the City: An Interpretation,"
 The Journal of American History, 1964, 51 (1), 41­59.

Dustmann, Christian, Kristine Vasiljeva, and Anna Piil Damm, "Refugee
 migration and electoral outcomes," Review of Economic Studies, 2019, 86 (5), 2035­
 2091.

Easterly, William and Ross Levine, "Africa's growth tragedy: policies and ethnic
 divisions," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (4), 1203­1250.

Eriksson, Katherine, "Ethnic enclaves and immigrant outcomes: Norwegian immi-
  grants during the Age of Mass Migration," European Review of Economic History,
  Forthcoming, 2019.

Faust, Albert Bernhardt, The Germans in the United States, German University
  League, 1916.

Feigenbaum, James J, "Intergenerational mobility during the great depression,"
  2015.

Fern´andez, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli, "Culture: An Empirical Investigation of
  Beliefs, Work, and Fertility," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, January
  2009, 1 (1), 146­77.

Fishback, Price, Shawn Kantor, and John Joseph Wallis, "Can the New Deal's
  three Rs be rehabilitated? A program-by-program, county-by-county analysis," Ex-
  plorations in Economic History, 2003, 40, 278­307.

Flora, Peter, State, Economy and Society in Western Europe 1815-1975: A Data
  Handbook in Two Volumes, Campus Verlag, 1983.

Fouka, Vasiliki, "How do immigrants respond to discrimination? The case of Germans
  in the US during World War I," American Political Science Review, 2019, 113 (2),
  405­422.


                                          39
  , "Backlash: The unintended effects of language prohibition in US schools after World
  War I," The Review of Economic Studies, 2020, 87 (1), 204­239.

  , Soumyajit Mazumder, and Marco Tabellini, "From Immigrants to Americans:
  Race and Assimilation during the Great Migration," Harvard Business School BGIE
  Unit Working Paper, 2018.

Fulford, Scott, Ivan Petkov, and Fabio Schiantarelli, "Does It Matter Where
  You Came From? Ancestry Composition and Economic Performance of US Counties,
  1850-2010," Mimeo, Boston College, 2020.

Galasso, Vincenzo and Paola Profeta, "When the state mirrors the family: the
 design of pension systems," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2018, 16
 (6), 1712­1763.

Giuliano, Paola, "Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin
 Matter?," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2007, 5 (5), 927­952.

   and Antonio Spilimbergo, "Growing up in a Recession," Review of Economic
  Studies, 2014, 81 (2), 787­817.

   and Nathan Nunn, "Understanding cultural persistence and change," NBER
  Working Paper 23617, 2017.

Glaeser, Edward L, Giacomo AM Ponzetto, and Andrei Shleifer, "Why does
 democracy need education?," Journal of economic growth, 2007, 12 (2), 77­99.

Goldin, Claudia, "The political economy of immigration restriction in the United
 States, 1890 to 1921," in "The regulated economy: A historical approach to political
 economy," University of Chicago Press, 1994, pp. 223­258.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Isaac Sorkin, and Henry Swift, "Bartik Instru-
 ments: What, When, Why, and How," NBER Working Paper 24408, 2018.

Greenwood, Michael J and Zachary Ward, "Immigration quotas, World War I,
 and emigrant flows from the United States in the early 20th century," Explorations
 in Economic History, 2015, 55, 76­96.

Grosjean, Pauline, "A history of violence: The culture of honor and homicide in the
 US South," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2014, 12 (5), 1285­1316.

Halla, Martin, Alexander F Wagner, and Josef Zweim¨       uller, "Immigration and
 voting for the far right," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2017, 15
 (6), 1341­1385.

                                          40
Hatton, Timothy J and Jeffrey G Williamson, The age of mass migration: Causes
 and economic impact, Oxford University Press on Demand, 1998.

Higham, John, Strangers in the land: Patterns of American nativism, 1860-1925,
 Rutgers University Press, 1955.

Hirschman, Charles, "The contributions of immigrants to American culture,"
 Daedalus, 2013, 142 (3), 26­47.

Hopkins, Daniel J, John Sides, and Jack Citrin, "The muted consequences of
 correct information about immigration," The Journal of Politics, 2019, 81 (1), 315­
 320.

Hunt, Jennifer and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle, "How much does immigration
 boost innovation?," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2010, 2 (2), 31­
 56.

Jaeger, David A, Joakim Ruist, and Jan Stuhler, "Shift-share instruments and
  the impact of immigration," NBER Working Paper 24285, 2018.

Jones, Maldwyn Allen, American immigration, University of Chicago Press, 1992.

Keeling, Drew, "The transportation revolution and transatlantic migration, 1850-
 1914," Research in Economic History, 1999, 19, 39­74.

Kennedy, President John F, A nation of immigrants, New York: Harper & Row
 Publishers, 1964.

Kerr, William R and Martin Mandorff, "Social networks, ethnicity, and en-
 trepreneurship," NBER Working Paper 21597, 2015.

Keyssar, Alexander, The right to vote: The contested history of democracy in the
 United States, Basic Books, 2009.

Kitayama, Shinobu, Keiko Ishii, Toshie Imada, Kosuke Takemura, and
 Jenny Ramaswamy, "Voluntary settlement and the spirit of independence: Ev-
 idence from Japan's" northern frontier."," Journal of personality and social psychol-
 ogy, 2006, 91 (3), 369.

Knudsen, Anne Sofie Beck, "Those Who Stayed: Selection and Cultural Change
 during the Age of Mass Migration," Working Paper 2019.

Kuriwaki, Shiro, "Cumulative CCES Common Content (2006-2018)," 2018.


                                         41
Kuziemko, Ilyana and Ebonya Washington, "Why did the Democrats lose the
 south? Bringing new data to an old debate," American Economic Review, 2018, 108
 (10), 2830­67.

Leip, David, "Dave Leip's Atlas of US Presidential Elections," 2018.

Lipset, Seymour Martin and Gary Marks, It didn't happen here: why socialism
  failed in the United States, WW Norton & Company, 2000.

Lleras-Muney, Adriana and Allison Shertzer, "Did the Americanization move-
  ment succeed? An evaluation of the effect of english-only and compulsory schooling
  laws on immigrants," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2015, 7 (3),
  258­90.

Logan, Trevon D and John M Parman, "The national rise in residential segrega-
  tion," The Journal of Economic History, 2017, 77 (1), 127­170.

Lowe, Matt, "Types of contact: A field experiment on collaborative and adversarial
  caste integration," 2020.

Lubell, Samuel, The Future of American Politics, New York: Harper and Bros., 1952.

Luttmer, Erzo FP, "Group loyalty and the taste for redistribution," Journal of po-
 litical Economy, 2001, 109 (3), 500­528.

   and Monica Singhal, "Culture, context, and the taste for redistribution," Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2011, 3 (1), 157­79.

Manson, Steven, Jonathan Schroeder, David Van Riper, Steven Ruggles
 et al., "IPUMS National Historical Geographic Information System: Version 12.0
 [Database]," Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2017, 39.

Mayda, Anna Maria, Giovanni Peri, and Walter Steingress, "The Political
 Impact of Immigration: Evidence from the United States," 2018.

Meltzer, Allan H and Scott F Richard, "A rational theory of the size of govern-
 ment," Journal of political Economy, 1981, 89 (5), 914­927.

Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger, "German Jewish
 ´
 emigr´
      es and US invention," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (10), 3222­55.

   and Shmuel San, "Immigration, science, and invention: Evidence from the 1920s
  quota acts," Working Paper 2019.


                                        42
Perlman, Elisabeth Ruth, "Connecting the periphery: three papers on the develop-
 ments caused by spreading transportation and information networks in the nineteenth
 century United States." PhD dissertation, Boston University, 2016.

Piketty, Thomas, "Social mobility and redistributive politics," The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 1995, 110 (3), 551­584.

  , "Brahmin Left vs Merchant Right: Rising Inequality and the Changing Structure
  of Political Conflict," WID.world WP 2018/7, 2018.

Ravallion, Martin and Michael Lokshin, "Who wants to redistribute?: The tunnel
 effect in 1990s Russia," Journal of public Economics, 2000, 76 (1), 87­104.

Ruggles, Steven, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Joasiah Grover, and
 Matthew Sobek, "Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 10.0 [dataset].,"
 Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 2020.

Schickler, Eric, Racial realignment: The transformation of American liberalism,
  1932­1965, Princeton University Press, 2016.

Sequeira, Sandra, Nathan Nunn, and Nancy Qian, "Immigrants and the Making
  of America," Review of Economic Studies, 2020, 87 (1), 382­419.

Slayton, Robert A, Empire statesman: The rise and redemption of Al Smith, Simon
  and Schuster, 2001.

Spitzer, Yannay, "Pogroms, Networks, and Migration: The Jewish Migration from
  the Russian Empire to the United States, 1881­1914," Working Paper 2015.

Steinmayr, Andreas, ""Contact Matters: Exposure to Refugees and Voting for the
  Far-Right"," Working Paper 2018.

Tabellini, Marco, "Gifts of the Immigrants, Woes of the Natives: Lessons from the
  Age of Mass Migration," Review of Economic Studies, 2020, 87 (1), 454­486.

Tolbert, Charles M and Molly Sizer, "US commuting zones and labor market
  areas: A 1990 update," Technical Report 1996.

Turner, Frederick Jackson, "The Significance of the Frontier in American History,"
 Proceedings of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin, 1893.

Vigdor, Jacob L, from Immigrants to Americans: The Rise and fall of fitting In,
 Rowman & Littlefield, 2010.


                                         43
Willcox, Walter F., Statistics of Migrations, National Tables, United States, NBER,
 372-498, 1929,




                                        44
Figures and Tables


                           Figure 1. Immigrants by Region




  Notes: Share of immigrant stock living in the United States, by sending region and by
  decade. Source: Authors' calculations from IPUMS sample of US Census (Ruggles et al.
  (2020)).



              Figure 2. Total Number of Immigrants (in Thousands)




    Notes: Annual inflow of immigrants to the United States (1850-1930). Source: Migra-
    tion Policy Institute.


                                            45
Figure 3. Fraction of European Immigrants over County Population (1910-1930)




 Notes: the map plots the average share of European Immigrants (over county population)
 in the period 1910-1930 in our sample. Source: Authors' calculations from IPUMS sample
 of US Census (Ruggles et al. (2020)).




                                          46
Figure 4. Share of Immigrants from Selected Countries in Different Counties




 Notes: share of individuals of European ancestry living in US counties in 1900, for
 selected ethnic groups. Source: Authors' calculations using IPUMS data.




                                         47
       Figure 5. Heterogeneous Effects: Exposure to Education Reforms




Notes: the bars report the marginal effect of historical immigration (with corresponding
95% confidence intervals) on the main outcomes of the analysis for counties with exposure
to education reforms above (resp. below) the sample median in orange (resp. blue). Depen-
dent variables are from CCES surveys: see Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey
questions.The measure of exposure to education reforms is built from Bandiera et al. (2018)
and Flora (1983); the variable is standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1.
Individual controls include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gen-
der, race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income. Historical
controls include: 1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share of men
15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score, 1900 employment share in manufac-
turing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira et
al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020).




                                             48
          Figure 6. Heterogeneous Effects: Intermarriage (1910-1930)




Notes: the bars report the marginal effect of historical immigration (with corresponding 95%
confidence intervals) on the main outcomes of the analysis for counties with intermarriage
rate above (resp. below) the sample median in orange (resp. blue). Dependent variables
are from CCES surveys: see Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. Indi-
vidual controls include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gender,
race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income. Historical con-
trols include: share of urban population and share of black population in 1900, labor force,
log of occupational score and manufacturing share in 1900, geographic coordinates, railroad
connectivity, index of industry growth (1910-1930).




                                             49
     Figure 7. Heterogeneous Effects: Residential Integration (1910-1930)




Notes: the bars report the marginal effect of historical immigration (with corresponding
95% confidence intervals) on the main outcomes of the analysis for counties with the index
of residential integration ­ defined as the opposite of residential segregation in Logan and
Parman (2017) ­ above (resp. below) the sample median in orange (resp. blue). Depen-
dent variables are from CCES surveys: see Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey
questions. Individual controls include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age
squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income.
Historical controls include: 1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share
of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score, 1900 employment share in man-
ufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira
et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020).




                                            50
  Figure 8. Effect of Historical Immigration on Democratic Vote Share




Notes: the figure plots 2SLS point estimates for the effects of the 1910-1930 average
fraction of immigrants on the Democratic vote share in presidential elections. Regres-
sions are estimated at the county-level and weighed by 1900 county population. Histor-
ical controls include: 1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share
of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score, 1900 employment share
in manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity
from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as
in Tabellini (2020). Regressions include the instrumented immigrants' characteristics.
Dashed line represents 95% confidence interval.




                                         51
                                       Table 1. Summary Statistics

              Variables                 Mean        St. Dev.       Min       Max                   Obs

                                                           Panel A: Historical County Variables
Fraction of Immigrants (1910-1930)      0.055        0.067           0        0.39                 2,898
Predicted Fraction of Immigrants        0.022        0.041           0        0.57                 2,898
(1910-1930)

Urban Share (1900)                      0.136        0.219           0         1                   2,898
Black Share (1900)                      0.134        0.213           0        0.94                 2,898
Employment Share in                     0.060        0.065           0        0.44                 2,898
Manufacturing Sector (1900)
Labor Force Share (1900)                0.832        0.058         0.39        1                   2,898
Occupational Score (1900)               2.838        0.151         2.36       3.30                 2,898
Industry Growth Index (1910-1930)       0.069        0.055         -0.04      0.24                 2,898
Railroad Connectivity (1850-1900)      24.193        17.255          0        50                   2,898

                                                Panel B: County Immigrants' Characteristics (1910-1930)
Exposure to Education Reforms             0            1           -3,54      4.3                  2,898
Share of English-speaking Immigrants    0.848        0.079           0        0.98                 2,898
Immigrants' Occupational Score          2.522        0.184           0        2.63                 2,898
Immigrants working in Manufacturing     0.282        0.032           0        0.41                 2,898
Share of Literate Immigrants            0.917        0.075           0         1                   2,898
Share of Intermarried Immigrants        0.112        0.036           0        0.22                 2,898
Index of Residential Integration        0.929        0.089         0.30       1.01                 2,876

                                                                 Panel C: CCES Ideology
Ideology                                2.883        1.145           1         5                  405,197
Party Affiliation Scale (R to D)        4.271        2.198           1         7                  422,101
Democratic Party Indicator              0.380        0.485           0         1                  410,015
Voted Democratic Candidate              0.509        0.500           0         1                  319,134

                                                     Panel D: CCES Preferences for Redistribution
Oppose Spending Cuts                    0.589        0.492           0         1                  379,541
Support Welfare Spending                2.818        1.199           1         5                  148,194
Support Minimum Wage Increase           0.720        0.449           0         1                  185,846
Finance Deficit with Taxes              0.402        0.265           0         1                  288,796



                                                     52
                             Table 2. Political Ideology, Preferences for Redistribution and Historical Presence of Immigrants

       Dep.                       Ideology   Party Scale   Democratic   Voted Democratic      Oppose         Support State      Support Minimum      Taxes to Pay
       Variables                              (R to D)       Party         Candidate       Spending Cuts    Welfare Spending      Wage Increase      State Deficit
                                    (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)                (5)                (6)                 (7)               (8)

       Panel A: OLS estimates
       Historical Fraction        1.196       2.893         0.635           0.614             0.376              1.471               0.424              0.189
       of Immigrants              (0.123)     (0.226)       (0.0427)        (0.0529)          (0.0462)           (0.213)             (0.0439)           (0.0264)


       Panel B: 2SLS estimates
       Historical Fraction        1.084       2.715         0.598           0.585             0.340              1.491               0.405              0.182
       of Immigrants              (0.147)     (0.288)       (0.0569)        (0.0684)          (0.0597)           (0.323)             (0.0543)           (0.0272)


       Panel C: First Stage
53




       Predicted Historical       1.418       1.420         1.420           1.417              1.420             1.430                1.417             1.424
       Fraction of Immigrants     (0.112)     (0.111)       (0.112)         (0.114)            (0.111)           (0.114)              (0.108)           (0.113)

       KP F-stat                    160        162.3          161            154.5              163.2             157.1                 171              159.4
       Observations               360,545     374,603       363,926         284,642            336,932           132,609              165,454           256,774
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.         2.90        4.31          0.39            0.52               0.60              2.84                 0.73              0.41
                                   (1.14)      (2.20)        (0.49)          (0.50)             (0.49)            (1.20)               (0.45)            (0.26)
       Individual Controls           Y           Y             Y               Y                  Y                 Y                    Y                 Y
       Historical Controls           N           N             N               N                  N                 N                    N                 N

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The regressor of interest is the average
     fraction of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. Its mean is 0.055 and its standard deviation is 0.067. The predicted fraction
     of immigrants is described in the main body of the paper. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak instruments. Individual controls include the following
     respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income. Standard errors in parenthesis
     are robust and clustered at the county level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                              Table 3. Redistribution, Ideology and Immigration - Second Stage with Historical Controls

       Dep.                      Ideology   Party Scale   Democratic   Voted Democratic       Oppose         Support State      Support Minimum      Taxes to Pay
       Variables                             (R to D)       Party         Candidate        Spending Cuts    Welfare Spending      Wage Increase      State Deficit
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)              (4)                (5)                (6)                 (7)               (8)

       Panel A: OLS estimates
       Historical Fraction       0.706       2.062         0.507            0.384             0.223              1.031               0.294             0.0950
       of Immigrants             (0.133)     (0.250)       (0.0455)         (0.0625)          (0.0515)           (0.244)             (0.0507)          (0.0285)


       Panel B: 2SLS estimates
       Historical Fraction       0.684       2.018         0.486            0.399             0.220              1.185               0.298              0.103
       of Immigrants             (0.174)     (0.346)       (0.0635)         (0.0850)          (0.0726)           (0.391)             (0.0679)           (0.0359)


       Panel C: First Stage
54




       Predicted Historical      1.241       1.243         1.243            1.238             1.243              1.252               1.239              1.242
       Fraction of Immigrants    (0.0854)    (0.0853)      (0.0856)         (0.0867)          (0.0854)           (0.0873)            (0.0830)           (0.0871)

       KP F-stat                  211.2        212          210.5             204               211.8             205.7                 223              203.1
       Observations              360,545     374,603       363,926          284,642            336,932           132,609              165,454           256,774
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.        2.90        4.31          0.39             0.52               0.60              2.84                 0.73              0.41
                                  (1.14)      (2.20)        (0.49)           (0.50)             (0.49)            (1.20)               (0.45)            (0.26)
       Individual Controls          Y           Y             Y                Y                  Y                 Y                    Y                 Y
       Historical Controls          Y           Y             Y                Y                  Y                 Y                    Y                 Y

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The regressor of interest is the average
     fraction of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. Its mean is 0.055 and its S.D. is 0.067. The predicted fraction of immigrants
     is described in the main body of the paper. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak instruments. Individual controls include the following respondents'
     characteristics: age, age squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income. Historical controls include: 1900 black and
     urban share of the county population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score, 1900 employment share in manufacturing (men
     15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini
     (2020). Standard errors in parenthesis are robust and clustered at the county level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                 Table 4. Redistribution, Ideology and Immigration - Second Stage with Instrumented Immigrants' Characteristics

     Dep.                   Ideology   Party Scale   Democratic   Voted Democratic      Oppose        Support State     Support Minimum   Taxes to Pay
     Variables                          (R to D)       Party         Candidate       Spending Cuts   Welfare Spending     Wage Increase   State Deficit
                              (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)               (5)              (6)                (7)              (8)

     Panel A: English Speaking Ability
     Historical Fraction    0.749        2.097        0.533           0.438            0.234             1.371              0.356           0.106
     of Immigrants           (0.207)      (0.403)     (0.0712)        (0.0976)         (0.0840)           (0.428)           (0.0751)        (0.0404)
     English-Speaking        0.124        0.152        0.091           0.075             0.027           0.355              0.111            0.007
     Immigrants             (0.189)      (0.354)      (0.067)         (0.088)           (0.072)          (0.197)            (0.063)          (0.03)

     KP F-stat               17.52        17.97        17.91           17.58             17.81            19.53              18.27           18.85


     Panel B: Occupational Income Score
     Historical Fraction    0.676        1.997        0.481           0.397            0.220             1.179              0.290           0.104
55




     of Immigrants           (0.174)      (0.347)     (0.0636)        (0.0849)         (0.0724)           (0.391)           (0.0683)        (0.0358)
     Immigrants' Income      0.044        0.113        0.024           0.006             -0.002           0.031              0.040            -0.008
     Score                  (0.072)       (0.14)      (0.028)         (0.034)           (0.031)          (0.076)            (0.027)          (0.016)

     KP F-stat               5.114        5.282        5.230           5.189             5.261            5.787              5.162           5.376


     Panel C: Employment in Manufacturing
     Historical Fraction    0.757        2.118        0.509           0.439            0.244             1.303              0.321           0.124
     of Immigrants           (0.183)      (0.366)     (0.0668)        (0.0883)         (0.0758)           (0.401)           (0.0694)        (0.0364)
     Immigrants working      -0.619       -0.840       -0.192         -0.334             -0.197          -0.969              -0.200         -0.181
     in Manufacturing       (0.389)      (0.700)      (0.132)          (0.166)          (0.134)           (0.439)           (0.125)          (0.079)

     KP F-stat               58.03        59.47        59.15           58.38             59.23            62.58              60.07           62.58
                                                                                     Table 4, Continued
     Panel D: Literacy
     Historical Fraction    0.739        2.118         0.523             0.433              0.230               1.280                0.330              0.100
     of Immigrants           (0.187)      (0.369)      (0.0656)          (0.0901)           (0.0780)             (0.410)             (0.0709)           (0.0377)
     Share of Literate       0.183        0.330         0.121             0.113               0.033              0.317                0.109              -0.008
                            (0.195)      (0.376)        (0.073)          (0.093)             (0.077)            (0.209)              (0.038)            (0.0384)
     KP F-stat               8.557        8.776         8.724             8.564               8.667              9.619                8.956              9.281


     Panel E: All Immigrants' Characteristics
     Historical Fraction    0.687        1.912         0.512             0.418               0.232              1.431                0.346              0.117
     of Immigrants           (0.235)      (0.448)      (0.0799)           (0.107)           (0.0914)             (0.442)             (0.0814)           (0.0437)
     KP F-stat                 13         13.08         13.39             15.41               12.74              13.15                13.68              14.18
     Observations           360,545      374,603       363,926           284,642             336,932            132,609              165,454            256,774
     Mean (s.d.) dep.var.     2.90         4.31          0.39              0.52                0.60               2.84                 0.73               0.41
56




                             (1.14)       (2.20)        (0.49)            (0.50)              (0.49)             (1.20)               (0.45)             (0.26)
     Individual Controls       Y            Y             Y                 Y                   Y                  Y                    Y                  Y
     Historical Controls       Y            Y             Y                 Y                   Y                  Y                    Y                  Y

       Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The regressor of interest is the
       average fraction of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. Its mean is 0.055 and its S.D. is 0.067. The predicted fraction
       of immigrants is described in the main body of the paper. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak instruments. Individual controls include the following
       respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income. Historical controls include:
       1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score, 1900 employment share in
       manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth
       (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020). The definition and construction of the variables related to immigrants' characteristics can be found in Table A.2. Standard
       errors in parenthesis are robust and clustered at the county level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                                                   Table 5. Mechanisms: Exposure to Education Reforms

       Dep.                         Ideology   Party Scale   Democratic    Voted Democratic        Oppose          Support State      Support Minimum      Taxes to Pay
       Variables                                (R to D)       Party          Candidate         Spending Cuts     Welfare Spending      Wage Increase      State Deficit
                                       (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)                (5)                (6)                  (7)               (8)

       Historical Fraction          0.600        1.774         0.491            0.384                0.210            1.332                0.333               0.102
       of Immigrants                (0.219)      (0.424)       (0.0775)         (0.0997)            (0.0880)          (0.417)              (0.0791)           (0.0412)
       Exposure to Education        0.0521      0.0822         0.0128           0.0212             0.0131             0.0549               0.00813          0.00944
       Reforms                      (0.0173)    (0.0308)       (0.0055)         (0.0075)            (0.006)           (0.0172)             (0.0052)          (0.0032)
       KP F-stat                      11.75       11.89         12.10             13.73              11.51              11.93                12.57             12.54
       Observations                 360,545      374,603       363,926           284,642            336,932            132,609             165,454            256,774
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.           2.90         4.31          0.39              0.52               0.60               2.84                0.73               0.41
                                     (1.14)       (2.20)        (0.49)            (0.50)             (0.49)             (1.20)              (0.45)             (0.26)
       Individual Controls             Y            Y             Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                   Y                  Y
57




       Historical Controls             Y            Y             Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                   Y                  Y
       Instrumented Immigrants'
       Characteristics                 Y            Y             Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                   Y                  Y

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The regressor of interest is the average
     fraction of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. Its mean is 0.055 and its S.D. is 0.067. The predicted fraction of immigrants
     is described in the main body of the paper. The measure of exposure to education reforms is built from Bandiera et al (2018) and Flora (1987); the variable is
     standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak instruments. Individual controls include the following respondents'
     characteristics: age, age squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income. Historical controls include: 1900 black and urban
     share of the county population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score, 1900 employment share in manufacturing (men 15-64), county
     geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020). Standard
     errors in parenthesis are robust and clustered at the county level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                        Table 6. Immigration and New Deal Expenditures

 Dep.                        Relief Expenditure   Public Work Program      Farm Program Housing Loans and
 Variables                       per capita             per capita           per capita Insurance per capita
                                     (1)                     (2)                 (3)                 (4)
 Panel A: Baseline Specification
 Historical Fraction                183.0                  -43.72              133.9                -4.673
 of Immigrants                      (27.92)                (22.45)             (20.23)             (56.48)
                                   [0.267 ]              [-0.0277 ]          [0.0826 ]            [-0.0064]
 KP F-stat                           103                    103                 103                 103

 Panel B: Controlling for Sales Growth Rate
 Historical Fraction                183.2                  -39.93              130.7                -6.208
 of Immigrants                      (27.99)                (22.24)             (20.25)              (56.9)
                                   [0.267 ]              [-0.0253 ]          [0.0806 ]            [-0.0085]
 Sales Growth Rate                  1.47                  21.20               -17.31                -8.441
                                   (4.317)                (5.008)              (4.174)             (8.208)
 KP F-stat                          72.29                   72.29               72.29              72.29

 Observations                       2972                   2972                 2972                2972
 Mean (s.d.) dep.var.               76.71                  31.92                37.61               68.49
                                   (46.99)                (44.24)              (53.64)             (71.25)
 Historical Controls                  Y                      Y                   Y                   Y
 Instrumented Immigrants'
 Characteristics                      Y                      Y                   Y                   Y
 Notes: Dependent variables and the sales growth rate are taken from Fishback et al. (2003). Relief Expenditure
(column 1) and Public Work Program (column 2) per capita refer to the total amount of Relief grants and public
works grants, respectively; Farm Program per capita (column 3) aggregates loans and grants provided by the
Agricultural Adjustment Administration, the Farm Credit Administration, the Farm Security Administration,
and the Rural Electrification Administration; Housing Loans and Insurance per capita (column 4) refers to the
total amount of grants and loans provided by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, the Home Owners Loan
Corporation, the Farm Housing Administration (insured loans), and the US Housing Administration. The regressor
of interest is the average fraction of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. All
regressions include state fixed effects and are weighed by 1900 county population. Historical controls include:
1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log
occupational score, 1900 employment share in manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad
connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini
(2020). Immigrants' characteristics are: English-speaking ability, literacy, occupational income score, and the
employment share in manufacturing. Square brackets report beta coefficients. Robust standard errors in parenthesis
are clustered at the county level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.




                                                       58
A   Appendix ­ Additional Figures and Tables

               Figure A.1. Immigrants as Percent of US Population




    Notes: the solid line shows the number of legal immigrants as a percent of US pop-
    ulation. The dashed line includes also the estimated number of illegal immigrants,
    available from 2000 onwards. Source: the number of legal immigrants comes from the
    Migration Policy Institute, while the number of illegal immigrants was taken from the
    Pew Research Center tabulations.




                                             59
Figure A.2. Share of European Immigrants: "High" and "Low" Restrictions




 Notes: Share of European immigrants entering the US in each year between 1900 and
 1930, classified as coming from countries exposed to "high" and "low" restrictions to
 immigration according to Abramitzky et al. (2019d). Source: Authors' calculations
 from IPUMS sample of US Census (Ruggles et al. (2020))




                                          60
Figure A.3. Preferences for Redistribution and Exposure to Education Reform




Notes: : The figure plots the preferences for redistribution for the first-generation immigrants
by country of origin, over the logarithm of the year of the Education Reform. Both y-axis
and x-axis report the residuals of the specific variable obtained after partialling out the
logarithm of the GDP for each country. The observations are weighted according to the
number of observations for each country of origin. The blue solid line shows the relationship
between the two variables when we do not include Denmark in the sample. The dashed red
line shows the relationship including Denmark. The coefficient for the regression including
Denmark is -3.450 with robust standard errors equal to 2.315.




                                              61
Figure A.4. Fraction of European Immigrants: Partialling Out State fixed effects




Notes: the map plots the quintiles of the average share of European Immigrants (over county
population) in the period 1910-1930 in our sample after partialling out State fixed effect. Source:
Authors' calculations from IPUMS sample of US Census (Ruggles et al. (2020)).




                                                62
Figure A.5. Share of Immigrants from Selected Countries in Massachusetts, 1900




   Notes: share of individuals of European ancestry living in Massachusetts counties in
   1900, for selected ethnic groups. Source: Authors' calculations using IPUMS data




                                           63
Figure A.6. Ideology and Preferences for Redistribution: Partialling Out State fixed
effects
                   Panel A: Voted Democratic Candidate




                            Panel B: Support Welfare Spending




      Notes: the map plots the quintiles of two outcomes: voted for Democratic candidate
      at Presidential Elections and support State welfare spending after partialling out State
      fixed effect.

                                                64
             Figure A.7. First Stage (Residual Bin-Scatterplot)




Notes: The y-axis (resp. x-axis) reports the actual (resp. predicted) average fraction
of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. The scatter-
plot pools observations into 50 bins. Each point in the scatter diagram represents the
residuals of the two variables, after partialling out State fixed effects, and 1900 his-
torical controls. Historical controls include: 1900 black and urban share of the county
population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score,
1900 employment share in manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates,
railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry
growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020). The red, solid line refers to the slope of
the first stage coefficient, which is also reported in the main diagram (with associated
clustered standard errors at the county level).




                                          65
Figure A.8. Exposure to Education Reforms: Partialling Out State fixed effects




   Notes: the map plots the quintiles of the exposure to education reforms after partialling
   out State fixed effect.


  Figure A.9. Intermarriage (1910-1930): Partialling Out State fixed effects




   Notes: the map plots the quintiles of the average intermarriage rate between 1910 and
   1930 after partialling out State fixed effect.




                                              66
Figure A.10. Residential Integration (1910-1930): Partialling Out State fixed effects




     Notes: the map plots the quintiles of the index of residential segregation computed in
     the period 1910-1930 after partialling out State fixed effect.




                                              67
       Table A.1. Immigrants and Exposure to Education Reform

 Countries                Education Reform (Year of Introduction)
 Albania                                           1928
 Austria                                           1869
 Belgium                                           1914
 Bulgaria                                          n/a
 Czechoslovakia                                    n/a
 Denmark                                           1814
 Estonia                                           n/a
 Finland                                           1921
 France                                            1882
 Germany                                           1871
 Greece                                            1834
 Hungary                                           n/a
 Ireland                                           1892
 Italy                                             1877
 Latvia                                            n/a
 Lithuania                                         n/a
 Netherlands                                       1900
 Norway                                            1827
 Poland                                            1918
 Portugal                                          1835
 Romania                                           n/a
 Russia (Jewish)                                   n/a
 Russia (No Jewish)                                1918
 Spain                                             1857
 Sweden                                            1842
 Switzerland                                       1874
 United Kingdom                                    1880
 Yugoslavia                                        n/a

 Notes: the table presents the list of European countries included in our analysis,
together with the year in which education reforms were introduced (column 2). The
date reported for Education Reform is based on Bandiera et al. (2018), except for
Austria and Germany. In the latter case, we follow the definition in Flora (1983).




                                        68
                                                    Table A.2. Independent Variables: Definition and Construction

     Variable                                            Description                                                                                Source
                                                                                                                                                    Authors' calculations from
     Fraction of immigrants (1910-1930)                  Average across decades of European Immigrant share over decade county population
                                                                                                                                                    Ruggles et al. (2020)
                                                         Average across decades of predicted European Immigrant share over 1900 county popu-        Authors' calculations from
     Predicted fraction of immigrants (1910-1930)
                                                         lation (Leave-out instrument adapted from Tabellini, 2020)                                 Ruggles et al. (2020)
                                                                                                                                                    ICPSR Study 2896, Haines
     Urban share (1900)                                  People in places with +2,500 inhabitants over county population
                                                                                                                                                    et al. (2010)
                                                                                                                                                    ICPSR Study 2896, Haines
     Black share (1900)                                  Black share over county population
                                                                                                                                                    et al. (2010)
     Labore Force Share (1900)                           Men in labor force over men aged 15-64                                                     Ruggles et al. (2020)
     Employment share in manufacturing share (1900)      Share of men employed in manufacturing, relative to men in the labor force                 Ruggles et al. (2020)
     Occupational score (1900)                           Average of log(1+occupational score) for men in the labor force                            Ruggles et al. (2020)
                                                                                                                                                    Sequeira, Nunn, and Qian
     Connectivity to the Railroad (1850-1900)            Years of connection to the Railroad in the period 1850-1900
69




                                                                                                                                                    (2020)
                                                                                                                                                    Data from Ruggles et
                                                         Share of employment in different industries in each county in 1900 interacted with the
     Industry Growth Index                                                                                                                          al. (2020), adapted from
                                                         national growth rate of each industry for each decade between 1900 and 1930.
                                                                                                                                                    Tabellini (2020)
     County Geographic Coordinates                       Latitude and longitude of the county centroid.                                             Manson et al. (2017)

                                                         Weighted average of the number of years between 1910 and the year of introduction of
                                                         education reform for each immigrant group, weighted by the relative share of immigrants    Bandiera et al (2018); for
     Exposure to education reforms                       from each country in the county between 1910 and 1930. If no reform was introduced         Germany and Austria-
                                                         in the country of origin prior to 1910, we assign a value of 0 to the immigrant-specific   Hungary, Flora (1987)
                                                         exposure to education reform.
                                                         Average across decades of the share of immigrants being married with native (with native   Authors' calculations from
     Intermarriage (1910-1930)
                                                         parents) over all married immigrants. Sample is both men and women                         Ruggles et al. (2020)
                                                         Average across decades of the share of English-speaker immigrants over all immigrants.     Authors' calculations from
     Share of English-speaking immigrants (1910-1930)
                                                         Sample restricted to men aged 15-64                                                        Ruggles et al. (2020)
                                                         Average across decades of the average on labor force of log(1+occupational score). Labor   Authors' calculations from
     Immigrants' income score (1910-1930)
                                                         force restricted to immigrant men aged 15-64                                               Ruggles et al. (2020)
                                                         Average across decades of the share of immigrants (men aged 15-64) employed in manu-       Authors' calculations from
     Immigrants working in manufacturing (1910-1930)
                                                         facture over immigrants in labor force                                                     Ruggles et al. (2020)
                                                         Average across decades of the share of literate immigrants over all immigrants. Sample     Authors' calculations from
     Share of literate immigrants (1910-1930)
                                                         restricted to men aged 15-64                                                               Ruggles et al. (2020)
Table A.3. Immigrants' Preferences for Redistribution and Year of Introduction of
Education Reforms in the Countries of Origin, European Social Survey

             Dep. Variable                                 Preferences for Redistribution
                                                   Denmark Included     Denmark NOT Included
                                                         (1)                    (2)
             Log Year of                                  -3.534*               -4.574***
             Introduction of Education Reforms            (1.730)                (1.559)

             Observations                                 11,489                 11,305
             Cluster                                         Y                      Y
             N. Clusters                                     19                    18
             Mean (s.d.) dep.var.                          3.835                  3.839
                                                          (1.048)                (1.048)

             Individual Controls                            Y                       Y

             Notes: Each regression controls for gender, a quadratic in age, logarithm of years
            of education, employment and marital status, income and logarithm of GDP from
            the immigrants' countries of origin. Regressions also include round fixed effects and
            standard errors are clustered at the country of origin level. Regressions use data from
            the European Social Survey, including rounds from 1 to 8. Significance levels: 
            p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.




                                                     70
                                                    Table A.4. Dependent Variables: Definition and Construction

                Variable                Question                                                     Answers coded as                                                          Years
                                                                             Panel A. CCES Ideology
                                        In general, how would you describe your own political
                Ideology                                                                             From 1=very conservative to 5=very liberal                                2006-2018
                                        viewpoint?


                                        Generally speaking, do you think of yourself as: Strong
                                        democrat, not very strong democrat, lean democrat, in-
     Party Affiliation Scale (R to D)                                                                From 1=strong republican to 7=strong democrat                             2006-2018
                                        dependent, lean republican, not very strong republican,
                                        strong republican.
                                        Generally speaking, do you think of yourself as a: demo-
       Democratic Party Indicator                                                                    Indicator equal 1 for Democrat, 0 for Republican or Independent           2006-2018
                                        crat, republican, independent.
                                        For whom did you vote for President of the United
      Voted Democratic Candidate                                                                     Indicator equal 1 if voted Democrat and 0 for Independent or Republican   2006-2018
                                        States?

                                                                  Panel B. CCES Preferences for Redistribution
71




                                        The federal budget deficit is approximately XXX trillion
                                        this year. If the Congress were to balance the budget
                                        it would have to consider cutting defense spending, cut-
                                                                                                                                                                               2006, 2008,
         Oppose spending cuts           ting domestic spending (such as Medicare and Social Indicator equal 1 if preferred option is not to cut spending
                                                                                                                                                                               2010-2018
                                        Security), or raising taxes to cover the deficit. What
                                        would you most prefer that Congress do - cut domestic
                                        spending, cut defense spending, or raise taxes?
                                        State legislatures must make choices when making
                                        spending decisions on important state programs. Would                                                                                  2014, 2016,
        Support welfare spending                                                                     From 1=most decrease to 5=most increase
                                        you like your legislature to increase or decrease spending                                                                             2018
                                        on the five areas below? Welfare spending.
                                        Do you favor or oppose raising the minimum wage to
                                        $X an hour over the next two years, or not? OR If your
                                                                                                                                                                               2006-2008,
     Support minimum wage increase      state put the following questions for a vote on the ballot, Indicator equal 1 if in favor
                                                                                                                                                                               2016, 2018
                                        would you vote FOR or AGAINST? Raise the minimum
                                        wage to $X/hour?
                                        If your state were to have a budget deficit this year it
                                        would have to raise taxes on income and sales or cut
                                        spending, such as on education, health care, welfare,
        Finance deficit with taxes                                                               Normalize range to 0-1, where 1=100% taxes and 0% cuts                        2006-2017
                                        and road construction. What would you prefer more,
                                        raising taxes or cutting spending? Choose a point along
                                        the scale from 0 to 100
                Table A.5. Summary Statistics, CCES - Individual Characteristics

        Variables              Mean          St. Dev.        Min          Max       Obs

Age                            49.51          16.14           18           99      374,603
Female                         0.53            0.50            0           1       374,603
Male                           0.47            0.50            0           1       374,603
Black                          0.11            0.31            0           1       374,603
White                          0.75            0.43            0           1       374,603
Other                          0.14            0.34            0           1       374,603
Single                         0.27            0.44            0           1       374,603
Married                        0.56            0.50            0           1       374,603
Widowed                        0.05            0.21            0           1       374,603
Separated                      0.13            0.34            0           1       374,603
No High School                 0.03            0.17            0           1       374,603
High School                    0.27            0.45            0           1       374,603
More than High School          0.70            0.46            0           1       374,603
Employed                       0.54            0.50            0           1       374,603
Unemployed                     0.06            0.24            0           1       374,603
Out of Labor Force             0.41            0.49            0           1       374,603
Income < 10K                   0.04            0.20            0           1       374,603
10K < Income < 20K             0.08            0.27            0           1       374,603
20K < Income < 30K             0.11            0.32            0           1       374,603
30K < Income < 40K             0.12            0.32            0           1       374,603
40K < Income < 50K             0.10            0.31            0           1       374,603
50K < Income < 60K             0.10            0.30            0           1       374,603
60K < Income < 70K             0.08            0.26            0           1       374,603
70K < Income < 80K             0.08            0.27            0           1       374,603
80K < Income < 100K            0.10            0.29            0           1       374,603
100K < Income < 120K           0.07            0.25            0           1       374,603
120K < Income < 150K           0.05            0.23            0           1       374,603
Income > 150K                  0.06            0.24            0           1       374,603




                                              72
                                         Table A.6. Baseline Specification with Individual Controls Coefficients

     Dep.                   Ideology    Party Scale   Democratic     Voted Democratic      Oppose        Support State     Support Minimum   Taxes to Pay
     Variables                           (R to D)       Party           Candidate       Spending Cuts   Welfare Spending     Wage Increase   State Deficit
                              (1)           (2)           (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)                (7)              (8)


     Historical Fraction   0.706***      2.062***      0.507***          0.384***         0.223***          1.031***          0.294***        0.0950***
     of Immigrants          (0.133)       (0.250)      (0.0455)          (0.0625)         (0.0515)           (0.244)          (0.0507)         (0.0285)
                           [0.0512]      [0.0787]      [0.0854]          [0.0683]         [0.0386]          [0.0857]           [0.057]         [0.0329]
     Age                   -0.0052***   0.0203***      0.0023***         -0.0007*         0.0043***        -0.0059***         0.0024***       -0.0016***
                            (0.0007)     (0.0013)       (0.0003)         (0.0004)          (0.0003)         (0.0012)           (0.0004)        (0.0002)
                             [-0.074]     [0.148]       [0.0758]         [-0.0216]          [0.142]          [-0.080]           [0.085]        [-0.0960]
     Age squared            -7.01e-06   -0.0002***    -2.05e-05***      -7.09e-06**      -5.35e-05***       -1.45e-05        -3.18e-05***    1.31e-05***
                           (7.28e-06)   (1.35e-05)     (3.06e-06)        (3.54e-06)       (3.30e-06)       (1.24e-05)         (4.21e-06)      (2.12e-06)
                            [-0.0098]    [-0.1627]       [-0.067]         [-0.0227]         [-0.174]        [-0.0199]           [-0.114]        [0.077]
73




     Female                0.207***      0.394***      0.116***         0.0922***         0.0775***        0.0731***          0.106***        0.0417***
                            (0.004)       (0.007)      (0.0016)          (0.0018)          (0.0017)         (0.0066)          (0.0022)         (0.001)
                           [0.0895]      [0.1186]      [0.0922]          [0.0789]           [0.030]         [0.1185]          [0.0792]

     Black                 0.239***      1.686***      0.367***          0.409***         0.126***          0.421***          0.189***        0.0548***
                           (0.0063)      (0.0115)      (0.0026)           (0.003)         (0.0028)          (0.0113)          (0.0038)         (0.0019)
                           [0 .0649]      [0.241]       [0.236]           [0.257]          [0.081]          [0.1046]          [0.1262]         [0.0585]
     Other Race            0.0661***     0.458***      0.0823***        0.0925***         0.0266***        0.0621***          0.0559***      -0.00616***
                             (0.006)     (0.0104)        (0.002)         (0.0028)          (0.0025)         (0.0098)            (0.003)        (0.0016)
                            [0.0199]     [0.0717]       [0.0579]          [0.061]          [0.0188]         [0.0178]           [0.0433]        [-0.0078]

     Married               -0.381***    -0.595***     -0.0981***        -0.139***         -0.114***        -0.153***          -0.0661***      -0.0604***
                            (0.005)      (0.009)        (0.002)          (0.0024)          (0.0023)         (0.0085)           (0.0029)        (0.0014)
                            [-0.165]     [-0.134]      [-0.0999]          [-0.138]         [-0.115]         [-0.0636]          [-0.0735]        [-0.113]
     Widowed               -0.278***    -0.417***     -0.0727***        -0.115***        -0.0647***        -0.0869***         -0.0349***      -0.0455***
                            (0.010)      (0.0186)      (0.0042)          (0.0047)         (0.0046)          (0.0168)            (0.006)        (0.0029)
                            [-0.051]     [-0.0395]      [-0.031]         [-0.0496]         [-0.027]          [-0.016]           [-0.016]       [-0.0356]
                                                                          Table A.6, Continued
     Divorced          -0.179***   -0.308***    -0.0611***   -0.0696***          -0.0402***      -0.0459***   -0.0200***   -0.0300***
                        (0.0067)     (0.012)     (0.0028)     (0.0032)            (0.00301)       (0.0114)     (0.00395)    (0.0019)
                        [-0.052]    [-0.0469]     [-0.042]     [-0.047]           [-0.0276]        [-0.013]    [-0.0147]     [-0.036]

     Unemployed         0.0068      -0.0233     -0.0229***   -0.0158***           0.0103***      0.145***     0.0408***     -0.00152
                       (0.0083)     (0.015)      (0.0035)     (0.0041)             (0.0036)      (0.0152)      (0.0054)     (0.0024)
                       [0.0014]     [-0.003]      [-0.011]     [-0.007]             [0.005]      [0.0265]      [0.0187]      [-0.001]
     Out Labor Force   0.0213***   0.0575***     0.0035*     0.0144***            0.0436***      0.132***     0.0203***    0.0249***
                        (0.0044)    (0.0081)     (0.0019)     (0.0021)            (0.00198)      (0.0077)      (0.0026)     (0.0012)
                        [0.0091]    [0.0128]     [0.0035]      [0.014]             [0.0436]      [0.0545]       [0.022]      [0.046]

     High School       -0.0238**   -0.120***     -0.0081*    -0.0243***           -0.0123**      -0.181***    -0.0274***   -0.0200***
                        (0.0119)    (0.0210)     (0.0048)      (0.006)             (0.0051)       (0.0213)     (0.0065)     (0.0036)
                        [-0.009]     [-0.024]     [-0.007]     [-0.021]            [-0.011]        [-0.066]    [-0.0275]     [-0.033]
     More than         0.175***    0.0965***    0.0099**     0.0388***            0.0337***      -0.0508**    -0.0630***   0.0158***
74




     High School       (0.0117)     (0.0207)    (0.00476)     (0.0063)             (0.005)        (0.021)      (0.0064)     (0.0035)
                        [0.069]     [0.0202]     [0.009]       [0.034]             [0.031]        [-0.019]     [-0.065]     [0.0269]

     Income 10-20K     0.0644***   0.107***     0.0306***    0.0172***            0.0424***      -0.0997***     0.0102     0.00693**
                        (0.011)     (0.02)       (0.0046)     (0.0057)             (0.0048)       (0.0189)     (0.0066)     (0.0033)
                        [0.0149]    [0.013]      [0.0169]      [0.009]              [0.236]        [-0.022]     [0.005]      [0.007]
     Income 20-30K     0.0344***   0.0487**     0.0235***      0.0019             0.0115**       -0.314***     0.00113     -0.013***
                        (0.0109)    (0.019)      (0.0044)     (0.0055)            (0.0046)        (0.0181)     (0.0063)     (0.0032)
                         [0.009]    [0.007]       [0.015]      [0.001]             [0.007]        [-0.082]     [0.0008]     [-0.016]
     Income 30-40K      0.0160       -0.0011    0.0205***     -0.0014              -0.0031       -0.459***    -0.0227***   -0.0218***
                       (0.0109)     (0.0194)     (0.0045)     (0.006)              (0.005)        (0.018)      (0.0064)      (0.003)
                        [0.004]     [-0.0002]     [0.013]     [-0.001]             [-0.002]       [-0.123]      [-0.016]     [-0.026]
     Income 40-50K      0.0129     -0.0604***   0.0119***     -0.00768           -0.0197***      -0.542***    -0.0421***   -0.0309***
                        (0.011)     (0.0198)     (0.0046)     (0.0056)            (0.0048)        (0.0186)     (0.0065)     (0.0033)
                        [0.003]      [-0.008]     [0.007]      [-0.005]            [-0.012]       [-0.136]     [-0.0285]     [-0.036]
                                                                                     Table A.6, Continued

     Income 50-60K          0.0013     -0.108***        0.0061          -0.0121**           -0.0337***        -0.579***           -0.0620***        -0.0353***
                            (0.011)     (0.020)        (0.0046)          (0.0056)            (0.0048)          (0.0188)            (0.0065)          (0.0033)
                           [0.0003]     [-0.015]       [0.0038]           [-0.007]            [-0.021]         [-0.145]            [-0.0418]          [-0.041]
     Income 60-70K          0.0065     -0.0907***       0.0075            -0.004            -0.0295***        -0.606***           -0.0623***        -0.0339***
                            (0.012)     (0.0211)       (0.0048)         (0.0059)             (0.0051)          (0.0196)             (0.007)          (0.0034)
                           [0.0015]      [-0.011]       [0.004]          [-0.002]             [-0.016]         [-0.136]            [-0.0378]         [-0.0343]
     Income 70-80K        0.0230**     -0.0946***     0.0103**            -0.005            -0.0389***        -0.581***           -0.0681***        -0.0333***
                           (0.012)       (0.021)       (0.048)          (0.0058)              (0.005)          (0.0196)             (0.007)           (0.003)
                           [0.006]       [-0.012]     [0.0058]           [-0.003]            [-0.0216]         [-0.132]             [-0.042]          [-0.035]
     Income 80-100K       0.0437***    -0.0870***     0.0125***         0.00422             -0.0393***        -0.631***           -0.0728***        -0.0314***
                           (0.0115)      (0.021)       (0.0047)         (0.0057)              (0.005)          (0.0193)             (0.007)          (0.0034)
                            [0.011]      [-0.012]      [0.0075]          [0.003]              [-0.023]         [-0.156]             [-0.049]          [-0.036]
     Income 100-120K      0.0477***    -0.0760***     0.0187***         0.0133**            -0.0420***        -0.603***           -0.0889***        -0.0262***
                            (0.012)     (0.0218)        (0.005)          (0.006)             (0.0053)          (0.0205)            (0.0070)          (0.0035)
75




                           [0.0108]      [-0.009]      [0.0098]          [0.007]              [-0.022]         [-0.128]             [-0.057]          [-0.026]
     Income 120-150K      0.0540***    -0.0955***     0.0106**          0.0160***           -0.0423***        -0.619***           -0.0849***        -0.0221***
                           (0.0126)     (0.0228)      (0.0052)           (0.0062)            (0.0055)          (0.0211)            (0.0073)          (0.0036)
                            [0.011]     [-0.0100]      [0.005]            [0.008]            [-0.0198]         [-0.123]             [-0.045]         [-0.0199]
     Income > 150K        0.0903***    -0.0743***     0.0159***         0.0323***           -0.0393***        -0.608***           -0.0812***        -0.0213***
                            (0.012)      (0.022)       (0.0051)          (0.0061)            (0.0054)          (0.021)             (0.0072)          (0.0036)
                           [0.0196]      [-0.008]       [0.008]           [0.016]             [-0.019]         [-0.128]             [-0.046]         [-0.0203]


     Observations          360,545      374,603        363,926           284,642              336,932          132,609             165,454            256,774
     KP F-Stat              211.2         212           210.5              204                 211.8            205.7                223               203.1

       Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. This table reports all individual
       controls associated with the regressions reported in Table 3, Panel B. The regressor of interest is the average fraction of European immigrants over county
       population between 1910 and 1930. Its mean is 0.058 and its standard deviation is 0.068. The predicted fraction of immigrants is described in Section 4.2
       of the paper. Square brackets report beta coefficients. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak instruments. Standard errors in parenthesis are robust and
       clustered at the county level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                                        Table A.7. Baseline Specification: Controlling for Intergenerational Mobility

       Dep.                            Ideology    Party Scale   Democratic    Voted Democratic        Oppose         Support State       Support Minimum      Taxes to Pay
       Variables                                    (R to D)       Party          Candidate         Spending Cuts    Welfare Spending       Wage Increase      State Deficit
                                          (1)          (2)           (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)                  (7)               (8)

       Historical Fraction              0.673       1.982         0.483             0.401              0.213              1.137                0.279             0.101
       of Immigrants                    (0.174)     (0.341)       (0.0619)          (0.0830)           (0.0714)           (0.393)              (0.0679)          (0.0355)

       Immigrants' Intergenerational     0.0037      0.0119        0.0009            -0.0007            0.0023             0.0161               0.0062            0.0008
       Mobility Index                   (0.0117)    (0.0226)      (0.0045)          (0.0055)           (0.0046)           (0.0122)             (0.0041)          (0.0023)
       Observations                     360,545      374,603       363,926          284,642            336,932            132,609              165,454            256,774
       KP F-stat                         11.04        11.25         11.20            10.96              11.16              12.15                11.44              11.63
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.               2.90        4.31           0.39             0.52               0.60               2.84                 0.73               0.41
                                         (1.14)      (2.20)         (0.49)           (0.50)             (0.49)             (1.20)               (0.45)             (0.26)
       Individual Controls                 Y           Y              Y                Y                  Y                  Y                    Y                  Y
       Historical Controls                 Y           Y              Y                Y                  Y                  Y                    Y                  Y
76




     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The regressor of interest is the average fraction
     of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. Its mean is 0.058 and its standard deviation is 0.068. The predicted fraction of immigrants
     is described in the main body of the paper. The measure of social mobility is built from Abramitzky et al (2019) and reflects, by nationality, the predict income
     rank of son whose immigrant father was in 25th income percentile; its mean and standard deviation are 0.411 and 0.028. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak
     instruments. Individual controls include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment, employment
     status, income. Historical controls include: share of urban population and share of black population in 1900, labor force, log of occupational score manufacturing share,
     geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity, index of industry growth, average immigrant share in 1900 in each county. Standard errors in parenthesis are robust and
     clustered at the county level. Immigrants' characteristics are: English-speaking ability, literacy, income score and employment in manufacturing. Significance levels:
      p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                                          Table A.8. Sample Split around Exposure to Education Reforms Median

       Dep.                            Ideology    Party Scale   Democratic     Voted Democratic        Oppose         Support State       Support Minimum      Taxes to Pay
       Variables                                    (R to D)       Party           Candidate         Spending Cuts    Welfare Spending       Wage Increase      State Deficit
                                          (1)          (2)            (3)              (4)                 (5)                (6)                  (7)               (8)

       Panel A: Education Reform Above Median
       Historical Fraction             1.406         3.267         0.619             0.724              0.492              1.413                0.639              0.224
       of Immigrants                   (0.389)       (0.702)       (0.130)           (0.174)            (0.146)            (0.539)              (0.122)            (0.0710)
       Observations                     172,736      178,786       173,738           136,669            160,738             62,596               78,684            124,327
       KP F-stat                         96.85        97.49         97.39             96.99              96.85              95.68                97.45              96.89
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.           2.88(1.15)    4.21(2.20)    0.37(0.48)        0.50(0.50)         0.59(0.49)         2.84(1.21)           0.71(0.45)         0.41(0.27)
       Mean (s.d.) fraction of imm.   0.10(0.08)    0.10(0.08)    0.10(0.08)        0.10(0.08)         0.10(0.08)         0.10(0.08)           0.10(0.08)         0.10(0.08)


       Panel B: Education Reform Below Median
77




       Historical Fraction               0.110       1.029         0.330              0.0628             0.0254             0.350                0.0568             -0.0467
       of Immigrants                    (0.154)      (0.344)       (0.0719)          (0.0742)           (0.0586)            (0.178)             (0.0682)           (0.0335)
       Observations                     187,808      195,816       190,187           147,972            176,193             70,013               86,768            132,446
       KP F-stat                         264.7        262.9         263.6             262.4              262.5              262.6                264.6              267.2
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.           2.93(1.13)    4.40(2.20)    0.41(0.49)        0.54(0.50)         0.60(0.49)         2.84(1.19)           0.74(0.44)         0.41(0.26)
       Mean (s.d) fraction of imm.    0.09(0.09)    0.09(0.09)    0.09(0.09)        0.09(0.09)         0.09(0.09)         0.09(0.09)           0.09(0.09)         0.09(0.09)
       Individual Controls                 Y            Y             Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                    Y                  Y
       Historical Controls                 Y            Y             Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                    Y                  Y
       Immigrants' Characteristics         N            N             N                 N                  N                  N                    N                  N
       T-test [p-value]                [0.007]      [0.009]        [0.075]          [0.001]             [0.009]            [0.078]              [0.000]           [0.005]

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The regressor of interest is the average fraction
     of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. The predicted fraction of immigrants is described in the main body of the paper. The measure
     of exposure to education reforms is built from Bandiera et al (2018) and Flora (1987); the variable is standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. Here the
     sample is split around the median of this index in the estimation sample (-0.188). The last row reports the p-value of the t-test for equality between coefficients above and
     below the median. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak instruments. Individual controls include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gender,
     race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income. Historical controls include: 1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share
     of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score, 1900 employment share in manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity
     from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020). Standard errors in parenthesis are robust and clustered at the
     county level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                                                    Table A.9. Sample Split around Intermarriage (1910-1930)

       Dep.                            Ideology    Party Scale   Democratic    Voted Democratic        Oppose          Support State      Support Minimum       Taxes to Pay
       Variables                                    (R to D)       Party          Candidate         Spending Cuts     Welfare Spending      Wage Increase       State Deficit
                                          (1)          (2)            (3)              (4)                (5)                (6)                  (7)                (8)

       Panel A: Intermarriage Above Median
       Historical Fraction              2.072        4.406         0.881             1.045               0.540             1.704                0.687               0.233
       of Immigrants                    (0.517)      (0.931)       (0.166)           (0.225)             (0.181)           (0.452)              (0.168)            (0.0997)
                                       [0.155]      [0.172]       [0.156]           [0.180]            [0.0943]           [0.122]              [0.131]            [0.0758]
       Observations                     180,352      187,154       181,837           142,110            168,006             65,751               82,630            129,465
       KP F-stat                         312.1        313.8         313.7             298.7              323.8              327.56                353               311.2
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.           2.84(1.14)    4.15(2.20)    0.36(0.48)        0.49(0.50)         0.58(0.49)         2.81(1.19)           0.70(0.46)         0.40(0.26)
       Mean (s.d.) fraction of imm.   0.05(0.05)    0.05(0.05)    0.05(0.05)        0.05(0.05)         0.05(0.05)         0.05(0.05)           0.05(0.05)         0.05(0.05)


       Panel B: Intermarriage Below Median
78




       Historical Fraction               0.383       1.537         0.420            0.288                 0.134             1.158                0.198             0.0461
       of Immigrants                    (0.218)       (0.441)      (0.0742)         (0.0975)            (0.0880)            (0.497)             (0.0797)          (0.0417)
                                       [0.0287]     [0.0601]      [0.0743]         [0.0495]             [0.0234]          [0.0829]             [0.0378]           [0.0150]
       Observations                     180,193      187,449       182,089           142,532            168,926             66,858               82,824            127,309
       KP F-stat                         440.3        449.8         447.9             441.6              443.4              427.4                 439               454.8
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.           2.96(1.14)    4.46(2.19)    0.42(0.49)        0.55(0.50)         0.61(0.49)         2.86(1.20)           0.75(0.43)         0.41(0.26)
       Mean (s.d.) fraction of imm.   0.13(0.09)    0.13(0.09)    0.13(0.09)        0.13(0.09)         0.13(0.09)         0.13(0.09)           0.13(0.09)         0.13(0.09)
       Individual Controls                 Y            Y             Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                    Y                  Y
       Historical Controls                 Y            Y             Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                    Y                  Y
       Immigrants' Characteristics         N            N             N                 N                  N                  N                    N                  N
       T-test [p-value]                [0.009]       [0.078]      [0.000]           [0.005]            [0.007]            [0.009]               [0.075]           [0.001]

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The regressor of interest is the average fraction
     of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. The predicted fraction of immigrants is described in the main body of the paper. The measure
     of intermarriage is the average share of intermarried over married immigrants in 1910-1930 period: we consider an immigrants to be intermarried if married with a
     native with both parents being native. Here the sample is split around the median of this measure in the estimation sample (0.1023). The last row reports the p-value
     of the t-test for equality between the coefficients above and below median. The coefficients in square brackets refer to beta coefficients. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat
     for weak instruments. Individual controls include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment,
     employment status, income. Historical controls include: 1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log
     occupational score, 1900 employment share in manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an
     index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020). Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                                                Table A.10. Sample Split around Residential Integration (1910-1930)

       Dep.                            Ideology     Party Scale   Democratic   Voted Democratic        Oppose          Support State      Support Minimum       Taxes to Pay
       Variables                                     (R to D)       Party         Candidate         Spending Cuts     Welfare Spending      Wage Increase       State Deficit
                                          (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)                (5)                (6)                  (7)                (8)

       Panel A: Residential Integration Above Median
       Historical Fraction              2.781         5.622        1.060             1.277              0.795              2.191                1.060               0.288
       of Immigrants                    (0.707)       (1.222)      (0.224)           (0.309)            (0.247)            (0.731)              (0.233)             (0.130)
                                       [0.209]       [0.220]      [0.188]           [0.219]            [0.139]            [0.157]              [0.203]            [0.0936]
       Observations                     178,719      185,934       180,398           140,234            166,480             65,113               82,092            126,784
       KP F-stat                         100.7        101.6         101.9             100.3              99.43              93.13                98.15              97.98
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.           2.80(1.14)    4.12(2.22)    0.36(0.48)        0.48(0.50)         0.57(0.50)         2.81(1.20)           0.70(0.46)         0.40(0.26)
       Mean (s.d.) fraction of imm.   0.03(0.03)    0.03(0.03)    0.03(0.03)        0.03(0.03)         0.03(0.03)         0.03(0.03)           0.03(0.03)         0.03(0.03)


       Panel B: Residential Integration Below Median
79




       Historical Fraction               0.409       1.584         0.438            0.324                 0.128             1.158                0.221             0.0526
       of Immigrants                    (0.210)       (0.415)      (0.0697)         (0.0946)            (0.0803)            (0.479)             (0.0775)          (0.0428)
                                       [0.0307]     [0.0619]      [0.0774]         [0.0557]             [0.0224]          [0.0830]             [0.0423]           [0.0171]
       Observations                     180,894      187,692       182,573           143,659            169,581             67,130               82,927            129,330
       KP F-stat                         485.3        488.4         487.2             476.8              483.6              469.6                488.9              482.3
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.           3.01(1.14)    4.50(2.17)    0.42(0.50)        0.56(0.50)         0.63(0.48)         2.87(1.20)           0.75(0.43)         0.41(0.27)
       Mean (s.d.) fraction of imm.   0.15(0.08)    0.15(0.08)    0.15(0.08)        0.15(0.08)         0.15(0.08)         0.15(0.08)           0.15(0.08)         0.15(0.08)
       Individual Controls                 Y            Y             Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                    Y                  Y
       Historical Controls                 Y            Y             Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                    Y                  Y
       Immigrants' Characteristics         N            N             N                 N                  N                  N                    N                  N
       T-test [p-value]                [0.002]       [0.003]       [0.011]          [0.004]             [0.012]             [0.245]            [0.001]             [0.090]

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The regressor of interest is the average fraction
     of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. The predicted fraction of immigrants is described in the main body of the paper. Residential
     integration (1910-1930) is defined as the opposite of residential segregation in Logan and Parman (2017): the sample is split around the median of this measure in
     the estimation sample (0.9266). The coefficients in square brackets refer to beta coefficients. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak instruments. Individual controls
     include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income. Historical controls
     include: 1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score, 1900 employment share in
     manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as
     in Tabellini (2020). Standard errors in parenthesis are robust and clustered at the county level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                                                      Table A.11. Sample Split around Intermarriage (1900)

       Dep.                            Ideology    Party Scale   Democratic   Voted Democratic        Oppose         Support State      Support Minimum      Taxes to Pay
       Variables                                    (R to D)       Party         Candidate         Spending Cuts    Welfare Spending      Wage Increase      State Deficit
                                         (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)                (5)               (6)                  (7)               (8)

       Panel A: Intermarriage (1900) Above Median
       Historical Fraction             1.756         3.308         0.597            0.677               0.420             1.149               0.686             0.269
       of Immigrants                   (0.588)       (0.940)       (0.170)          (0.233)             (0.197)           (0.502)             (0.155)            (0.115)
                                      [0.131]       [0.129]       [0.105]          [0.116]            [0.0730]           0.0819]             [0.131]           [0.0868]
       Observations                    170,146       176,442      171,295           133,639            158,291            61,552              77,356            121,193
       KP F-stat                        183.8         179.7        182.6             202.1              177.6             186.1               174.7              179.6
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.           2.88(1.15)   4.25(2.21)    0.38(0.49)        0.51(0.50)        0.59(0.49)         2.85(1.20)          0.72(0.45)         0.41(0.26)
       Mean (s.d.) fraction of imm.   0.05(0.05)   0.05(0.05)    0.05(0.05)        0.05(0.05)        0.05(0.05)         0.05(0.05)          0.05(0.05)         0.05(0.05)


       Panel B: Intermarriage (1900) Below Median
80




       Historical Fraction              0.582        1.896         0.489            0.392               0.146             1.315              0.276               0.0532
       of Immigrants                    (0.215)      (0.445)      (0.0752)         (0.0963)           (0.0914)            (0.504)            (0.0834)           (0.0445)
                                      [0.0434]     [0.0737]      [0.0858]         [0.0670]            [0.0254]          [0.0937]            [0.0527]            [0.0171]
       Observations                    169,630       176,325      171,461           134,975            159,121            63,327              78,176            121,164
       KP F-stat                        313.1         314.8         314              309.4              313.1             311.9               321.8              306.2
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.           2.96(1.14)   4.42(2.18)    0.41(0.49)        0.54(0.50)        0.61(0.49)         2.85(1.20)          0.74(0.44)         0.41(0.26)
       Mean (s.d.) fraction of imm.   0.14(0.09)   0.14(0.09)    0.14(0.09)        0.14(0.09)        0.14(0.09)         0.14(0.09)          0.14(0.09)         0.14(0.09)
       Individual Controls                Y            Y             Y                 Y                 Y                  Y                    Y                 Y
       Historical Controls                Y            Y             Y                 Y                 Y                  Y                    Y                 Y
       Immigrants' Characteristics        N            N             N                 N                 N                  N                    N                 N
       T-test [p-value]                [0.064]       [0.179]       [0.577]          [0.263]            [0.204]            [0.818]            [0.015]            [0.079]

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The regressor of interest is the average
     fraction of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. The predicted fraction of immigrants is described in the main body of the paper. The
     measure of intermarriage is the share of intermarried over married immigrants in 1900: we consider an immigrants to be intermarried if married with a native with
     both parents being native. Here the sample is split around the median of this measure in the estimation sample (0.0526). The last row reports the p-value of the t-test
     for equality between the coefficients above and below median. The coefficients in square brackets refer to beta coefficients. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak
     instruments. Individual controls include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment, employment
     status, income. Historical controls include: 1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational
     score, 1900 employment share in manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted
     industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020). Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                                                    Table A.12. Sample Split around Residential Integration (1900)

       Dep.                            Ideology      Party Scale   Democratic   Voted Democratic        Oppose          Support State      Support Minimum       Taxes to Pay
       Variables                                      (R to D)       Party         Candidate         Spending Cuts     Welfare Spending      Wage Increase       State Deficit
                                          (1)            (2)          (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)                  (7)                (8)

       Panel A: Residential Integration (1900) Above Median
       Historical Fraction               1.154         3.211        0.621            0.558                 0.290             1.089               0.573               0.0985
       of Immigrants                    (0.619)        (1.081)      (0.219)           (0.269)             (0.182)           (0.607)              (0.180)             (0.115)
                                       [0.0865]       [0.125]      [0.110]          [0.0958]             [0.0506]          [0.0780]             [0.110]             [0.0319]
       Observations                     179,250        186,386      180,866          140,292             166,851            65,279               82,014             126,751
       KP F-stat                         270.5          272.3        272.2            259.8               269.3              266                 278.6               267.9
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.            2.82(1.14)     4.16(2.22)   0.36(0.48)       0.48(0.50)         0.57(0.50)          2.81(1.20)           0.70(0.46)        0.340(0.26)
       Mean (s.d.) fraction of imm.    0.04(0.04)     0.04(0.04)   0.04(0.04)       0.04(0.04)         0.04(0.04)          0.04(0.04)           0.04(0.04)         0.04(0.04)


       Panel B: Residential Integration (1900) Below Median
81




       Historical Fraction                0.189        1.231         0.376           0.224                0.0386             1.020                 0.136           -0.00396
       of Immigrants                     (0.237)        (0.455)     (0.0762)          (0.107)           (0.0881)             (0.515)             (0.0850)          (0.0431)
                                        [0.0141]      [0.0481]     [0.0665]         [0.0385]            [0.00673]          [0.0731]              [0.0259]          [-0.0012]
       Observations                     179,226        186,047      180,949          142,753             168,140            66,562               82,487             128,548
       KP F-stat                         286.8          288.2        286.3            282.6               287.2              267                 288.9               284.8
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.            2.99(1.14)     4.46(2.17)   0.42(0.50)       0.56(0.50)         0.62(0.49)          2.87(0.19)           0.75(0.43)        0.42(0.26)
       Mean (s.d.) fraction of imm.    0.15(0.08)     0.15(0.08)   0.15(0.08)       0.15(0.08)         0.15(0.08)          0.15(0.08)           0.15(0.08)        0.15(0.08)
       Individual Controls                 Y              Y            Y                Y                   Y                  Y                    Y                  Y
       Historical Controls                 Y              Y            Y                Y                   Y                  Y                    Y                  Y
       Immigrants' Characteristics         N              N            N                N                   N                  N                    N                  N
       T-test [p-value]                 [0.166]        [0.116]       [0.327]          [0.275]            [0.233]            [0.935]             [0.033]             [0.413]

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.44 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The regressor of interest is the average
     fraction of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. The predicted fraction of immigrants is described in the main body of the paper.
     Residential integration (1900) is defined as the opposite of residential segregation in Logan and Parman (2017): the sample is split around the median of this measure
     in the estimation sample (0.9066). The coefficients in square brackets refer to beta coefficients. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak instruments. Individual controls
     include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income. Historical controls
     include: 1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score, 1900 employment share in
     manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as
     in Tabellini (2020). Standard errors in parenthesis are robust and clustered at the county level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
B      Appendix ­ Robustness Checks
In this section we present a variety of robustness checks. First, we start by addressing
the possibility that immigrants settled in counties that, historically, were already more
liberal and where support for the Democratic Party was stronger. If this were to be the
case, and if such political preferences (of natives) persisted over time, our estimates may
be biased by the spurious correlation between past ideology and European historical
immigration. While our instrument should deal with this concern, one may be worried
that the 1900 settlements of European immigrants were themselves correlated with
political ideology of the native born.
    In Table B.1, we augment our baseline specification (reported in Panel B of Table 3)
by controlling for the county level Democratic vote share in presidential elections of
1900 and 1904. Reassuringly, results, reported in Panel B of Table B.1, show that all
coefficients remain precisely estimated and quantitatively very close to those reported
in the baseline specification of Table 3 and displayed in Panel A of Table B.1 to ease
comparisons. Moreover, in unreported results, we replicated Table B.1 by varying the
definition of "baseline" years (1900 or 1904 alone; including elections of 1908 and/or
1912; combining elections until 1912), and our estimates remained virtually unchanged.
    Second, in Table B.2 we verify that our results are robust to extending the sample
period used to define the average European immigrant share to 1850-1930. Since our in-
strument is constructed using the 1900 settlements of European immigrants, we cannot
conduct this exercise with 2SLS. However, the similarity of OLS and 2SLS estimates in
our main results (see Tables 2 and 3) bolsters our confidence in the OLS analysis for
the 1850 to 1930 period.
    Panel A of Table B.2 reports the baseline OLS results obtained for the 1910 to 1930
period (also shown in Panel A of Table 3), while Panel B replicates them for the 1850-
1930 decades. As noted in Sequeira et al. (2020), when going back to pre-1900 decades,
some counties are not available. For this reason, in Panel C, we repeat this exercise
including only counties for which we have observations in all decades. Reassuringly,
results are always quantitatively and qualitatively close to those reported in Panel A:
in all cases, historical immigration is strongly and positively associated with liberal
ideology and higher preferences for redistribution among American voters today.48
    Third, in Table B.3, we verify that our results are robust to excluding the US South,
where identification with the Democratic Party and, more broadly, political preferences
may have been greatly influenced by the history of race relations (Kuziemko and Wash-
ington, 2018; Schickler, 2016). Moreover, we show that our estimates are unchanged
  48
    Results (unreported) remain unchanged also when defining the period of interest from 1850 to
1920, as done for instance in Sequeira et al. (2020).



                                              82
when defining the European immigrant share at the Community Zone (CZ) ­ rather
than at the county ­ level (Table B.4). This exercise deals with the possibility that
European immigration triggered selective "white flight", inducing more conservative
natives to emigrate in response to the arrival of European immigrants. If this were
to be the case, our findings may be unduly affected by sample selection. However,
Table B.4 documents that, even when aggregating the unit of analysis to CZs, all our
results remain unchanged.49
    Fourth, we explore the relationship between political ideology, European immigra-
tion, and ethnic diversity. As noted in Section 6 in the main text of the paper, a large
literature has documented a negative relationship between ethnic diversity and prefer-
ences for redistribution (Alesina et al., 1999; Alesina and Giuliano, 2011). As shown in
Tabellini (2020), such relationship was evident also during the Age of Mass Migration:
in US cities where (immigrant induced) ethnic diversity was higher, public spending
and tax rates were lower. In light of these results, one may wonder if our positive
estimates for the effects of immigration on preferences for redistribution are, at least
partly, due to the fact that we are not accounting for ethnic diversity explicitly.
    To examine this possibility, we augment our baseline specification by separately con-
trolling for the (instrumented) ethnic diversity brought about by European immigrants.
2SLS results for this exercise are reported in Table B.5, which shows not only that the
coefficient on the historical fraction of immigrants is unchanged, but also that ethnic
diversity has a positive effect on both liberal ideology and preferences for redistribu-
tion, although its precision varies across outcomes.50 We speculate that this, somewhat
surprising, result is due to the fact that the diversity brought about European immi-
grants was relatively contained in size. On the one hand, when levels of diversity are
not "too high", at least in the medium to long run, social cohesion can be enhanced,
consistent with recent work by Bazzi et al. (2019). On the other, although slowly and at
varying rates, European immigrants eventually became fully integrated into the Amer-
ican society (Abramitzky et al., 2019a), in part helped by the arrival of new outsiders
like African Americans from the US South, who looked even more different from white
natives than European immigrants (Fouka et al., 2018).
    Fifth, we verify that our results are robust to omitting counties with very large and
   49
      CZs are defined as clusters of counties that feature strong commuting ties within, and weak com-
muting ties across CZs. Importantly, the boundaries of CZs are time-invariant, and are defined on
the basis of post 1960s migration patterns (Tolbert and Sizer, 1996). This implies that, for the early
twentieth century, they represent a very large definition of "local" labor market, not to mention po-
litical jurisdiction. In unreported results, we also verified that our estimates are unchanged when
aggregating counties to State Economic Areas (SEAs), as in Abramitzky et al. (2019d). SEAs are
county aggregates that should correspond (roughly) to CZs for the early twentieth century.
   50
      Results reported in Table B.5 do not control for the (instrumented) economic characteristics of
immigrants (e.g. Table 4). However, in unreported results, we verified that including these additional
controls leaves results unchanged.

                                                 83
very low immigration, and that could be potential outliers. In Tables B.6 and B.7, we
replicate our baseline results trimming observations in counties with average 1910-1930
European immigration below (resp. above) the 1st and the 5th (resp. the 99th and
95th) percentiles respectively. Reassuringly, in all cases coefficients are in line with
those reported in Table 3 (Panel B).
    Finally, we examine the possibility that the 1900 settlements of specific European
groups across US counties might be correlated with both the long-run political ideology
of Americans (or, with factors that determined them) and the migration patterns of that
specific immigrant group in each decade between 1900 and 1930. As shown formally
in Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2018), if this were to be the case, the validity of the
instrument would be threatened. Following an approach similar to that used in Tabellini
(2020), we replicate the analysis for each of our eight outcomes by adding ­ one by one
­ the share of each European group in the county in 1900 (relative to all immigrants
from that group in the United States).
    We plot 2SLS coefficients (with corresponding 95% intervals) for each of these sep-
arate regressions in Figures B.1 and B.2, reporting the point estimate associated with
the baseline specification as the first dot from the left to ease comparisons. In all cases,
coefficients remain quantitatively close to, and never statistically different from, our
baseline estimates. Only for the 9th dot from the left, which plots results for the re-
gressions that include the 1900 share of French immigrants, we note a slight drop in the
magnitude of the coefficient. But, even in this case, results remain close to our baseline
ones.




                                            84
    Figure B.1. 2SLS Coefficients, Controlling for Initial Shares: Political Ideology




Notes: The Figure plots the 2SLS point estimate (with corresponding 95% confidence intervals) for
the effect of the historical fraction of immigrants augmenting the specification reported in Table 3 with
the 1900 immigrant share from each sending country, separately. The first coefficient plotted in the
figure corresponds to the baseline specification. The ninth coefficient refers to the specification that
includes the 1900 share of French immigrants in the county (relative to all immigrants from France in
the US as of 1900).




                                                   85
Figure B.2. 2SLS Coefficients, Controlling for Initial Shares: Preferences for Redistri-
bution




Notes: The Figure plots the 2SLS point estimate (with corresponding 95% confidence intervals) for
the effect of the historical fraction of immigrants augmenting the specification reported in Table 3 with
the 1900 immigrant share from each sending country, separately. The first coefficient plotted in the
figure corresponds to the baseline specification. The ninth coefficient refers to the specification that
includes the 1900 share of French immigrants in the county (relative to all immigrants from France in
the US as of 1900).




                                                   86
                              Table B.1. Baseline Specification Controlling for Democratic Share in Presidential Elections

       Dep.                    Ideology    Party Scale   Democratic   Voted Democratic        Oppose         Support State      Support Minimum      Taxes to Pay
       Variables                            (R to D)       Party         Candidate         Spending Cuts    Welfare Spending      Wage Increase      State Deficit
                                  (1)          (2)          (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)                  (7)               (8)

       Panel A: 2SLS Baseline
       Historical Fraction      0.684       2.018         0.486            0.399              0.220              1.185               0.298              0.103
       of Immigrants            (0.174)     (0.346)       (0.0635)         (0.0850)           (0.0726)           (0.391)             (0.0679)           (0.0359)
       KP F-stat                 211.2        212          210.5             204               211.8              205.7                 223              203.1
       Observations             360,545     374,603       363,926          284,642            336,932            132,609              165,454           256,774
       Panel B: 2SLS Controlling for Democratic Share (1900-1904)
       Historical Fraction      0.701       2.054         0.490            0.406              0.230              1.205               0.305              0.106
       of Immigrants            (0.176)     (0.347)       (0.0628)         (0.0852)           (0.0724)           (0.388)             (0.0679)           (0.0367)
       KP F-stat                 214.2        215          213.5            207.3              214.7              208.4                225.9             205.4
87




       Observations            344,492      358,057       347,810          271,822            322,115            126,864             158,360            245,230
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.   2.90(1.14)   4.31(2.20)    0.39(0.49)       0.52(0.50)         0.60(0.49)         2.84(1.20)          0.73(0.45)         0.41(0.26)
       Individual Controls        Y            Y             Y                Y                  Y                  Y                   Y                  Y
       Historical Controls        Y            Y             Y                Y                  Y                  Y                   Y                  Y

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The regressor of interest is the average
     fraction of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. Its mean is 0.055 and its S.D. is 0.067. The predicted fraction of immigrants
     is described in the main body of the paper. In Panel B, we control for the (county-level) average Democratic vote share in Presidential Elections for 1900 and
     1904. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak instruments. Individual controls include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gender,
     race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income. Historical controls include: 1900 black and urban share of the county population,
     1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score, 1900 employment share in manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates,
     railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020). Standard errors in parenthesis
     are robust and clustered at the county level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                             Table B.2. Ideology, Preferences for Redistribution and Immigration (1850-1930) ­ OLS estimates

       Dep.                     Ideology    Party Scale   Democratic   Voted Democratic        Oppose         Support State       Support Minimum      Taxes to Pay
       Variables                             (R to D)       Party         Candidate         Spending Cuts    Welfare Spending       Wage Increase      State Deficit
                                  (1)           (2)          (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)                  (7)               (8)

       Panel A: Baseline Specification
       Historical Fraction     0.706***      2.062***      0.507***         0.384***           0.223***           1.031***             0.294***          0.0950***
       of Immigrants            (0.133)       (0.250)      (0.0455)         (0.0625)           (0.0515)            (0.244)             (0.0507)           (0.0285)
       Panel B: All Counties (1850-1930) Baseline Specification
       Historical Fraction     0.614***      1.630***      0.391***         0.327***           0.192***           0.830***             0.252***          0.0804***
       of Immigrants            (0.118)       (0.239)      (0.0467)         (0.0563)           (0.0450)            (0.205)             (0.0453)           (0.0255)
       Observations             178,719      185,934       180,398          140,234            166,480             65,113               82,092            126,784
       KP F-stat                 100.7        101.6         101.9            100.3              99.43              93.13                98.15              97.98
       Observations             360,545      374,603       363,926          284,642            336,932            132,609              165,454            256,774
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.    2.90(1.14)   4.31(2.20)    0.39(0.49)       0.52(0.50)         0.60(0.49)         2.84(1.20)           0.73(0.45)         0.41(0.26)
88




       Panel C: Counties with all decades (1850-1930)
       Historical Fraction     0.657***      1.694***      0.403***         0.338***           0.178***           0.854***             0.269***          0.0726***
       of Immigrants            (0.128)       (0.270)      (0.0535)         (0.0639)           (0.0515)            (0.230)             (0.0506)           (0.0279)
       Observations             288,463      300,146       291,487          227,177            269,957            107,037              132,876            203,906
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.    2.91(1.14)   4.35(2.20)    0.40(0.49)       0.53(0.50)         0.60(0.49)         2.83(2.20)           0.73(0.44)         0.40(0.26)
       Individual Controls         Y            Y             Y                Y                  Y                  Y                    Y                  Y
       Historical Controls         Y            Y             Y                Y                  Y                  Y                    Y                  Y

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions.Data are based on Authors' calculations
     from Ruggles et al. 2020. The regressor of interest is the average fraction of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. Its mean is
     0.055 and its standard deviation is 0.067. Individual controls include the following respondents'characteristics: age, age squared, gender, race, marital status,
     educational attainment, employment status, income. Historical controls include: 1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share of men 15-64
     in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score, 1900 employment share in manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity
     from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020). Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                                                      Table B.3. Baseline Specification Excluding US South

       Dep.                      Ideology   Party Scale   Democratic    Voted Democratic       Oppose          Support State      Support Minimum      Taxes to Pay
       Variables                             (R to D)       Party          Candidate        Spending Cuts     Welfare Spending      Wage Increase      State Deficit
                                   (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)                (5)                (6)                  (7)               (8)

       Panel A: OLS estimates
       Historical Fraction       0.621       1.918         0.502             0.375              0.180             0.990                0.249             0.0781
       of Immigrants             (0.129)     (0.246)       (0.0480)          (0.0715)           (0.0497)          (0.268)              (0.0561)          (0.0360)


       Panel B: 2SLS estimates
       Historical Fraction       0.616       1.923         0.500             0.383              0.181             1.241                0.266              0.091
       of Immigrants             (0.176)     (0.340)       (0.0586)          (0.0841)           (0.0699)          (0.432)              (0.0680)           (0.0359)


       Panel C: First Stage
89




       Predicted Historical      1.357       1.358         1.359             1.359              1.358             1.372                1.348              1.363
       Fraction of Immigrants    (0.0637)    (0.0632)      (0.0636)          (0.0639)           (0.0640)          (0.0677)             (0.0643)           (0.0618)

       KP F-stat                  453.3        461.4         457.4            452.5               450               410.2                439               486.9
       Observations              244,636     253,712        246,682          194,570            229,120            90,011              111,939            176,590
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.       2.963       4.384          0.401            0.539              0.614              2.847               0.733              0.410
                                 (1.143)     (2.181)        (0.498)          (0.487)            (1.191)            (0.442)                                (0.265)
       Individual Controls          Y           Y             Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                   Y                  Y
       Historical Controls          Y           Y             Y                 Y                  Y                  Y                   Y                  Y

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The Table replicates Table 3 excluding
     US South States (Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississipi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia
     and West Virginia. The regressor of interest is the average fraction of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. Its mean is 0.129
     and its standard deviation is 0.082. The predicted fraction of immigrants is described in the main body of the paper. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for
     weak instruments. Individual controls include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment,
     employment status, income. Historical controls include: 1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900
     log occupational score, 1900 employment share in manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020),
     and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020). Standard errors in parenthesis are robust and clustered at the commuting zone
     level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                                         Table B.4. Baseline Specification Aggregating at the Commuting Zone Level

       Dep.                      Ideology    Party Scale   Democratic   Voted Democratic        Oppose         Support State      Support Minimum      Taxes to Pay
       Variables                              (R to D)       Party         Candidate         Spending Cuts    Welfare Spending      Wage Increase      State Deficit
                                   (1)           (2)          (3)              (4)                (5)                (6)                  (7)                (8)

       Panel A: OLS estimates
       Historical Fraction       0.825        2.288         0.531            0.419              0.298              1.137               0.354              0.124
       of Immigrants             (0.191)      (0.367)       (0.0632)         (0.0890)           (0.0704)           (0.232)             (0.0828)           (0.0395)


       Panel B: 2SLS estimates
       Historical Fraction       0.682        1.788         0.415            0.337              0.296              1.267                0.321             0.144
       of Immigrants             (0.211)      (0.421)       (0.0789)         (0.105)            (0.0811)           (0.289)              (0.104)           (0.0450)


       Panel C: First Stage
90




       Predicted Historical      1.337        1.338         1.338            1.337              1.345              1.345                1.324             1.337
       Fraction of Immigrants    (0.146)      (0.146)       (0.146)          (0.149)            (0.148)            (0.151)              (0.143)           (0.145)

       KP F-stat                  83.29        83.46         83.48            80.66              83.03              79.84                85.62             84.55
       Observations              366,845      381,147       370,285          289,680            342,801            134,927              168,308           261,278
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.        2.9         4.301         0.388            0.518              0.596              2.838                0.725             0.406
                                 (1.144)      (2.201)       (0.487)          (0.500)            (0.491)            (1.197)              (0.446)           (0.264)
       Individual Controls          Y            Y             Y                Y                  Y                  Y                    Y                 Y
       Historical Controls          Y            Y             Y                Y                  Y                  Y                    Y                 Y

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The Table replicates Table 3 aggregating
     the geography used to define the fraction of immigrants from the county to the Commuting Zone level. The regressor of interest is the average fraction of European
     immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. Its mean is 0.101 and its standard deviation is 0.088. The predicted fraction of immigrants is described
     in the main body of the paper. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak instruments. Individual controls include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age
     squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income. Historical controls include: 1900 black and urban share of the county
     population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score, 1900 employment share in manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic
     coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020). Standard errors in
     parenthesis are robust and clustered at the commuting zone level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                                              Table B.5. Baseline Specification: Controlling for Ethnic Diversity

       Dep.                   Ideology   Party Scale   Democratic   Voted Democratic        Oppose         Support State      Support Minimum      Taxes to Pay
       Variables                          (R to D)       Party         Candidate         Spending Cuts    Welfare Spending      Wage Increase      State Deficit
                                (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)                (5)               (6)                  (7)               (8)

       Historical Fraction    0.697       2.051         0.493            0.409              0.224              1.198               0.300              0.105
       of Immigrants          (0.170)     (0.336)       (0.0610)         (0.0822)           (0.0715)           (0.388)             (0.0673)           (0.0356)

       Ethnic Diversity        0.215       0.447        0.0833            0.134              0.0547             0.222               0.0395             0.0279
                              (0.140)      (0.259)      (0.0506)         (0.0620)           (0.0526)           (0.144)             (0.0501)           (0.0259)
       Observations           359,776     373,811       363,159           284,041            336,220           132,308              165,098           256,228
       KP F-stat               47.17       47.69         48.34             51.61              47.06             50.06                50.60             46.99
       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.     2.90        4.31          0.39             0.52               0.60               2.84                0.73               0.41
                               (1.14)      (2.20)        (0.49)           (0.50)             (0.49)             (1.20)              (0.45)             (0.26)
       Individual Controls       Y           Y             Y                 Y                 Y                  Y                    Y                 Y
       Historical Controls       Y           Y             Y                 Y                 Y                  Y                    Y                 Y
91




     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The Table replicates Table 3
     augmenting the specification by controlling for Ethnic Diversity. The regressor of interest is the average fraction of European immigrants over county
     population between 1910 and 1930. Its mean is 0.058 and its standard deviation is 0.068. The predicted fraction of immigrants is described in the main body
     of the paper. Ethnic diversity is reconstructed using national group shares. Its mean is 0.764 and its S.D. is 0.119. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak
     instruments. Individual controls include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment,
     employment status, income. Historical controls include: 1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900
     log occupational score, 1900 employment share in manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020),
     and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020), average immigrant share in 1900 in each county. Immigrants' characteristics
     are: English-speaking ability, literacy, income score and employment in manufacturing. Standard errors in parenthesis are robust and clustered at the county
     level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                              Table B.6. Baseline Specification, Trimming Outliers (1st-99th Percentiles of Immigration)

       Dep.                   Ideology   Party Scale   Democratic    Voted Democratic        Oppose         Support State       Support Minimum      Taxes to Pay
       Variables                          (R to D)       Party          Candidate         Spending Cuts    Welfare Spending       Wage Increase      State Deficit
                                 (1)         (2)           (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)                  (7)               (8)

       Panel A: 2SLS estimates
       Historical Fraction    0.617        1.889         0.443            0.329              0.219              0.752                0.267             0.0940
       of Immigrants          (0.176)      (0.356)       (0.0698)         (0.0895)           (0.0697)           (0.183)              (0.0675)          (0.0395)

       Panel B: First Stage
       Historical Fraction    1.258        1.258         1.259            1.254              1.260              1.276                1.256              1.252
       of Immigrants          (0.119)      (0.119)       (0.120)          (0.120)            (0.120)            (0.124)              (0.118)            (0.119)

       KP F-stat               110.9         111          110.5             109.2              110.2              106.3               113.8              111.7
       Observations           353,714      367,435       356,966          279,347             330,454           129,967              162,123            252,240
92




       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.     2.90         4.31          0.39             0.52                0.60              2.84                 0.73               0.41
                               (1.14)       (2.20)        (0.49)           (0.50)              (0.49)            (1.20)               (0.45)             (0.26)

       Individual Controls       Y            Y             Y                Y                   Y                 Y                    Y                  Y
       Historical Controls       Y            Y             Y                Y                   Y                 Y                    Y                  Y

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. See Table A.4 for the exact wording
     of the survey questions. The regressor of interest is the average fraction of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. The Table
     replicates Table 3 but restricting the sample to counties with average fraction of immigrants above the 99th percentile (0.338) and below the 1st percentile
     (0.0004). The predicted fraction of immigrants is described in the main body of the paper. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak instruments. Individual
     controls include the following respondents' characteristics: age, age squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income.
     Historical controls include: 1900 black and urban share of the county population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score,
     1900 employment share in manufacturing (men 15-64), county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of
     predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020). Standard errors in parenthesis are robust and clustered at the county level. Significance levels:
      p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
                              Table B.7. Baseline Specification, Trimming Outliers (5th-95th Percentiles of Immigration)

       Dep.                   Ideology   Party Scale   Democratic    Voted Democratic        Oppose         Support State       Support Minimum      Taxes to Pay
       Variables                          (R to D)       Party          Candidate         Spending Cuts    Welfare Spending       Wage Increase      State Deficit
                                 (1)         (2)           (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)                  (7)               (8)

       Panel A: 2SLS estimates
       Historical Fraction    0.751        2.142         0.466            0.409              0.252              0.641                0.324              0.131
       of Immigrants          (0.224)      (0.461)       (0.0910)         (0.114)            (0.0914)           (0.219)              (0.0835)           (0.050)

       Panel B: First Stage
       Historical Fraction    1.131        1.130         1.131            1.123              1.133              1.145                1.139              1.127
       of Immigrants          (0.115)      (0.114)       (0.115)          (0.115)            (0.115)            (0.119)              (0.114)            (0.114)

       KP F-stat               97.42        97.58         97.04             95.86              96.31              92.60               100.1              97.62
       Observations           325,461      337,891       328,298          257,217             303,847           119,412              149,144            232,934
93




       Mean (s.d.) dep.var.     2.90         4.29          0.39             0.52                0.60              2.83                 0.72               0.41
                               (1.14)       (2.20)        (0.49)           (0.50)              (0.49)            (1.20)               (0.45)             (0.26)

       Individual Controls       Y            Y             Y                Y                   Y                 Y                    Y                  Y
       Historical Controls       Y            Y             Y                Y                   Y                 Y                    Y                  Y

     Notes: Dependent variables are taken from CCES surveys. See Table A.4 for the exact wording of the survey questions. The regressor of interest is the
     average fraction of European immigrants over county population between 1910 and 1930. The Table replicates Table 3 but restricting the sample to counties
     with average fraction of immigrants above the 95th percentile (0.26) and below the 5th percentile (0.001). The predicted fraction of immigrants is described
     in the main body of the paper. KP F-Stat refers to the F-stat for weak instruments. Individual controls include the following respondents' characteristics:
     age, age squared, gender, race, marital status, educational attainment, employment status, income. Historical controls include: 1900 black and urban share
     of the county population, 1900 share of men 15-64 in the labor force, 1900 log occupational score, 1900 employment share in manufacturing (men 15-64),
     county geographic coordinates, railroad connectivity from Sequeira et al. (2020), and an index of predicted industry growth (1910-1930) as in Tabellini (2020).
     Standard errors in parenthesis are robust and clustered at the county level. Significance levels:  p< 0.01,  p< 0.05,  p< 0.1.
C       Appendix ­ European Social Survey
The European Social Survey (ESS) is a repeated cross-sectional survey conducted in
around 38 countries in Europe since 2002, every two year.51 Our analysis includes
survey rounds from 1 to 8, i.e. until 2016, and all the countries that are available
therein. The number of respondents in each wave varies from 40,000 to 56,000 for a
total of 326,678 respondents overall. The ESS collects demographic and socio-economic
characteristic of respondents, and elicits political ideology as well as attitudes towards
social exclusion and preferences for redistribution.
   We use the ESS to validate the proxy for historical preferences for redistribution
constructed in the main text, which is based on exposure to education reforms across
European countries (see Section 3.1 in the main text). To do so, we focus on first
generation immigrants, i.e. individuals who are residing in a country different from
their country of birth, and estimate the following specification:

               yijt = t + log (EduRef ormj ) + Xijt + log (GDP2000,j ) + uijt                      (C.4)

    Where yijt is the stated preference for redistribution of respondent i from country j in
survey wave t. Consistent with the literature (Luttmer and Singhal, 2011), we measure
preferences for redistribution using individuals' response to the following statement
in the ESS: "Government should reduce differences in income levels". The possible
answers range from 1 (for Strongly Agree ) to 5 (for Strongly Disagree ). We recode the
variable so that higher values correspond to stronger preferences for redistribution. We
also control for wave fixed effects t , a set of individual characteristics Xijt , and the
logarithm country j 's GDP in 2000.52
    The key regressor of interest is the log of the year in which the first education
reform was introduced in country j .53 The vector of individual characteristics, Xijt ,
includes: gender, a quadratic in age, level of income, logarithm of years of education,
employment, marital status. We create ten different income dummies: the first nine
exactly correspond to the first nine possible categories that are reported in the ESS
question; the last dummy encompasses all higher levels of income. Employment status
reports three different categories: employed, unemployed, and out of the labor force.
Finally, marital status includes the following four categories: single, married, divorced
or separated, and widowed.
  51
     The exact number of countries varies across survey waves. Data can be downloaded at http:
//www.europeansocialsurvey.org.
  52
     Results are unchanged when using GDP measured in other years. Data can be downloaded at
http://www.rug.nl/research/ggdc/data/pwt/pwt-7.0.
  53
     See Section 3.1 for the sources of this variable and Table A.1 for the years of introduction for each
country in our sample.


                                                   94
    Results, reported in Figure A.3 and Table A.3 in Appendix A, and are based on
11,489 observations ­ the number of respondents we are left with after restricting the
sample to first generation immigrants and to individuals from countries for which we
have data on education reforms (see Table A.1). In Figure A.3, we plot the relationship
between the average preferences for redistribution of respondents (on the y-axis) and the
logarithm of the year in which the reform was introduced in their country of origin (on
the x-axis), after partialling out GDP of the country in 2000, and weighing observations
by the number of respondents in the ESS.54 We report results obtained both including
(dashed line) and excluding (solid line) Denmark, which might be a potential outlier.
    Table A.3 reports similar results for a more formal regression analysis, where we
estimate equation (Equation C.4) with OLS. To save space, Table A.3 only reports
the coefficient associated with the log of the year of introduction of education reforms,
but we also include all controls described above. Standard errors are clustered at the
country of origin level. As for Figure A.3, we report results obtained including (column
1) and excluding (column 2) Denmark.




 54
      Equivalent results are obtained when estimating unweighted regressions.


                                                  95
                                                                    Table C.1. Variable Description

               Variable               Question                                                     Answers coded as                        Source
                                                  Panel A. Preferences for Redistribution
                                      Government should reduce differences in income levels.
     Preferences for Redistribution                                                                Scale from 1=Disagree Strongly          European Social Survey
                                      1= Strongly Agree to 5 Disagree Strongly. 7=Refusal,
                                      8=Don't know. 9=No answer                                    to 5=Strongly Agree

                                            Panel B. Main Regressor and Individual Controls
                                                                                                                                           Bandiera et al (2018); for
     Log Year of Education Reform Year in which the education reform was implemented               Logarithm(Year of reform)               Germany and Austria-
                                                                                                                                           Hungary, Flora (1987)

         Country of Residence                                                                                                              European Social Survey

           Country of Birth                                                                                                                European Social Survey
96




                  Age                                                                                                                      European Social Survey

                Gender                Gender of the respondent                                     Coded as 1=male, 2=female               European Social Survey

          Years of Education          Years of education                                           Logarithm(1+years of education)         European Social Survey


                                      Legal marital status: single, married or in a civil union,   Coded as 1=single, 2=married or in a
            Marital Status                                                                         civil union, 3=divorced or separated,   European Social Survey
                                      separated, divorced, widowed.                                4=widowed


          Employment Status           Main activity, last 7 days.                                  Coded as 1=out of the labor force,      European Social Survey
                                                                                                   2=unemployed, 3=employed

                Income                Household's total net income, all sources                    Coded as 1 to 9 for the first nine      European Social Survey
                                                                                                   deciles and 10 for higher levels


                                      Log per capita GDP (PPP converted relative to the
                                                                                                                                           Groningen Growth and De-
                 GDP                  United States, G-K method, at current prices) for the        Logarithm(1+GDP2000 )
                                                                                                                                           velopment Centre
                                      year.
