                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THREE MYTHS ABOUT FEDERAL REGULATION

                                    Patrick A. McLaughlin
                                      Casey B. Mulligan

                                      Working Paper 27233
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27233


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We appreciate insights from, discussions with, and reports by the White House Council of
Economic Advisers. Blake Hoarty and Hayden Warlick provided valuable research assistance.
We also thank Christina Behe and Nita Ghei for providing useful feedback on an early draft. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Patrick A. McLaughlin and Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Three Myths about Federal Regulation
Patrick A. McLaughlin and Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 27233
May 2020
JEL No. K23,L51,Q58

                                         ABSTRACT

Despite evidence to the contrary, three common myths persist about federal regulations. The first
myth is that many regulations concern the environment, but in fact only a small minority of
regulations are environmental. The second myth is that most regulations contain quantitative
estimates of costs or benefits. However, these quantitative estimates appear rarely in published
rules, contradicting the impression given by executive orders and Office of Management and
Budget guidance, which require cost-benefit analysis (CBA) and clearly articulate sound
economic principles for conducting CBA. Environmental rules have relatively higher-quality
CBAs, at least by the low standards of other federal rules. The third myth, which is particularly
relevant to the historic regulations promulgated during the COVID-19 pandemic, is the
misperception that regulatory costs are primarily clerical, rather than opportunity or resource
costs. If technocrats have triumphed in the regulatory arena, their victory has not been earned by
the merits of their analysis.


Patrick A. McLaughlin
Mercatus Center at
George Mason University
3434 Washington Blvd
Arlington, VA 22201
pmclaughlin@mercatus.gmu.edu

Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27233
Regulation is one of the hardest concepts to grasp in the world of policy, largely because
its vast breadth and depth defy comprehension. Regulatory experts have not settled on a
single way to quantify the body of regulations on the books at any given point in time.
Nonetheless, as of January 3, 2020, the Code of Federal Regulations contains over 103
million words of rules promulgated by more than 100 agencies, which would take a full-
time worker reading at 250 words per minute more than 3 years to read.1
         Federal regulation is broadly misunderstood, even by the "regulatory czars" who
have oversight. The misunderstandings can be summarized as three mutually reinforcing
myths:
    1) The first myth is about the composition of the flow of regulation (and
         deregulation)--that regulations address mostly environmental concerns. We find
         instead that only a small fraction of regulation is environmental. Economic and
         social regulations are far more common. Our data suggest that the costs of health
         regulation have exceeded the costs of environmental regulation over the past couple
         of decades, and this observation does not even begin to count the costs of
         regulations in 2020 intended to combat the coronavirus pandemic.
    2) The second myth is that regulators offer reasonable justifications and quantitative
         evidence for regulations. Despite executive orders and Office of Management and
         Budget (OMB) guidance requiring cost-benefit analysis (CBA) of new regulations,
         the typical justifications and cost assessments of nonenvironmental regulations are
         seriously lacking.



1
  The exact number of regulatory agencies is difficult to pin down. The Sourcebook of United
States Executive Agencies offers estimates ranging from 118 to more than 600: "For example,
FOIA.gov lists 118 separate executive agencies that comply with the Freedom of Information Act
requirements imposed on every federal agency. This appears to be on the conservative end of the
range of possible agency definitions. The United States Government Manual lists 305 unique or
subcomponent units as agencies. An even more inclusive listing comes from USA.gov, which
lists over 600 government departments and agencies." Jennifer L. Selin and David E. Lewis,
Sourcebook of United States Executive Agencies, 2nd ed. (Washington, DC: Administrative
Conference of the United States, 2018), 12.
                                                                                              1
    3) The third myth is about the nature of the costs imposed by regulations on
       households and businesses--that the bulk of the costs are clerical. Although many
       regulations create nontrivial paperwork and clerical costs, the vast majority of
       regulation costs are economic distortions.
       There may also be myths about the benefits of regulation. However, we expect that
agencies and Congress are more aware of these benefits because something motivated the
regulators to promulgate the regulations in the first place. The costs of regulation are less
proximate to the regulators themselves. We leave comprehensive analysis of benefits for
future research. Readers may also be interested in the net benefit calculations prepared by
the Council of Economic Advisers (CEA), which quantify a wide range of regulatory
benefits, including "consumer data privacy, environmental protection, fuel savings, and
reductions in uncompensated healthcare."2




RegulatoryBackground

       The constantly changing alphabet soup of federal agencies leaves even experts
confused about how many agencies exist and which ones issue regulations. A good
working definition of a regulation, which we take to be a government intervention that
requires or prohibits some action or activity, can help understand regulations' origins.
Under that definition, federal regulations originate in all three branches of government, as
we explain in this section.

Congress

       Congress can write and pass bills that, if signed into law by the president or passed
over a veto, all Americans must obey. In writing laws, Congress can delegate authority to
the executive branch, which includes executive agencies whose heads sit on the president's
cabinet as well as independent agencies such as the Federal Communications Commission
or the Federal Reserve System. The delegation of lawmaking authority can be explicit, as


2
 Council of Economic Advisers, The Economic Effects of Federal Deregulation since
January 2017: An Interim Report, June 2019; White House, Economic Report of the
President Together with the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers,
February 2020, 134.
                                                                                           2
with the House Medicare for All bills directing that "the Secretary [of Health and Human
Services] shall pay, from amounts made available for capital expenditures . . . such sums
determined appropriate by the Secretary to providers." 3 Congress can also delegate
implicitly by writing its bills with vague terms that executive branch agencies or federal
courts must further interpret in order to make them operational. Take the 1963 Clean Air
Act, which, as subsequently amended by Congress, requires the EPA to establish standards
"applicable to the emission of any air pollutant" from motor vehicles.4 The act itself does
not say whether the greenhouse gases (such as carbon dioxide) causing climate change are
an "air pollutant." The EPA ultimately decided that they are. The Supreme Court affirmed
the EPA's decision when it concluded that "greenhouse gases fit well within the Clean Air
Act's capacious definition of `air pollutant.'"5


FederalAgencies

        Most regulations are created when regulatory agencies publish final rules, which
explain changes to the text of existing regulations.6 As such, final rules can be conceived
of as regulatory "flows." New rules are published, by both executive agencies and
independent agencies, in the Federal Register and indicate the parts of the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) to be changed. Rules can add text to the CFR, revise it, or remove it.7
The CFR is therefore a stock of regulation.8 As published in the Federal Register, new
rules also include agency motivation, analysis of budgetary and economic impact, and
summary of public comments that are not part of the CFR.




3
  Medicare for All Act of 2019, H.R. 1384, 116th Cong. (2019).
4
  Clean Air Act of 1963, 42 U.S.C. § 7521(a)(1) (2013).
5
  Massachusetts v. EPA, 549 U.S. 497, 532 (2007).
6
  Most agencies are considered part of the executive branch, although a handful of independent
agencies defy such simple classification. Nonetheless, all agencies--executive or independent--
create regulations in the same way, as prescribed by the Administrative Procedure Act.
7
  Examples of these are 76 Fed. Reg. 26547 (showing additions and revisions to the text of the
CFR) and 82 Fed. Reg. 29237 (removing regulations that were invalidated by Congress and the
president). Adding text to the CFR is not necessarily the same as restricting the choices of
households or businesses. Agency guidance documents can also be considered flows of
regulation, although they are not part of the CFR.
8
  Sections of the CFR refer back to the pages of the Federal Register that created or modified
their text.
                                                                                                  3
Judiciary

       Federal regulation sometimes originates in federal courts on a case-by-case basis,
as with some regulation of competition, without rules or guidance. Case-specific
regulations can become a permanent part of the regulatory landscape, especially if they are
affirmed by federal courts.9

DataontheStocksandFlowsofRegulations

       To the extent that the federal government provides summary measures of the flow
of regulation, these summary measures cover only the rules promulgated by the executive
agencies. That is, they exclude guidance documents published by any agency, rules
published by independent agencies, and statutes or court decisions that are not reflected in
agency rulemaking. And the information produced by executive agencies from that subset
of regulatory actions is fairly narrow--for example, most new rules are not accompanied
by quantitative estimates of benefits and costs.
       Recent years have witnessed the advent of independent academic research projects
that attempt to fill the data gap about regulation. The most prominent of these is the
RegData Project. Launched in 2012 with a working paper by Omar Al-Ubaydli and Patrick
A. McLaughlin, RegData is both a methodology and a database. The RegData methodology
entails using text analysis and machine-learning algorithms to parse and quantify the CFR.
Several dimensions, or features, of federal regulations have been quantified over the course
of the ongoing RegData Project, including the quantity of regulatory restrictions contained
in regulations and the relevance of those restrictions to the various sectors and industries
that make up the US economy. The resulting data have been made freely available to the
public at QuantGov.org.10
       The two primary metrics in the RegData database are restrictions and industry
relevance. Restrictions is a cardinal proxy of the number of regulatory restrictions
contained in regulatory text, devised by counting select words and phrases, such as shall


9
  For example, Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States set the precedent for subsequent
antitrust regulation. 221 U.S. 1, 31 S. Ct. 502 (1911).
10
   Patrick A. McLaughlin and Oliver Sherouse, RegData US 3.1 Annual (dataset), QuantGov,
Mercatus Center at George Mason University, Arlington, VA, 2018, https://quantgov.org/regdata-
us/.
                                                                                             4
or must, that are typically used in legal language to create binding obligations or
prohibitions. The database also includes a secondary measure of volume--the total word
counts--as an alternative measure of the volume of regulation over time.
        The second key variable in RegData is industry relevance, representing estimates
of the relevance of the text of a regulation to the different sectors and industries in the
economy. RegData utilizes the industry definitions in the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS), which categorizes all economic activity into different
industries. RegData uses machine-learning algorithms to assess the probability that a unit
of regulatory text targets a specific NAICS industry. This assessment requires two steps.
First, the program "learns" what words, phrases, and other features can best identify when
a unit of text is relevant to a specific industry by analyzing our compilation of training
documents. Training documents are documents that are known to be relevant to one or
more explicitly named industries. Over the course of the RegData project, we have gathered
tens of thousands of training documents from publications in the Federal Register that
name the NAICS codes affected by rulemakings.
        Second, some simple calculations permit the combination of restrictions and
industry relevance into a single variable, industry restrictions, which is an estimate of the
number of restrictions that are relevant to a particular industry or set of industries in one or
more regulations. 11 The advent of an industry-specific metric of regulation that is
comprehensive (i.e., inclusive of all federal regulations that are in effect in each year),
replicable, and transparent has created paths to performing economic research on
regulation in ways that were previously infeasible. All of these metrics--restrictions,
industry relevance, and industry restrictions--can be cross-tabulated with regulatory
agency because RegData encodes the CFR's attribution (in its various tables of contents)
of each part of the CFR with an agency.12
        Other approaches have sampled the flow of regulations. These include Jerry Ellig's
"regulatory report cards" and analysis by the Competitive Enterprise Institute's Clyde


11
   For further discussion and examples, see Omar Al-Ubaydli and Patrick A. McLaughlin,
"RegData: A Numerical Database on Industry-Specific Regulations for All United States
Industries and Federal Regulations, 1997­2012," Regulation & Governance 11, no. 1 (2017):
109­23.
12
   Occasionally agencies engage in joint rulemaking, in which case each restrictive word in the
shared CFR part would count toward each agency. For the purposes of aggregating across
agencies, the restrictive word would count only once.
                                                                                                  5
Wayne Crews.13 The CEA sampled 21 regulatory and deregulatory actions from five broad
categories based on indicators of importance to the public.14 The Federal regulatory budget
itself, which dates back to fiscal year 2017, is a fiscal year sample of rules from executive
agencies that includes rule-specific cost estimates.15




Myth#1:MostRegulationisEnvironmental


EstimatesfromRegDataandtheFederalRegister

        The first myth about regulation is that most regulation is environmental. This
commonly repeated myth inaccurately equates deregulation with polluted air and water. In
fact, only 14 percent of all economically significant federal rules issued between 2000 and
2016 came from the three major environmental agencies: the EPA, the Department of




13
   Jerry Ellig, "Evaluating the Quality and Use of Regulatory Impact Analysis: The Mercatus
Center's Regulatory Report Card, 2008­2013" (Mercatus Working Paper, Mercatus Center at
George Mason University, Arlington, VA, July 2016); Clyde Wayne Crews, "Less Than 1
Percent of Federal Regulations Get Cost-Benefit Analysis," Competitive Enterprise Institute,
November 17, 2015, https://cei.org/blog/less-1-percent-federal-regulations-get-cost-benefit-
analysis.
14
   Council of Economic Advisers, The Economic Effects of Federal Deregulation since January
2017; White House, Economic Report of the President Together with the Annual Report of the
Council of Economic Advisers, February 2020. The CEA's categories are (1) statutes, (2) the 16
federal rules or guidance overturned under the Congressional Review Act (CRA) since January
2017, (3) rules in the fiscal year 2018 and 2019 regulatory budgets, (4) agency guidance
documents, and (5) rulemaking by independent agencies. Solely because it selected from the
years 2017­2019 according to public attention, the CEA's sample comprises entirely deregulatory
actions; the regulatory actions in the regulatory budget received few public comments.
15
   "Economically significant" regulations are those that have costs or other economic effects that
are estimated to exceed $100 million annually or that meet other criteria specified in Executive
Order 12866, which governs regulatory analysis and review for executive branch agencies.
Economically significant rules are part of the regulatory budget, unless they are "transfer rules,"
which "cause only income transfers between taxpayers and program beneficiaries." Office of
Management and Budget, "Guidance Implementing Executive Order 13771, Titled `Reducing
Regulation and Controlling Regulatory Costs'" (M-17-21, Executive Office of the President,
Washington, DC, April 5, 2017), 6. The budget also includes a number of other substantive,
nonsignificant rules selected by the regulating agency. We suspect that many of those rules were
selected for regulatory budgeting with the intention of increasing the agency count of
deregulatory actions.
                                                                                                 6
Interior (DOI), and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).16 These results are shown
in the top panel of table 1.


Table 1. Three Methods of Quantifying New Regulation, 2000­2016

                   Quantification Method                            Count or amount       Share
     Economically significant rules ("count or amount"
     = number of rules)
       All executive agencies                                                    926       1.00
       HHS                                                                       296       0.32
       Nonenvironmental                                                          796       0.86
       Environmental                                                             130       0.14
     RegData: restrictive words ("count or amount" = number of restrictive words in thousands)
       All agencies                                                              214       1.00
       HHS                                                                         18      0.08
       Nonenvironmental                                                          141       0.66
       Environmental                                                               72      0.34
     CEA sample of 21 regs later removed ("count or amount" = $ billions)
       All agencies                                                              276       1.00
       HHS (4)                                                                     91      0.33
       Nonenvironmental (18)                                                     219       0.79
       Environmental (3)                                                           57      0.21

Note: Ninety-eight percent of the "count or amount" of environmental regulations in the
CEA sample is from a single rule.

          The small share of environmental regulation is also confirmed by RegData
statistics, which also include the rules that are not designated as economically significant.
Table 1 shows how essentially two-thirds of the 2000­2016 increase in restrictive words
(141,000 out of 214,000) were made by agencies with primarily nonenvironmental
missions. Although not shown in the table, the stock of restrictive words as of 2017 is also
illustrative: it was about 1.1 million overall and about 238,000 for the environmental
agencies. In other words, 79 percent of the stock of regulation is nonenvironmental.
          The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is the single largest
promulgator of economically significant regulations between 2000 and 2016, outpacing


16
  This rule count, combined by the George Washington University Regulatory Studies Center, is
for executive agencies only. The NRC is the only significant independent agency with an
environmental mission.
                                                                                            7
EPA by more than three to one. While contributing many words, HHS contributes less to
the increase in restrictive words. A potential reason for its large contribution to
economically significant rules may be the large size of HHS (its annual budget is more than
$1 trillion), given that one of the thresholds for economic significance is an absolute dollar
amount. From this perspective, the number of rules may be a better indicator for comparing
regulatory costs across agencies than the number of restrictive words. A second potential
reason is that many important HHS rules have a duration of only one year, and therefore it
issues multiple rules on the same topic, with new rules replacing old (hence, comparatively
little increase the CFR stock of restrictive words). For the purposes of interagency
comparisons, perhaps this results in exaggerating the importance of HHS. On the other
hand, the fact that HHS does rulemaking so frequently may indicate a high level of detail
and large scope with which it regulates.
       Future interagency regulatory comparisons will include the period of the COVID-
19 pandemic, during which time HHS regulators were considering everything from rules
for employers to approvals of new drugs and therapies. We expect that the updated
comparisons will further debunk the first myth by showing that the economic impact of
new federal health regulation far exceeds that of new environmental regulation.



ExamplesSelectedontheBasisofPublicAttention

       Not all rules are equally important. Nor is each occurrence of "shall" or "must" in
the CFR equally important. Ideally, we could use quantitative estimates of importance
provided by the regulating agencies, but, as discussed in connection with the second myth,
quantitative estimates are often absent, or they frequently obscure an economically
important regulation. Instead we use the sample of 21 post-2016 deregulations selected by
the CEA on the basis of attention from the public,17 as measured by number of comments
submitted during the comment period of rulemaking and attention from Congress. These
deregulations removed 21 regulations that were put in place between 2000 and 2016, so
what the CEA reports as cost savings from deregulation can be taken as an estimate of the


17
  Council of Economic Advisers, The Economic Effects of Federal Deregulation since January
2017; White House, Economic Report of the President Together with the Annual Report of the
Council of Economic Advisers, February 2020.
                                                                                             8
costs created by their precursor regulations. The CEA sample is also interesting because,
as a sample of "only" 21, it facilitates a discussion of specific regulations while at the same
time capturing an important part of the totality of regulation.
        For example, the fiscal year 2018 regulatory budget had more than 200 rules from
the executive agencies, which are already selected on the basis of economic importance.
Among the 10 rules from executive agencies with at least 100 comments, only one was
environmental. The quantity of comments received on that one rule, known as the "Waste
Prevention Rule" or "Venting and Flaring Rule," was wildly disproportionate with its costs
and benefits. Because the regulation applies only to oil and gas operations on federal and
tribal lands, whereas at least 80 percent of oil and gas operations are on private lands, the
annualized cost savings from the deregulation was only about $0.3 billion as compared to
the CEA's estimate of an average of $4 billion for the nine nonenvironmental rules. In
other words, less than 1 percent of the cost savings from deregulation in that year's budget
came from environmental deregulation.
        To be more concrete, it helps to reflect on some of the deregulations that have
received public attention. A 2018 rule letting consumers keep their short-term health
insurance plans (pejoratively known as "junk" plans by those who disapprove of the plan
designs) is an economic deregulation and does not pollute air or water. No pollution is
created by ending a foreign drug company's monopoly on the sales of generic prescription
drugs, as the FDA did in 2017 and 2018 by improving the process of approving generic
drugs. 18 The environment is not dirtier because university students are considered
customers of the university rather than employees, as the National Labor Relations Board
designated during the Obama administration. Removing regulatory barriers from the
franchise way of doing business, as the Department of Labor and the National Labor
Relations Board recently did, does not pollute air or water. All of these examples involve
regulatory costs in the billions of dollars per year.19
        The vehicle emissions rule will result in a large environmental share of the


18
   Council of Economic Advisers, The Administration's FDA Reforms and Reduced
Biopharmaceutical Drug Prices, October 2018.
19
   Each of these examples is discussed in more detail in the regulatory chapters of the 2019 and
2020 Economic Reports of the President. White House, Economic Report of the President
Together with the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers, March 2019; White
House, Economic Report of the President Together with the Annual Report of the Council of
Economic Advisers, February 2020.
                                                                                                   9
regulatory budget for fiscal year 2020, although it is an exception that proves the rule.
Estimates of the environmental costs of vehicle emissions from the Trump and the Obama
administrations are in comparatively close agreement. The overwhelming difference
between them is their assessments of the nonenvironmental economic costs. Figure 1 shows
the components of benefits and costs as estimated by both administrations. They include
private fuel savings, vehicle maintenance, and technology costs, to name a few. By both
estimates, the environmental benefits are just a tiny sliver. The substantive disagreement is
whether consumers can be trusted to assess the effect of vehicle choice on their families'
fuel budgets. The Obama administration assumed that enough consumers lacked this skill
that federal regulations were needed to protect them from their suboptimal vehicle choices.




Figure 1. Environmental Benefits are Dwarfed in the Cost-Benefit Analysis of
Emissions Rules




Note: CBAs from 2016 and 2018 are from the Obama and Trump administrations, respectively. A comparison
of these datasets was originally made by Antonio M. Bento et al., "Flawed Analyses of US Auto Fuel
Economy Standards," Science 362, no. 6419 (2018): 1119­21. GHG = greenhouse gas.
Sources: EPA, National Highway Transit Safety Administration, and California Air Resources Board, Draft
Technical Assessment Report: Midterm Evaluation of Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhous Gas Emission
Standards and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards for Model Years 2022­2025, July 2016, table

                                                                                                    10
12.82; The Safer Affordable Fuel-Efficient (SAFE) Vehicles Rule for Model Years 2021­2026 Passenger
Cars and Light Trucks, 83 Fed. Reg. 42986, table VII-51 (proposed August 24, 2018) (to be codified at 49
C.F.R. pts. 523, 531, 533, 536, and 537, and at 40 C.F.R. pts. 85 and 86).




         The bottom panel of table 1 accumulates the CEA's results. The aggregate annual
regulatory costs of the 21 selected regulations implemented in the 2000­2016 period are
estimated to be $276 billion. Seventy-nine percent of these costs are nonenvironmental. In
contrast, HHS regulations alone account for a third of the regulatory costs. This interagency
distribution of regulatory costs is remarkably similar to the distribution obtained merely by
counting economically significant rules (top panel of table 1).


Myth#2:RegulationIsSmartandEvidenceBased

         The second myth is that federal regulation is smart and evidence based. Professor
and former federal regulatory czar Cass Sunstein declared a "triumph of the technocrats"
in a "cost-benefit revolution [that] requires regulators to demonstrate a genuine need for
government action . . . weaken[ing] the hold of interest groups, popular opinion,
anecdotes, and intuitions." 20 Based on his assessment that federal regulators capably
balance costs and benefits, Sunstein concludes that any additional constraints on regulators,
such as a regulatory budget, "are hard to defend."21 The 2012 Economic Report of the
President describes a regulatory process that purportedly includes "careful analysis of costs
and benefits, both before and after regulatory action, including an informed public
discussion."22
         Good analysis is certainly an important input to smart regulation.23 As regulatory
expert Jerry Ellig puts it, "[Good] regulation . . . means regulation that solves a significant


20
     Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit Revolution (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2018), xi,
3.
21
 Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit Revolution, 20.
22
 White House, Economic Report of the President Together with the Annual Report of the
Council of Economic Advisers, February 2012.
23
  Indeed, good analysis is such a vital component to smart regulation that OMB
published a circular describing how a good economic analysis of a proposed regulation
should be executed. See Office of Management and Budget, Circular A-4, September 17,
2003.
                                                                                      11
problem at a reasonable cost. To know whether a regulation solves a significant problem
at a reasonable cost, the regulatory agency needs to know whether a significant problem
exists, the root cause of the problem, alternative solutions that address the root cause, the
effectiveness of each alternative in solving the problem, the benefits to society of each
alternative, and the costs to society of each alternative. This is the information that a
complete regulatory impact analysis (RIA) provides."24
       Unfortunately, the actual record of agency analysis of nonenvironmental
regulations is quite the opposite. Clyde Wayne Crews's study of the 53,838 federal rules
finalized between 2001 and 2014 finds that only 246 of them (less than one percent)
quantified regulatory costs. Only 160 quantified benefits. A more recent analysis found
that between 2007 and 2016, only 137 of the 36,255 final rules (0.4 percent) had dollar
estimates for both benefits and costs.25 Important regulations are often classified (whether
strategically or by accident, we cannot say) as not "economically significant" and thereby
exempt from analysis requirements. Another exemption is obtained by issuing "guidance"
rather than formal rulemaking, although the Trump administration now requires guidance
to be reviewed together with proposed rules.
       More than 20 major rules per year are "transfer rules" and almost by definition
underestimate costs by orders of magnitude, despite the fact that a more accurate estimate
of costs could be obtained by "a simple multiplication operation." 26 By definition, a
transfer rule asserts its primary effect to be transferring a significant amount of income
from one party to another rather than creating a significant aggregate cost. However, the
assertion is questionable because transfers often "induce moral hazard or other inefficient
behavior,"27 especially when the transfer is to or from federal taxpayers, which is typical
of federal transfer rules. OMB Circular A-94 has long guided agencies on how to quantify
the marginal excess burden of transfers to and from federal taxpayers, but agencies have
not adhered to the guidance. More recently, OMB sought public comment on more sternly
requiring agencies to use multiplication to estimate the economic distortions created by



24
   Ellig, "Evaluating the Quality and Use of Regulatory Impact Analysis," 1.
25
   James Broughel, "More Information Needed on the Benefits and Costs of Regulations," The
Bridge, August 22, 2018.
26
   OMB, "Marginal Excess Tax Burden as a Potential Cost under EO 13771," Regulations.gov,
December 6, 2019, https://www.regulations.gov/document?D=OMB-2017-0002-0055.
27
   OMB, "Guidance Implementing Executive Order 13771," 6.
                                                                                             12
transfers.28
        The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) under Tom Wheeler (2013­17)
is an example of an agency that promulgated economically important regulations such as
privacy mandates and "net neutrality" price regulations on business-to-business
transactions without professional cost-benefit analysis. As a former publisher of the Wall
Street Journal put it, "The White House and FCC acted on pure ideology. Cost-benefit
analysis? What's that?"29 The FCC's chief economist in 2014 described his agency's rules
as "an economics-free zone" in which "a fair amount of the economics was wrong,
unsupported, or irrelevant."30 The CEA estimates that just two of the rules issued by the
FCC in 2015 and 2016 had annual regulatory costs in the tens of billions of dollars.31



RegulatoryCostsareUnderestimatedbyOrdersofMagnitude

        An important example of underestimating regulatory costs was mentioned above:
the 2016 prohibition of "junk" insurance plans. No cost was assessed for that rule because
the rule was designated as not economically significant, but this designation is not
supposed to be used unless there is no material adverse effect on any sector of the economy.
It is absurd to deny any material adverse effect from a prohibition of a product that 2 million
people would be purchasing (as estimated by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget
Office).32 The CEA later estimated that the annual cost of this regulation was $13 billion,
which is 130 times the monetary threshold for economic significance.
        The FDA's regulation of generic prescription drugs is another example. It had such
a burdensome approval process for generic manufacturers that sometimes only one
company was making a generic. A few lucky or well-connected companies were able to


28
   OMB, "Marginal Excess Tax Burden as a Potential Cost under EO 13771."
29
   L. Gordon Crovitz, "`Economics-Free' Obamanet," Wall Street Journal, January 31, 2016.
30
   Crovitz, "`Economics-Free' Obamanet."
31
   White House, Economic Report of the President Together with the Annual Report of the
Council of Economic Advisers, February 2020. It is worth noting that the FCC recently created an
Office of Economics and Analytics to provide "analytical and quantitative support for
rulemakings," among other things. The new office opened in December 2018, as described in
Federal Communications Commission, "FCC Opens Office of Economics and Analytics," news
release, December 11, 2018, https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/DOC-355488A1.pdf.
32
   Congressional Budget Office, Federal Subsidies for Health Insurance Coverage for People
under Age 65: 2018 to 2028, May 2018.
                                                                                             13
sell a drug they did not invent at a price about as high as when the inventor had the
monopoly. When the FDA put those procedures in place, no cost was assessed because
they were promulgated as a "guidance" document exempt from the cost-assessment
requirement. The CEA estimated that these barriers to entry were costing consumers tens
of billions of dollars per year.33
        As a third example, we note how the FDA has at times minimized or ignored the
actual effects of its policies to avoid acknowledging them as regulatory costs. The FDA
asserts that it intends its prescription-opioid policies (among others) to "actually result in
a decrease in misuse and abuse, and their consequences, addiction, overdose and death, in
the community."34 The actual result, however, involves illicit markets, yet the FDA refuses
to recognize that any illicit activity results from its policies, even retrospectively. One
doctor stated at an FDA conference to evaluate the impact of the agency's opioid
"reformulation" policy, "As FDA we don't have much control over Mexican cartels and
the availability of low-cost heroin."35 Another, speaking on the same topic, said, "Don't
try to measure things you can't control."36 Meanwhile, studies suggest that thousands of
people overdose on heroin and fentanyl (these are illicitly manufactured opioids) as a result
of the FDA's prescription policies that cause consumers to switch away from prescriptions
and toward the illicitly manufactured opioids.37 We are not saying that the FDA should

33
   As further proof of the economic significance of the generic-drug entry barriers, take Teva
Pharmaceutical, an Israeli company known as the world's foremost producer of generic drugs,
with many of them destined for US consumers. Teva's stock crashed in the summer of 2017,
shortly after the FDA began deregulating. The CEO said that Teva would henceforth be less
profitable owing to "greater competition as a result of an increase in generic drug approvals by
the U.S. FDA." Yitzhak Peterburg, quoted in Michael Sheetz, "Teva Stock Plummets 18% after
Rough Quarter in US Generic Drug Market," CNBC, August 3, 2017.
34
   FDA, "NDA 22-272 OxyContin Division Director Summary Review for Regulatory Action,"
December 30, 2009, 10 (emphasis added),
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/nda/2010/022272s000MedR.pdf.
35
   FDA, "Data and Methods for Evaluating the Impact of Opioid Formulations with Properties
Designed to Deter Abuse in the Postmarket Setting: A Scientific Discussion of Present and Future
Capabilities," Docket No. FDA-2017-N-2903, July 11, 2017, 182,
https://www.fda.gov/media/107603/download.
36
   FDA, "Data and Methods for Evaluating the Impact of Opioid Formulations," 184.
37
   Abby Alpert, David Powell, and Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, "Supply-Side Drug Policy in the
Presence of Substitutes: Evidence from the Introduction of Abuse-Deterrent Opioids," American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10, no. 4 (2018): 1­35; William N. Evans, Ethan M. J.
Lieber, and Patrick Power, "How the Reformulation of OxyContin Ignited the Heroin Epidemic,"
Review of Economics and Statistics 101, no. 1 (2019): 1­15; and Casey B. Mulligan, "Prices and
Federal Policies in Opioid Markets" (NBER Working Paper No. 26812, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, February 2020a).
                                                                                             14
lightly regulate prescriptions merely to entice consumers away from heroin, but rather that
a cost-benefit analysis should acknowledge all important costs--medical and
nonmedical--that result from a regulatory action. As the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine put it, the FDA should "consider the potential effects of these
interventions on illicit markets . . . and take appropriate steps to mitigate those effects."38
        A fourth example is the "rebate" rule proposed by the Trump administration. 39
"Rebates" are checks written by drug companies to health insurance plans as part of the
competition for plan business and would have been prohibited in the Medicare segment of
the prescription drug industry. No market failure was cited, even though OMB Circular A-
4 specifies that "each agency shall identify . . . the failures of private markets or public
institutions that warrant new agency action." 40 It adds that "a particularly demanding
burden of proof is required to demonstrate the need for . . . price controls."41 Although
HHS intended the rule to "blow up the way the industry does business"42 and advertised it
as "the most significant change in how Americans' drugs are priced at the pharmacy
counter, ever," 43 it only quantified clerical costs. HHS merely estimated the time it would
take for businesspeople to read the rebate rule, to read their own contracts to check for
compliance, and perhaps to fill out a form. The cost of the rule was calculated as time spent
reading and performing other clerical activities multiplied by the hourly wage rate, which
proved to be a mere 0.03 percent of the revenue of the industry segment being regulated.
There is nothing smart or evidence based about a cost estimate that ignores how prohibiting


38
   Richard J. Bonnie, Morgan A. Ford, and Jonathan K. Phillips, eds., Pain Management and the
Opioid Epidemic: Balancing Societal and Individual Benefits and Risks of Prescription Opioid
Use (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2017), 6.
39
   Department of Health and Human Services, Fraud and Abuse; Removal of Safe Harbor
Protection for Rebates Involving Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Creation of New Safe Harbor
Protection for Certain Point-of-Sale Reductions in Price on Prescription Pharmaceuticals and
Certain Pharmacy Benefit Manager Service Fees, 84 Fed. Reg. 2340 (February 6, 2019). The rule
has now been withdrawn for some of the reasons noted in this paper.
40
   OMB, Circular A-4, 4. Circular A-4 is OMB's "guidance to Federal agencies on the
development of regulatory analysis" (p. 1).
41
   OMB, Circular A-4, 6.
42
   Casey B. Mulligan, You're Hired!: Untold Successes and Failures of a Populist President
(Washington, DC: Republic Book Publishers, forthcoming 2020c).
43
   Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar, quoted in HHS, "Trump
Administration Proposes to Lower Drug Costs by Targeting Backdoor Rebates and Encouraging
Direct Discounts to Patients," news release, January 31, 2019,
https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2019/01/31/trump-administration-proposes-to-lower-drug-costs-
by-targeting-backdoor-rebates-and-encouraging-direct-discounts-to-patients.html.
                                                                                             15
a mechanism of competition (the rebates) might affect competition in the market or might
create any other cost beyond paperwork.
        In some instances, OMB specifically exempts an agency from estimating costs and
benefits of its rules. Regulations issued by the Drug Enforcement Administration in support
of the war on drugs are in this category.44 We are not aware of estimates of the prevalence
of this type of exemption.



MarketFailuresandRegulatoryAlternativesAreNotCited



        The fact that the vast majority of new rules is implemented without quantitative
estimates of benefits or costs is merely the tip of the iceberg. Another issue is that the
quality of analysis itself (for those rules that have an analysis) rarely lives up to the
standards set by the government itself.45 While estimates of costs and benefits are certainly
important elements of a regulatory impact analysis (RIA), several other parts of an RIA are
arguably even more important. For example, before even considering benefits and costs,
an RIA should assess whether a significant problem exists in the first place and evaluate
alternative approaches to solving the problem. Unfortunately, these aspects of RIAs are too
often ignored, as shown in the Mercatus Center at George Mason University's Regulatory
Report Card project. This project assessed the quality of RIAs accompanying 130
economically significant prescriptive regulations proposed between 2008 and 2013.46 Jerry


44
  For example, see Schedules of Controlled Substances: Placement of FUB-AMB in Schedule 1,
84 Fed. Reg. 58090, 58094 (October 30, 2019).
45
   See Art Fraas and Randall Lutter, "The Challenges of Improving the Economic Analysis of Pending
Regulations: The Experience of OMB Circular A-4," Annual Review of Resource Economics 3, no. 1
(2011): 71­85; Jamie Belcore and Jerry Ellig, "Homeland Security and Regulatory Analysis: Are We Safe
Yet?," Rutgers Law Journal 40, no. 1 (2008): 1­96; Robert W. Hahn et al., "Assessing Regulatory Impact
Analyses: The Failure of Agencies to Comply with Executive Order 12,866," Harvard Journal of Law and
Public Policy 23, no. 3 (2001): 859­71; Robert W. Hahn and Patrick Dudley, "How Well Does the
Government Do Cost­Benefit Analysis?," Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 1, no. 2 (2007):
192­211; Robert W. Hahn and Robert Litan, "Counting Regulatory Benefits and Costs: Lessons for the
U.S. and Europe," Journal of International Economic Law 8, no. 2 (2005): 473­508; Robert W. Hahn,
Randall W. Lutter, and W. Kip Viscusi, Do Federal Regulations Reduce Mortality? (Washington, DC:
AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies, 2000); Government Accountability Office, Regulatory
Reform: Agencies Could Improve Development, Documentation, and Clarity of Regulatory Economic
Analyses, May 1998; Government Accountability Office, Air Pollution: Information Contained in EPA's
Regulatory Impact Analyses Can Be Made Clearer, April 1997.
46
   Prescriptive regulations mandate or prohibit activities. See Jerry Ellig and Patrick A. McLaughlin, "The
Quality and Use of Regulatory Impact Analysis in 2008," Risk Analysis 32, no. 5 (2012): 855­80.
                                                                                                        16
Ellig, the lead scholar on this project, reports that 48 percent of these regulations were
accompanied by "no significant evidence demonstrating the existence, size, or cause of the
problem to be solved," and just 22 percent of the regulations were accompanied by
"reasonably thorough evidence showing that a given regulation would likely achieve the
desired outcome(s)."47
        Even worse, the low quality of analysis is often reflected in poor decision-making
in the crafting of the rules that the analyses ostensibly inform. Such poor craftsmanship
can occur when an analysis fails to provide evidence that a regulation will solve an actual
problem or when it lacks specificity as to the principal cause of a problem.48 In 2011, for
example, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) adopted a regulation that
excludes the value of an investor's primary residence when determining whether the
individual meets the $1 million net worth requirement to be considered an "accredited
investor" who can purchase securities that are not registered with the SEC. The agency also
could have considered whether a net worth test is sufficient to protect investors from
making bad investment decisions, or whether a financial sophistication test could achieve
that objective more effectively.49 The SEC conducted no such analyses, so it is not clear
whether the regulation solves an actual problem or does so in the most effective way.
        There are also regulations that fail to target the principal cause of the problem. In
2015, the FDA finalized a regulation requiring firms that produce, process, pack, or handle
animal food to have processes and procedures in place to ensure that animal food is as safe
as human food. 50 The preliminary RIA, conducted while the FDA was developing the
regulation, did not even attempt to estimate the benefits or identify their sources.51 The
final RIA estimated that the regulation would generate $10.1 million to $138.8 million in
benefits annually by protecting humans and pets from contaminated food. The FDA
presented no empirical evidence of benefits for livestock, relying instead on a survey of

47
   Ellig, "Evaluating the Quality and Use of Regulatory Impact Analysis," 21, 23.
48
   See Patrick A. McLaughlin, Jerry Ellig, and Michael Wilt, "Comprehensive Regulatory
Reform" (Mercatus Policy Primer, Mercatus Center at George Mason University, Arlington, VA,
2017).
49
   Jerry Ellig and Hester Peirce, "SEC Regulatory Analysis: A Long Way to Go and a Short Time
to Get There," Brooklyn Journal of Corporate, Financial & Commercial Law 8, no. 2 (2014):
410­11.
50
   FDA, Current Good Manufacturing Practice and Hazard Analysis and Risk-Based Preventive Controls
for Food for Animals, 80 Fed. Reg. 56170 (September 15, 2015).
51
   Jerry Ellig and Richard Williams, "FDA's Animal Food Regulation Is for the Birds," Regulation 37, no.
2 (2014): 54­61.
                                                                                                      17
experts who offered their opinions on how effective the rule would be in preventing
contamination of livestock feed. 52 The FDA failed to consider alternative approaches,
especially in light of the scant evidence.
        Environmental regulations are more likely prepared in accordance with the sound
economic principles of Circular A-4 because they have more frequently been the subject
of lawsuits. The first myth that most regulation is environmental thereby helps contribute
to the second myth of smart regulation. Nonenvironmental regulations quantify hardly any
of their costs. Even when they do, they get less attention from the administration because
they are less likely to be the subject of litigation.



PaternalismwithRestrictionsRatherThanAdvice

We previously noted how the primary justification of automobile standards was a
paternalism aimed at saving consumers from themselves rather than an advisory way of
giving them the information they lacked to make their own decisions. Other regulations
treat businesses the same way. In 2009, the Department of Transportation's Federal
Railroad Administration (FRA) also justified a major public safety rule by asserting that
the new regulation would create private business benefits and by including those private
benefits in its RIA. 53 The FRA had been considering requiring railroads to implement
automatic train control systems that would prevent collisions since at least 1986, when the
National Transportation Safety Board recommended that the FRA implement regulatory
standards for a system that would create "positive train separation."54 The FRA considered
doing just that on multiple occasions between 1994 and 2004, but each time it concluded
that the costs would far outweigh the benefits.
        Even though its estimate of net benefits was negative, the FRA's 2004 analysis
changed dramatically from previous versions.55 Beginning with the 2004 analysis, the FRA


52
  FDA, "Current Good Manufacturing Practice, Hazard Analysis and Risk-Based Preventive Controls for
Food for Animals," Final Regulatory Impact Analysis, September 15, 2015, 31­51.
53
   Department of Transportation, Federal Railroad Administration, "Positive Train Control
Systems," Regulatory Impact Analysis, August 3, 2011.
54
   Jerry Ellig and Michael Horney, "Preventing a Regulatory Train Wreck: Mandated Regulation
and the Cautionary Tale of Positive Train Control" (Mercatus Working Paper, Mercatus Center at
George Mason University, Arlington, VA, June 2016), 6.
55
   Ellig and Horney, "Preventing a Regulatory Train Wreck."
                                                                                                  18
included "business benefits" in its estimate of total benefits that the regulation would
create. By contrast, the FRA had issued reports in 1994 and 1999 which mentioned the
possibility that positive train control systems could create cost reductions or other benefits
for railroads and shippers, but it did not estimate the magnitude of these business benefits
or include them in net benefits calculations. The FRA's 2004 analysis claimed that many
of these business benefits would accrue to railroads, which the railroads themselves
disputed. The FRA's analysis gives a few examples of these hypothetical benefits,
including "(1) real-time transmission of locomotive diagnostic information, (2) fuel
savings from pacing of trains to avoid cycles of rapid movement followed by long waits,
(3) more efficient car use due to frequently updated and optimized dispatching, and (4)
avoided investments in track capacity because of more efficient use of existing capacity."56
Similar to the vehicle emissions rule discussed above, the direct benefits from improving
railroad safety only accounted for a very small percentage--about 3 percent--of the total
benefits included in the FRA's analysis. The rest of the benefits came from private benefits
to railroads (about 28 percent), private benefits to shippers (35 to 54 percent, depending on
assumptions), and social benefits (15 to 34 percent).
          The FRA examined positive train control gain following the passage of the Rail
Safety Improvement Act of 2008, in which Congress ordered the FRA to promulgate a
"positive train control" regulation. In the RIA that accompanied the FRA's final positive
train control rule in 2010, private business benefits are not included in the primary analysis,
but they are included in a sensitivity analysis. Without including private benefits, the FRA
estimated that the costs of implementing a positive train control regulation ($9.5 billion to
$13.1 billion over a 20-year period) would far exceed its safety benefits ($440 million to
$674 million). The FRA's sensitivity analysis, however, concludes that the combination of
business benefits and social benefits could lead positive train control to cover its costs in
20­25 years.57




56
     Ellig and Horney, "Preventing a Regulatory Train Wreck," 8.
57
     Ellig and Horney, "Preventing a Regulatory Train Wreck."
                                                                                            19
Myth#3:ThePrimaryBurdenofRegulationIsPaperwork

        The third regulatory myth, reinforced by the other two, is that the main burden of
regulation is paperwork. Encouraged by the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, federal
agencies are comparatively diligent at estimating the clerical work created or saved by their
regulations. The clerical costs seem large in an absolute sense: in 2016, OIRA estimated
that the public spends about 10 billion hours per year filling out federal forms.58 But this
estimate refers to all federal rules, not just the new ones. Having looked at many of the
federal rules introduced since 2009, we clearly see that paperwork burdens are just the tip
of the iceberg in terms of overall costs, but the nonenvironmental regulations rarely include
any estimate of the rest of the iceberg. (The 162-page 2016 "overtime rule" from the
Department of Labor is an unusual but interesting case, with billions of dollars of
paperwork costs, mainly because of a requirement to track work hours for millions of
employees who would have otherwise been salaried.59)
        We can illustrate the size of paperwork costs compared to economic costs with an
example that most people will easily understand ­ state-issued stay-at-home mandates
during the COVID-19 crisis. The paperwork burden associated with these mandates
relatively small for an individual: on average, it would require about 12 minutes for an
adult to read her governor's executive order containing the stay-at-home decree. At a wage
rate of $25 per hour, the wages forgone from reading the order are about $5 per person.
Assuming two people per household need to read the order, the paperwork burden per
household is $10.      In contrast, the economic burden (i.e., the opportunity cost) of
complying with the stay-at-home orders is likely to be well into the $1,000s per household.
Even if it were only $1,000 per household, the paperwork burden would be only 1/100th of
the economic burden.60



58
   OMB, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Information Collection Budget of the
United States Government, 2016.
59
   Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, Defining and Delimiting the Exemptions for
Executive, Administrative, Professional, Outside Sales and Computer Employees, 81 Fed. Reg.
32391 (May 23, 2016).
60
   Mulligan (2020b) estimates that the "shutdown" pandemic economy is lacking opportunities
worth $231 per household per day relative to normal activity. Although most of those
opportunity costs are "voluntary" (not attributable to state mandates), state mandates need only
accelerate the beginning, or delay the end, of the pandemic depression by a total of five days in
order to create a cost of more than $1,000 per household.
                                                                                                    20
        Using the CEA's sample of 18 nonenvironmental regulations,61 we estimate that
the economic costs of regulation are more than 60 times the clerical costs. These economic
costs are, to use the terms of art specified in Circular A-4, "resource costs" and
"opportunity costs" of valuable economic activity that cannot occur because of regulation.
A prohibition of short-term insurance plans might not require much paperwork but
nonetheless could prevent valuable transactions from occurring.
        In the CEA sample, the cross-regulation correlation between economic costs and
paperwork costs is negative. To be clear, the CEA's sample is intentionally selected to
identify economically important regulations. Because the sum of economic costs across all
regulations is dominated by the contribution of the costly regulations, the CEA's sample is
enough to take seriously the conclusion that the overall total of economic costs far exceeds
the overall total of paperwork costs.
        Based on its sample, CEA estimated that, in the average year from 2000 to 2016,
new regulations added costs of 0.2 percent of national income, including emissions
standards.62 For 11 years, that is a cumulative increase of about $3,000 per household. By
comparison, OMB reported that federal paperwork per household in 2015 was about 8.4
hours more than it had been 11 years earlier.63 If those 8.4 hours were worth $50 each, that
would be $421 added to the average household's paperwork costs by 2015. 64 By this
metric, only 12 percent of the increase in the per-household burden of regulatory costs can
be attributed to paperwork, even though the level of paperwork costs is impressive (10
billion hours per year).
        A 2012 final rule by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services mandated that
Medicare cover "benzos," which are prescription tranquilizers such as Valium and

61
   White House, Economic Report of the President Together with the Annual Report of the
Council of Economic Advisers, February 2020.
62
   Treating emissions standards as zero cost, the total added cost is 0.16 percent year, or an 11-
year cumulative cost of $2,400 per household. White House, Economic Report of the President
Together with the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers, February 2020, 131.
63
   OMB, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Information Collection Budget of the
United States Government. Paperwork increased from 8 billion hours in fiscal year 2004 to 9.78
billion in fiscal year 2015. The number of households increased from 106.588 million to
117.1634 million. See Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, "Household Estimates
(TTLHHM156N)" (dataset), March 9, 2020, https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TTLHHM156N.
64
   US GDP per hour worked in 2015 was about $65. See Our World in Data, "Productivity per
Hour Worked, 1970 to 2017," accessed May 8, 2020, https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/labor-
productivity-per-hour-pennworldtable. A significant fraction of GDP per hour worked is capital
rather than labor income.
                                                                                                 21
Xanax.65 Public commenters had warned the agency that benzos are vulnerable to "misuse
and abuse." Because the tranquilizers "enhance" the feeling of opioid consumption,
including consumption of heroin and fentanyl, they have been identified in tens of
thousands of drug overdoses since the rule went into effect. The costs of that abuse were
not even mentioned in the RIA, let alone quantified.66 Instead, the only cost counted was
the clerical cost because "sponsors will be required to submit information in their formulary
files indicating that they will cover these drugs."67
        Or take the case of the 1915 Seamen's Act's protectionism on behalf of the
maritime industry, which contributed to the drowning deaths of 844 people in Chicago.68
If the HHS were to conduct a cost-benefit analysis of the Seamen's Act using a similar
technique to its analysis of the "benzo" rule, it would estimate a cost for reading the law's
22 pages but estimate no cost for the 844 fatalities! As long as federal rules commonly fail
to quantify resource and opportunity costs, there has been no "triumph of the technocrats."




65
   Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Medicare Program; Changes to the Medicare
Advantage and the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Programs for Contract Year 2013 and
Other Changes, 77 Fed. Reg. 22071, 22072 (April 12, 2012).
66
   The RIA notes, but does not quantify, a particular instance of a clerical cost created by the rule.
Similarly, the RIA notes, but does not quantify, an expected benefit from improving beneficiary
access to these drugs.
67
   77 Fed. Reg. at 22156.
68
   Seamen's Act, Pub. L. No. 63-302, 38 Stat. 1164 (1915). The sinking of the SS Eastland in
Chicago on July 24, 1915, is attributed to retrofitting a complete set of lifeboats in order to
comply with the new law. The additional weight of the lifeboats made the Eastland so top-heavy
that it capsized while passengers were boarding in the Chicago River, causing 844 passengers and
crew members to drown. See Susan Q. Stranahan, "The Eastland Disaster Killed More Passengers
Than the Titanic and the Lusitania. Why Has It Been Forgotten?," Smithsonian Magazine,
October 27, 2014.
                                                                                                   22
Conclusions

        This paper reaches conclusions about the character and quality of federal regulation
using two methods. One method is text analysis of all regulations shown in the Code of
Federal Regulations at various points in time. The other method is sampling the flow of
regulation based on indicators of economic importance. Both methods contradict three
commonly believed myths about federal regulation. The general patterns are also supported
in this paper with dozens of specific examples.
        First, we find that a small minority of regulation is environmental. By some
measures, the flow of new health regulation alone since the year 2000 has far exceeded the
flow of environmental regulation. Second, the typical justifications and cost assessments
of the nonenvironmental regulations are seriously lacking. Environmental regulations can
be the exception to this pattern, which leads us to believe that the first myth about the
environmental share of regulation helps sustain the second myth that technocrats have
triumphed in the regulatory arena owing to the quality of their analysis. Third, although
many regulations create nontrivial paperwork and clerical costs, which are the types of
costs most likely to be quantified in RIAs, the vast majority of regulation costs are
economic distortions. In many cases, agencies could make important progress toward
adhering to the sound economic principles articulated in OMB guidance by engaging in a
multiplication operation on numbers already appearing in their RIAs, but currently,
agencies are not exerting even this ostensibly trivial effort.
        The three myths may be affecting the politics of regulation. In a country that is rich
enough for citizens to place significant value on clean air and water, environmental
regulations that help correct pollution externalities may have benefits that obviously justify
their costs. Influenced by the first myth, it is easy for the public to conclude that regulation
generally has benefits that conceivably justify their costs, especially when reassured by the
second myth that the regulators are carefully measuring costs and benefits. The special
interests seeking protection probably do not mind that their favorite economic regulations
are aggregated with truly beneficial environmental ones.
        But the costs of special-interest regulations do not stay hidden indefinitely. For
example, the share of small businesses citing regulation as their "single most important



                                                                                             23
problem" had been increasing through the end of 2016 when it reached 45 percent.69 As
the costs become visible, a populist backlash against the technocrats may follow, and
perhaps deservedly so.
                              




69
  Council of Economic Advisers, The Economic Effects of Federal Deregulation since January
2017, 11.
                                                                                         24
Bibliography


Alpert, Abby, David Powell, and Rosalie Liccardo Pacula. "Supply-Side Drug Policy in
       the Presence of Substitutes: Evidence from the Introduction of Abuse-Deterrent
       Opioids," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10, no. 4 (2018): 1­35.
Al-Ubaydli, Omar, and Patrick A. McLaughlin. "RegData: A Numerical Database on
       Industry-Specific Regulations for All United States Industries and Federal
       Regulations, 1997­2012," Regulation & Governance 11, no. 1 (2017): 109­23.
Belcore, Jamie., and Jerry Ellig. "Homeland Security and Regulatory Analysis: Are We
       Safe Yet?," Rutgers Law Journal 40, no. 1 (2008): 1­96.
Bonnie, Richard J., Morgan A. Ford, and Jonathan K. Phillips, eds. Pain Management
       and the Opioid Epidemic: Balancing Societal and Individual Benefits and Risks of
       Prescription Opioid Use (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2017), 6.
Broughel, James. "More Information Needed on the Benefits and Costs of Regulations,"
       The Bridge, August 22, 2018.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Medicare Program; Changes to the
       Medicare Advantage and the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit Programs for
       Contract Year 2013 and Other Changes, 77 Fed. Reg. 22071, 22072 (April 12,
       2012).
Clean Air Act of 1963, 42 U.S.C. § 7521(a)(1) (2013).
Congressional Budget Office, Federal Subsidies for Health Insurance Coverage for
       People under Age 65: 2018 to 2028, May 2018.
Council of Economic Advisers, The Administration's FDA Reforms and Reduced
       Biopharmaceutical Drug Prices, October 2018.
Council of Economic Advisers, The Economic Effects of Federal Deregulation since
       January 2017: An Interim Report, June 2019.
Crews, Clyde Wayne. "Less Than 1 Percent of Federal Regulations Get Cost-Benefit
       Analysis," Competitive Enterprise Institute, November 17, 2015,
       https://cei.org/blog/less-1-percent-federal-regulations-get-cost-benefit-analysis.
Crovitz, Gordon L. "`Economics-Free' Obamanet," Wall Street Journal, January 31,
       2016.


                                                                                            25
Department of Health and Human Services, "Trump Administration Proposes to Lower
       Drug Costs by Targeting Backdoor Rebates and Encouraging Direct Discounts to
       Patients," news release, January 31, 2019,
       https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2019/01/31/trump-administration-proposes-to-
       lower-drug-costs-by-targeting-backdoor-rebates-and-encouraging-direct-
       discounts-to-patients.html.
Department of Health and Human Services, Fraud and Abuse; Removal of Safe Harbor
       Protection for Rebates Involving Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Creation of
       New Safe Harbor Protection for Certain Point-of-Sale Reductions in Price on
       Prescription Pharmaceuticals and Certain Pharmacy Benefit Manager Service
       Fees, 84 Fed. Reg. 2340 (February 6, 2019).
Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, Defining and Delimiting the Exemptions
       for Executive, Administrative, Professional, Outside Sales and Computer
       Employees, 81 Fed. Reg. 32391 (May 23, 2016).
Department of Transportation, Federal Railroad Administration, "Positive Train Control
       Systems," Regulatory Impact Analysis, August 3, 2011.
Ellig, Jerry, and Hester Peirce. "SEC Regulatory Analysis: A Long Way to Go and a
       Short Time to Get There," Brooklyn Journal of Corporate, Financial &
       Commercial Law 8, no. 2 (2014): 410­11.
Ellig, Jerry, and Michael Horney. "Preventing a Regulatory Train Wreck: Mandated
       Regulation and the Cautionary Tale of Positive Train Control" (Mercatus
       Working Paper, Mercatus Center at George Mason University, Arlington, VA,
       June 2016), 6.
Ellig, Jerry, and Patrick A. McLaughlin. "The Quality and Use of Regulatory Impact
       Analysis in 2008," Risk Analysis 32, no. 5 (2012): 855­80.
Ellig, Jerry, and Richard Williams. "FDA's Animal Food Regulation Is for the Birds,"
       Regulation 37, no. 2 (2014): 54­61.
Ellig, Jerry. "Evaluating the Quality and Use of Regulatory Impact Analysis: The
       Mercatus Center's Regulatory Report Card, 2008­2013" (Mercatus Working
       Paper, Mercatus Center at George Mason University, Arlington, VA, July 2016).




                                                                                       26
Evans, William N., Ethan M. J. Lieber, and Patrick Power. "How the Reformulation of
       OxyContin Ignited the Heroin Epidemic," Review of Economics and Statistics
       101, no. 1 (2019): 1­15.
Federal Communications Commission, "FCC Opens Office of Economics and
       Analytics," news release, December 11, 2018,
       https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/DOC-355488A1.pdf.
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, "Household Estimates (TTLHHM156N)" (dataset),
       March 9, 2020, https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TTLHHM156N.
Food and Drug Administration, "Current Good Manufacturing Practice, Hazard Analysis
       and Risk-Based Preventive Controls for Food for Animals," Final Regulatory
       Impact Analysis, September 15, 2015, 31­51.
Food and Drug Administration, "Data and Methods for Evaluating the Impact of Opioid
       Formulations with Properties Designed to Deter Abuse in the Postmarket Setting:
       A Scientific Discussion of Present and Future Capabilities," Docket No. FDA-
       2017-N-2903, July 11, 2017, 182, https://www.fda.gov/media/107603/download.
Food and Drug Administration, "Data and Methods for Evaluating the Impact of Opioid
       Formulations," 184.
Food and Drug Administration, "NDA 22-272 OxyContin Division Director Summary
       Review for Regulatory Action," December 30, 2009, 10 (emphasis added),
       https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/nda/2010/022272s000MedR.pdf
       .
Food and Drug Administration, Current Good Manufacturing Practice and Hazard
       Analysis and Risk-Based Preventive Controls for Food for Animals, 80 Fed. Reg.
       56170 (September 15, 2015).
Fraas, Art., and Randall Lutter. "The Challenges of Improving the Economic Analysis of
       Pending Regulations: The Experience of OMB Circular A-4," Annual Review of
       Resource Economics 3, no. 1 (2011): 71­85.
Government Accountability Office, Air Pollution: Information Contained in EPA's
       Regulatory Impact Analyses Can Be Made Clearer, April 1997.
Government Accountability Office, Regulatory Reform: Agencies Could Improve
       Development, Documentation, and Clarity of Regulatory Economic Analyses,
       May 1998.

                                                                                      27
Hahn, Robert W. et al. "Assessing Regulatory Impact Analyses: The Failure of Agencies
       to Comply with Executive Order 12,866," Harvard Journal of Law and Public
       Policy 23, no. 3 (2001): 859­71.
Hahn, Robert W., and Patrick Dudley. "How Well Does the Government Do Cost­
       Benefit Analysis?," Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 1, no. 2
       (2007): 192­211.
Hahn, Robert W., and Robert Litan. "Counting Regulatory Benefits and Costs: Lessons
       for the U.S. and Europe," Journal of International Economic Law 8, no. 2 (2005):
       473­508.
Hahn, Robert W., Randall W. Lutter, and W. Kip Viscusi. Do Federal Regulations
       Reduce Mortality? (Washington, DC: AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory
       Studies, 2000).
Massachusetts v. EPA, 549 U.S. 497, 532 (2007).
McLaughlin, Patrick A., and Oliver Sherouse. RegData US 3.1 Annual (dataset),
       QuantGov, Mercatus Center at George Mason University, Arlington, VA, 2018,
       https://quantgov.org/regdata-us/.
McLaughlin, Patrick A., Jerry Ellig, and Michael Wilt. "Comprehensive Regulatory
       Reform" (Mercatus Policy Primer, Mercatus Center at George Mason University,
       Arlington, VA, 2017).
Medicare for All Act of 2019, H.R. 1384, 116th Cong. (2019).
Mulligan, Casey B. "Prices and Federal Policies in Opioid Markets" (NBER Working
       Paper No. 26812, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA,
       February 2020a).
Mulligan, Casey B. "Economic Activity and the Value of Medical Innovation during a
       Pandemic" (NBER Working Paper No. 27060, National Bureau of Economic
       Research, Cambridge, MA, April 2020b).
Mulligan, Casey B. You're Hired!: Untold Successes and Failures of a Populist
       President (Washington, DC: Republic Book Publishers, forthcoming 2020c).
Office of Management and Budget, "Guidance Implementing Executive Order 13771,
       Titled `Reducing Regulation and Controlling Regulatory Costs'" (M-17-21,
       Executive Office of the President, Washington, DC, April 5, 2017), 6.
Office of Management and Budget, "Guidance Implementing Executive Order 13771," 6.

                                                                                      28
Office of Management and Budget, "Marginal Excess Tax Burden as a Potential Cost
       under EO 13771," Regulations.gov, December 6, 2019,
       https://www.regulations.gov/document?D=OMB-2017-0002-0055.
Office of Management and Budget, "Marginal Excess Tax Burden as a Potential Cost
       under EO 13771."
Office of Management and Budget, Circular A-4, September 17, 2003.
Office of Management and Budget, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,
       Information Collection Budget of the United States Government, 2016.
Our World in Data, "Productivity per Hour Worked, 1970 to 2017," accessed May 8,
       2020, https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/labor-productivity-per-hour-
       pennworldtable.
Schedules of Controlled Substances: Placement of FUB-AMB in Schedule 1, 84 Fed.
       Reg. 58090, 58094 (October 30, 2019).
Seamen's Act, Pub. L. No. 63-302, 38 Stat. 1164 (1915).
Selin, Jennifer L., and David E. Lewis. Sourcebook of United States Executive Agencies,
       2nd ed. (Washington, DC: Administrative Conference of the United States, 2018),
       12.
Sheetz, Michael. "Teva Stock Plummets 18% after Rough Quarter in US Generic Drug
       Market," CNBC, August 3, 2017.
Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States, 221 U.S. 1, 31 S. Ct. 502 (1911).
Stranahan, Susan Q. "The Eastland Disaster Killed More Passengers Than the Titanic and
       the Lusitania. Why Has It Been Forgotten?," Smithsonian Magazine, October 27,
       2014.
Sunstein, Cass R. The Cost-Benefit Revolution (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2018), xi, 3.
White House, Economic Report of the President Together with the Annual Report of the
       Council of Economic Advisers, February 2020.
White House, Economic Report of the President Together with the Annual Report of the
       Council of Economic Advisers, March 2019.
White House, Economic Report of the President Together with the Annual Report of the
       Council of Economic Advisers, February 2012




                                                                                     29
