                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     A NO-ARBITRAGE PERSPECTIVE ON GLOBAL ARBITRAGE OPPORTUNITIES

                                          Patrick Augustin
                                          Mikhail Chernov
                                           Lukas Schmid
                                           Dongho Song

                                        Working Paper 27231
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27231


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We are grateful to Wenxin Du, Gregory Duffee,
Valentin Haddad, Robert Hodrick, Michael Johannes, Wenhao Li, Hanno Lustig, Tyler Muir,
Paolo Pasquariello, Fabrice Tourre, Adrien Verdelhan, Irina Zviadadze and participants in
seminars and conferences sponsored by MIT Sloan, UCLA Anderson, Virtual Derivatives
Workshop, and the 2020 David Backus memorial conference. The latest version is available at
https://sites.google.com/site/mbchernov/ACSS_INTL_latest.pdf.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Patrick Augustin, Mikhail Chernov, Lukas Schmid, and Dongho Song. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A No-Arbitrage Perspective on Global Arbitrage Opportunities
Patrick Augustin, Mikhail Chernov, Lukas Schmid, and Dongho Song
NBER Working Paper No. 27231
May 2020, Revised July 2020
JEL No. C01,E43,E44,G12,H60

                                           ABSTRACT

We revisit the recent literature on persistent deviations from covered interest parity (CIP) by
showing theoretically that CIP violations imply arbitrage opportunities only if uncollateralized
interbank lending rates are riskless. In the absence of observable riskless discount rates, we
extract them empirically using a simple no-arbitrage framework. They deliver novel quantitative
benchmarks for foreign exchange contracts that match observed forward currency premiums and
cross-currency basis swap rates well. The no-arbitrage benchmarks account for about two thirds
of the alleged CIP deviations, while the residual pricing errors line up with measures of
intermediary constraints and the expensiveness of the U.S. dollar.


Patrick Augustin                               Lukas Schmid
Desautels Faculty of Management                Marshall School of Business
McGill University                              University of Southern California
1001 Sherbrooke Street West, Room 552          and CEPR
Montreal, Qc H3A 1G5 Canada                    lukas.schmid@marshall.usc.edu
and CDI (Canadian Derivatives Institute)
patrick.augustin@mcgill.ca                     Dongho Song
                                               Johns Hopkins University
Mikhail Chernov                                Carey Business School
Anderson School of Management                  100 International Drive
University of California, Los Angeles          Baltimore, MD 21202
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C-417                dongho.song@jhu.edu
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and CEPR
and also NBER
mikhail.chernov@anderson.ucla.edu
1    Introduction

With an average daily turnover of $6.6 trillion (BIS, 2019), the foreign exchange mar-
ket is among the most liquid trading venues in the world. Fluctuations in exchange
rates are intimately related to fluctuations in sovereign default risk (Du and Schreger,
2016; Na, Schmitt-Groh´  e, Uribe, and Yue, 2018), and foreign exchange reserves repre-
sent a primary safety cushion for governments around the world (Bianchi, Hatchondo,
and Martinez, 2018). Thus, it is no surprise that scores of researchers have studied the
determination of exchange rates and their implications (e.g., Engel, 2016; Maggiori,
2017; Kremens and Martin, 2019; Lustig and Verdelhan, 2019; Lustig, Stathopoulos,
and Verdelhan, 2019; Gopinath, Boz, Casas, Diez, Gourinchas, and Plagborg-Moeller,
2020).

One of the pillars of how we think about the international currency system is that
of covered interest parity (e.g., Keynes, 1923). According to covered interest parity
(henceforth CIP), the cross-currency basis, that is, the difference between the for-
ward premium relative to the spot exchange rate and the cross-country interest rate
differential, should be equal to zero. At longer horizons above one year, CIP is char-
acterized through zero rates of cross-currency basis swaps (xccy). These are foreign
exchange derivative instruments that allow for the exchange of two variable rate loans
denominated in different currencies.

A growing and important literature provides evidence of persistent CIP violations,
at least since the 2008 Global Financial Crisis (GFC) (e.g., Ivashina, Scharftstein,
and Stein, 2015). Figure 1 offers an example of the evidence of non-zero basis and
xccy rates in the case of the Euro, using LIBOR as a proxy for the riskless rates,
following standard practice in the literature. Departures from zero for both time
series are taken as prima facie evidence that CIP is violated. Notably, CIP violations
suggest the existence of arbitrage opportunities (e.g., Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan,
2018), which in turn violates the backbone of our understanding of financial markets.
Prominent explanations include a combination of leverage and funding constraints
associated with the expensiveness of the U.S. dollar (Ivashina, Scharftstein, and Stein,
2015; Avdjiev, Du, Koch, and Shin, 2019) and balance sheet constraints of financial
intermediaries (Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan, 2018; Andersen, Duffie, and Song, 2019;
Fleckenstein and Longstaff, 2020).

We argue that the key to understanding the behavior of CIP is the nature of effective
funding rates (EFRs) faced by market participants. In stark contrast to conventional
wisdom, we show, in a model-free setting, that, under the null hypothesis of no
arbitrage, both the basis and xccy rates cannot be simultaneously zero unless the
EFR is equivalent to LIBOR. Intuitively, because both forward and xccy transactions
are fully collateralized, the EFR should be free of counterparty risk. Thus, given the
possibility of distress in uncollateralized interbank markets, proxying for the EFR by
LIBOR is empirically questionable. This observation prompts a question about the
appropriate quantitative benchmark for testing the CIP relation.

Tests of the short-term CIP validity depend on the availability of EFRs or riskless in-
terest rates. Standard practice in the literature is to proxy for these rates by Treasury
yields, or, bank funding rates, such as LIBOR, because financial institutions are the
ones most likely to enforce no-arbitrage relations by trading on price discrepancies.1
However, there is significant evidence that Treasury yields may be too low, because
they provide safety and convenience (e.g., Bansal and Coleman, 1996; Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012; Nagel, 2016), giving rise to a non-zero Treasury-based
forward exchange rate basis (Du, Im, and Schreger, 2018; Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and
Lustig, 2018). In addition, there is significant evidence that bank funding rates may
be too high because they can embed default risk, which could deliver a non-zero
LIBOR-based forward basis (Du, Im, and Schreger, 2018; Du, Tepper, and Verdel-
han, 2018). An additional complication for obtaining representative riskless rates is
that counterparties face differential funding costs depending on their credit risk and
bargaining power. Thus, we take the view that true risk-free rates are unobservable.

We propose a novel no-arbitrage benchmark by applying a standard stochastic dis-
count factor approach to characterize present values of cash flows associated with
foreign exchange contracts. We respect the fact that both short-term forward and
long-term xccy contracts are free of counterparty risk because of collateralization.
This implication is central to our perspective on the CIP anomaly, because the basis
constructed using the corresponding risk-free rates is zero, while the xccy rate is not.

We operationalize our framework to back out the cost of safe and riskless assets.
We posit that their dynamics are part of an affine no-arbitrage model, and use data
for G11 countries from January 2000 to December 2019. In a first step, we extract
the latent risk-free rates in each country by imposing the 3-month CIP in terms
of the model-based risk-free rates and by matching the term structure of IRS rates
in the respective countries. In a second step, we relate the estimated latent risk-
free rates to various observable candidates. We find that only three variables are
significant. The risk-free rates are closely associated with Treasury yields adjusted
for convenience, and sovereign credit default swap (CDS) rates. In addition, there is a
modest contribution from interbank rates, i.e., LIBOR. Thus, the estimated risk-free
rate is a linear combination of LIBOR, a Treasury rate adjusted for convenience, and
credit risk.
  1
      We refer to interbank rates as LIBOR, regardless of the currency of denomination.




                                                 2
We next use the riskless rates implied from our model to revisit the evidence on
long-term CIP deviations characterized by non-zero cross-currency swap rates. We
compute model-implied xccy rates, which were not used in the estimation. While the
basis is zero at horizons of one year and less, we find that xccy rates are non-zero, just
like in the data. The average 5-year xccy rate across countries during the post-crisis
period is 24 basis points (bps) vs. 21 bps in the model. Our no-arbitrage model would
furthermore imply zero Treasury basis and positive swap spreads. That is because in
our model, there is no difference between risk-free and Treasury rates.

Some variation in xccy rates remains unexplained by our model. We show that these
xccy pricing errors reflect market frictions that correlate with financial intermedi-
ary health. We find that the leverage of bank holding companies (He, Kelly, and
Manela, 2017) and the trade-weighted U.S. dollar index (Avdjiev, Du, Koch, and
Shin, 2019; Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig, 2018) are two highly significant vari-
ables co-varying with changes in the xccy pricing errors. Cross-sectional regressions
show that expected changes in the cross-currency pricing errors line up with their
beta sensitivities to both factors. Lastly, we implement the Haddad and Muir (2018)
cross-sectional analysis of intermediation costs and assets' exposure to a measure of
intermediary risk aversion. We find that swaps are intermediated more than forward
contracts, and that their risk aversion sensitivities line up accordingly. The overall
evidence is consistent with the role of intermediaries in xccy premiums.

We evaluate the relative contribution to the variation in xccy rates by our model and
the significant intermediary fractions in the spirit of Campbell and Ammer (1993).
Our variance-covariance decomposition on the 5-year xccy rates shows that our no-
arbitrage framework explains, on average, about 68% of the variation in their levels.
The remaining 32% of their variation that is left unexplained is accounted for by
financial intermediary leverage and the expensiveness of the USD.

Taken at face value, our findings lead to a novel and important conclusion. A sim-
ple no-arbitrage framework with the most minimal set of assumptions is helpful for
understanding, to a first order, the dynamics of the forward-spot exchange rate basis
and xccy rates. Our analysis suggests that non-zero and large xccy rates do not nec-
essarily imply arbitrage opportunities. In fact, our no-arbitrage benchmarks provide
a good quantitative account of the levels and dynamics of these rates. Nonetheless,
we associate our pricing errors with factors that are likely correlated with balance
sheet costs (Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan, 2018; Andersen, Duffie, and Song, 2019;
Fleckenstein and Longstaff, 2020). That result lends credence to the role of interme-
diary based asset pricing for quantitatively realistic models (He, Krishnamurthy, and
Milbradt, 2019).



                                            3
Related literature

Our work relates to the growing literature on international asset pricing anomalies in
developed economies documented since the GFC. One prominent stream of research
focuses on the failure of covered interest parity (CIP), a no-arbitrage condition that
equates the interest rate differential in two countries with the corresponding forward-
spot exchange rate premium. Since the GFC, there is increasing evidence that the
CIP condition, implied by interbank interest rates such as LIBOR, has been violated.
The evidence suggests that borrowing costs in USD cash markets are lower than those
implied by comparable synthetic USD loans constructed using foreign currency loans,
spot and forward exchange rates. Taken at face value, this suggests the presence of
persistent and systematic arbitrage opportunities (Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan, 2018).

In terms of possible explanations of CIP deviations, early work points towards fric-
tions in global intermediation of USD funding. See, among others, Baba, Packer,
and Nagano (2008), Coffey, Hrung, and Sarkar (2009), Griffolli and Ranaldo (2011),
McGuire and von Peter (2012), and Bottazzi, Luque, Pascoa, and Sundaresan (2012).
Ivashina, Scharftstein, and Stein (2015) provide a model that rationalizes these ef-
fects through foreign banks that cut USD lending more than U.S. banks in crisis
times. Coffey, Hrung, and Sarkar (2009) and Bahaj and Reis (2018) support such
views by documenting that U.S. swap lines to foreign central banks are effective in
reducing CIP deviations. Other explanations relate to an increase in bank counter-
party risk associated with the crisis (Tuckman and Porfirio, 2003; Baba and Packer,
2009; Skinner and Mason, 2011; Levich, 2012; Csavas, 2016; Wong, Leung, and Ng,
2016; Alfred Wong, 2018), while Coffey, Hrung, and Sarkar (2009) and Fong, Va-
lente, and Fung (2010) provide evidence in support of both credit and liquidity risk
as drivers of CIP deviations. Garleanu and Pedersen (2011) point towards binding
margin constraints. Additional contributions are made by Akram, Rime, and Sarno
(2008), Goldberg, Kennedy, and Miu (2010), and Iida, Kimura, and Sudo (2016).

CIP deviations have persisted even after funding conditions became less strained in
the post-crisis period, which is often associated with a reduced ability to conduct
arbitrage in response to post-crisis regulation. Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018)
document a co-movement in CIP deviations with bank balance sheet constraints (see
also Andersen, Duffie, and Song (2019) and Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020) for
related arguments.) Similarly, Cenedese, Corte, and Wang (2020) point towards post-
crisis leverage constraints as a source of CIP deviations. Borio, McCauley, McGuire,
and Sushko (2016) argue that an increase in hedging demand coupled with reduced
balance sheet capacity is responsible for persistent deviations. See also Liao (2016)
for arguments of hedging demand. Anderson, Du, and Schlusche (2019) indicate that
banks' arbitrage positions reduced in response to a reduction in wholesale funding

                                          4
supply following a regulatory change in the money market mutual fund industry in
2016. Avdjiev, Du, Koch, and Shin (2019) cite banks' leverage constraints as a source
of friction, driven by the strength of the dollar. In that same spirit, Du, Hebert, and
Wang (2019) argue that CIP deviations may reflect financial intermediaries' shadow
costs of capital constraints.2

Rime, Schrimpf, and Syrstad (2019) take a view that LIBOR-based CIP deviations
do not necessarily imply arbitrage opportunities, like we do. In contrast to us, they
use observable interest rates to estimate feasible transaction costs. They conclude,
on the basis of these costs, that CIP arbitrage is possible for only a subset of highly
capitalized banks. The potential arbitrage profits are, however, much smaller than
what LIBOR-based measures would indicate. Andersen, Duffie, and Song (2019)
question benefits of CIP arbitrage to bank shareholders in the light of required funding
value adjustments.

One common feature across previous work is that CIP deviations are measured using
observable interest rates. Our key distinction is that we consider true discount rates to
be unobservable when we analyze CIP deviations from the no-arbitrage perspective.
Moreover, we provide new testable predictions for long-term CIP deviations suggested
by non-zero prices of cross-currency basis swaps.

Another stream of research focuses on CIP deviations measured using Treasury yields,
giving rise to a non-zero Treasury basis. Du, Im, and Schreger (2018) document the
Treasury basis across G11 and emerging countries and relate it to relative differ-
ences in convenience yields. Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig (2018, 2019) formalize
the greater convenience yield for USD assets based on foreign investors' demand for
safe assets. The two studies differ in their measurement of the Treasury basis, with
the former relying on fitted par yield curves and the latter using secondary market
bond prices. By studying the Treasury basis, we also relate broadly to the literature
that examines the convenience yield embedded in Treasury bonds (Bansal and Cole-
man, 1996; Grinblatt, 2001; Krishnamurthy, 2002; Longstaff, 2004; Gurkaynak, Sack,
and Wright, 2007; Goyenko, Subrahmanyam, and Ukhov, 2011; Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012; Nagel, 2016).

A third pricing anomaly that appeared since the GFC is the emergence of negative
swap spreads, i.e., interbank interest swap rates have fallen below maturity-matched
Treasury yields. The extant evidence almost exclusively focuses on the U.S., and cites
reasons related to hedging demand (Klingler and Sundaresan, 2019), dealer funding
costs (Lou, 2009), increases in regulatory leverage ratios (Boyarchenko, Gupta, Steele,
  2
    Discussions and test of CIP deviations go back to Keynes (1923). For early work, see also
Frenkel and Levich (1975); Dooley and Isard (1980); Taylor (1987, 1989); Popper (1993); Fletcher
and Taylor (1994, 1996).

                                               5
and Yen, 2018; Jermann, 2020), a declining convenience yield, (Klingler and Sundare-
san, 2018), or U.S. default risk (Augustin, Chernov, Schmid, and Song, 2020). Du,
Im, and Schreger (2018) relate CIP deviations to cross-country swap spread differen-
tials. We provide formal cross-country evidence on the dynamics and cross-sectional
differences in negative swap spreads.

Another major difference from prior work is that we study arbitrage anomalies across
multiple asset classes in a relative valuation sense. From that perspective, we also
relate closely to Pasquariello (2014), who studies commonalities across market dis-
locations in stock, foreign exchange, and money markets. Hazelkorn, Moskowitz,
and Vasudevan (2020) suggest that demand for leverage explains arbitrage anomalies
across foreign exchange and equity markets.



2     A no-arbitrage perspective

We start by presenting our assumptions. We then successively present the no-
arbitrage valuation approach to forward and xccy rates. We end by discussing our
empirical strategy.


2.1    Assumptions

Our starting point is a setting which precludes arbitrage opportunities in interna-
tional financial markets. To be clear and perhaps seemingly pedantic, by arbitrage
opportunities, we refer to strict arbitrage opportunities, that is, implementable trades
with non-positive price that generate a non-negative payoff and a positive payoff with
positive probability. Our aim is to evaluate empirically to what extent such a frame-
work can rationalize the apparent funding anomalies observed in recent international
financial markets.

From the perspective of a U.S. investor, the assumption of the absence of arbitrage
opportunities implies the existence of a valuation framework for returns on any assets
denominated in U.S. dollars by means of a stochastic discount factor. A stochastic
discount factor (SDF) is a stochastic process M0,T such that, for any gross return
R0,T between times 0 and T in U.S. dollars, we have

                                E0 [M0,T R0,T ] = 1.                                (1)

Standard asset pricing theory (see e.g., Duffie, 2001) guarantees that such a stochastic
process exists whenever there are no arbitrage opportunities.

                                           6
By the same token, from the perspective of, say, a Euro area investor, the absence
of arbitrage implies the existence of an SDF, say M0,T , to value the gross returns on
any asset denominated in Euros, R0,T between times 0 and T . That is, we must have

                                E0 M0,T R0,T = 1.


If international financial markets are integrated, these investment strategies denomi-
nated in Euros are available to a U.S. investor as well, but she would have to convert
U.S. dollars to Euros first, and then back. Let St denote the USD value of EUR 1 at
time t. In a setting without arbitrage opportunities, this implies, as emphasized by
Backus, Foresi, and Telmer (2001), that

                           E0 M0,T (ST /S0 )R0,T = 1,

so that

                    E0 M0,T R0,T = E0 M0,T (ST /S0 )R0,T .

This equality establishes a tight connection between movements in exchange rates,
and the stochastic discount factors M0,T , and M0,T .


2.2       Forward rates

A currency contract that is struck at time 0 to sell e1 forward at time T for the
price $F0,T has a net USD cash flow of F0,T - ST . A textbook forward valuation
strategy would involve two portfolios. One portfolio is long USD: sell e1 forward and
invest F0,T exp(-T r0,T ) at the annualized domestic T -period "risk-free rate" r0,T .
The second portfolio is short EUR: borrow e exp(-T r0,T ) at the annualized foreign
T -period "risk-free rate" r0,T . The two portfolios have identical payouts at maturity,
thereby making their time-0 values expressed in USD the same:

                             F0,T e-T r0,T = S0 e-T r0,T ,

implying that

                              F0,T /S0 = eT (r0,T -r0,T ) .


Departing from the textbook treatment, we have to think about appropriate measures
of funding rates for the potential arbitrageurs and about handling the counterparty

                                              7
risk. The use of LIBOR was common before the GFC because it was assumed that
financial institutions could fund themselves at LIBOR and they were believed to have
very low default risk. Both assumptions no longer hold. In particular, post-GFC
interbank rates contain non-trivial counterparty credit risk, because they represent
uncollateralized borrowing.

One could mitigate that risk by engaging in a CDS position on a borrowing bank.
However, that would require knowing the exact credit risk of the panel of LIBOR
banks. Alternatively, one could engage in some sort of collateralization. Collateral
may take different forms, cash or an asset, USD or EUR-denominated. Each of these
variations would impact an effective funding rate faced by the parties in a transaction.
Indeed, Rime, Schrimpf, and Syrstad (2019) document heterogeneity in funding costs
in the post-GFC environment. Effective funding rates would further be affected by fair
value adjustments (Andersen, Duffie, and Song, 2019). More generally, as emphasized
by Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2018), engaging in a derivatives transaction entails an
implicit rental of a dealer's balance sheet. The associated cost should be reflected in
the effective funding rates.

Thus, in order to make accounting for discount rates operational, we rely on the SDF-
based pricing relation in Equation (1) to value a forward. Daily marking to market
and costly collateral introduce additional cash flows to these contracts. Johannes and
Sundaresan (2007) demonstrate that these cash flows represent opportunity cost of
collateral, can be represented as a dividend yield on an asset. Thus,

                      E0 (M0,T e0,T F0,T ) = S0 · E0 (M0,T e0,T ),

where  and  represent the domestic and the foreign cost of collateral, respectively,
and M is the foreign SDF. Thus,

                          F0,T /S0 = E0 (M0,T )/E0 (M0,T ),                         (2)

where we use M as a shorthand for M e . Therefore M reflects both discounting as
well as the cash flow adjustments arising from collateralization.

The forward price in logs is given by

            f0,T - s0 = log E0 (M0,T ) - log E0 (M0,T ) = T (r0,T - r0,T ),         (3)

where r0,T  -T -1 log E0 (M0,T ) and r0,T  -T -1 log E0 (M0,T ) are the corresponding
domestic and foreign rates, respectively. We could relate these interest rates to the
risk-free ones via:

                      r0,T = r0,T - 0,T ,    r0,T = r0,T - 0,T .

                                             8
Define the forward premium as 0,T = T -1 (f0,T - s0 ). Next, the forward basis is

                          br
                           0,T = 0,T - (r0,T - r0,T ) = 0.

This first basic step allows us to connect our framework to the literature on cross-
currency bases.

Indeed, the literature on CIP violations (e.g., Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan, 2018)
explores either the LIBOR or OIS forward basis defined as

                             bi
                              0,T = 0,T - (i0,T - i0,T ).


where i and i represent LIBOR or OIS and their foreign counterparts. The two bases,
br and bi can be equal to zero simultaneously only if there is no substantive economic
differences between r and i.

Further, the literature on the specialness of U.S. Treasuries (e.g., Du, Im, and Schreger,
2018, Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig, 2019) evaluates the Treasury forward basis,

                            by
                             0,T = 0,T - (y0,T - y0,T ),

where y and y represent U.S. and foreign Treasury yields, respectively. This basis is
interpreted as the relative convenience yield of Treasuries. Implicit in this interpre-
tation is existence of interest rates at which the basis is equal to zero.

In this paper we take a view that the theoretical interest rates r and r are not readily
observable. Thus, the CIP condition (3) cannot be tested with readily available
benchmark interest rates. Indeed, in the post-GFC world, one would need to observe
effective funding costs of all players in the forward markets and be able to aggregate
them correctly to economically match the reported forward prices. Thus, we treat r
and r as these unobservable aggregate funding costs implicit in the forward premium.
Rime, Schrimpf, and Syrstad (2019) take the complimentary route of estimating the
marginal funding rates directly using information about wholesale money market
funding from non-bank investors.

Such a perspective is consistent with the view of Binsbergen, Diamond, and Grotteria
(2019) that prices of risky financial assets reflect risk-free rates stripped of the con-
venience premium. Relatedly, Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2018) use Treasury note
futures contracts to back out intermediaries' shadow funding costs.

Of course, the empirical fact that bi  br  0 before the crisis, and, subsequently bi
has departed from br is still worthy of an explanation even if it does not necessarily
violate no-arbitrage conditions. After estimating the relevant discount rates, we study
the reasons behind the departure of bi from br .

                                            9
As a next step, we analyze how our framework speaks to long-term CIP violations
as represented by cross currency basis swaps (xccy). That analysis leads us to an
empirical strategy allowing us to evaluate the no-arbitrage predictions about forward
premiums and xccy rates.


2.3    Cross-currency basis swap rates

Xccy contracts are OTC derivative instruments that allow investors to simultaneously
borrow and lend in two different currencies at floating interbank rates such as LIBOR
or EURIBOR. Specifically, it involves an exchange of principal in two different curren-
cies both at inception and at the expiration date of the swap, as well as an exchange
of floating cash flows linked to interbank rates. The exchange of face values of the
domestic and foreign legs of xccy are matched using the spot exchange rate between
both currencies. Unpredictable variation in exchange rates thus involves a non-trivial
amount of exchange rate risk at the maturity date of the contract. The price of xccy
is usually quoted as a fixed spread X over the floating foreign currency denominated
interest rate.

We examine xccy contracts from the perspective of an investor who, at initiation of
the contract, is paying S0 dollars and is receiving one euro. Table 1A illustrates the
cash flows associated with such a position. The investor would receive floating dollar
interest payments at the rate it on the USD leg at each date t + 1, and make floating
euro interest payments at the rate it + X on the EUR leg at each date t +1. The initial
principal payments would have to be reversed at maturity T . The present value of all
expected future cash flows on the USD leg of the cross-currency basis swap is given
by
                                    T
                0,T = S0 -1 +             E0 M0,t it-1 + E0 M0,T   ,
                                    t=1

and the present value of all expected future cash flows on the EUR leg of the cross-
currency basis swap is given by
                            T
             0,T = +1 -          E0 M0,t it-1 + X0,T     - E0 M0,T .
                           t=1

here we use the M notation again to account for the cost of collateral in swap
transactions. Xccy is fairly priced if both the USD and the EUR legs have the same
value in USD, i.e., 0,T + S0 0,T = 0. The condition yields the formula for the constant


                                             10
maturity xccy swap rate X0,T :
               T                      -1

X0,T =              E0 M0,t                                                                           (4)
              t=1
                T                                                      T
        ×               E0 M0,t it-1 + E0 M0,T                  -           E0 M0,t it-1 + E0 M0,T     .
                  t=1                                                 t=1


As a next step we link the xccy cash flows to those of interest rate swaps (IRS).
Specifically, we swap both the USD and the EUR interest rates into fixed rates using
an IRS in each currency, at prices CM S and CM S , respectively (CMS stands for
"constant maturity swaps"). We illustrate these cash flows in Table 1B.
The net cash flows of the USD leg 0,T of the fixed-for-fixed xccy are given by
                                                T
                    0,T = S0 -1 +                     CM S0,T E0 M0,t + E0 M0,T
                                                t=1
and the present value of expected future cash flows on the EUR leg is given by
                                  T
             0,T =       +1 -              CM S 0,T + X0,T E0 M0,t - E0 M0,T                      .
                                 t=1
The xccy is priced fairly if 0,T + S0 0,T = 0, which leads to the alternative expression
for X0,T :
              T                   -1

X0,T =              E0 M0,t                                                                                (5)
              t=1
                           T                                    T
        ×    CM S0,T            E0 M0,t - CM S 0,T                    E0 M0,t + E0 M0,T - E0 M0,T            .
                          t=1                                   t=1

Thus, we express the xccy rate in terms of (observable) interest rate swap rates and
(unobserved) discount factors, M0,t and M0,t .


2.3.1   Cross-sectional variation in xccy rates

In order to understand the drivers behind the xccy rate X , divide the expression in
(5) by CM S 0,T and add 1:
                                                 T
                                                      E0 M0,t         E0 M0,T - E0 M0,T
               X0,T            CM S 0,T         t=1
        1+                =                 ·    T
                                                                 +                T
                                                                                                  .
             CM S 0,T          CM S 0,T               E0 M0,t          CM S 0,T         E0 M0,t
                                                t=1                               t=1


                                                         11
Now let's introduce a hypothetical par bond (constant maturity Treasury, CMT) that
corresponds to the discount factor M . Its coupon rate is:

                                        1 - E0 M0,T
                            CM T0,T      T
                                                        .
                                              E0 M0,t
                                        t=1

A foreign hypothetical bond has a similar notation. Then,
                                           -1                    -1
          X0,T        CM S 0,T  CM S 0,T                CM S 0,T 
   1+            =             ·                · w0 +              · (1 - w0 ) (6)
        CM S 0,T      CM T 0,T    CM T 0,T              CM T 0,T
                                           -1
                      CM S 0,T  CM S 0,T 
                               ·                ,                               (7)
                      CM T 0,T    CM T    0,T


with weight w0  (1 - E0 [M0,T ]) · (1 - E0 [M0,T ])-1 . The approximation is based on
the assumption w0  1. We use this approximation for expositional purposes and for
cross-sectional analysis.

The first relation (equality) implies that CM S 0,T = CM T 0,T and CM S 0,T = CM T 0,T ,
then X0,T = 0. Otherwise, we should expect to see time-series and cross-sectional vari-
ation in xccy rates. The second relation (approximation) implies that cross-sectional
variation in the appropriately normalized xccy rate X is driven by the differences in
the domestic and foreign interest rates. Specifically, the sign of X is driven by the
cross-country differences in swap spreads, defined here as ratios of of swap rates and
(hypothetical) par bond rates.

As a result, we link cross-sectional variation in X to another post-GFC phenomenon
referred to as negative swap spreads. The evidence is that post-GFC in the U.S.,
CM S0,T - CM T0,T < 0, or, equivalently, CM S0,T /CM T0,T < 1 for large T , with the
same results for its foreign counterparts. Equation (7) links xccy to swap spreads
relative to the hypothetical bonds. Thus, we can evaluate whether this distinction
is important and whether the explanation of the swap spread is connected to the
appropriate discount factor.


2.3.2   Discounting at LIBOR

There is one prominent case that leads to a zero xccy rate. This is the case of
discounting at LIBOR, which was a prominent paradigm prior to the GFC (e.g., Duffie

                                          12
and Singleton, 1997). To see this, note that in that case E0 M0,T = 1/(1 + i0,T )T .
As a result,

                                            1 - E0 M0,T
                               CM S0,T =        T
                                                              .                       (8)
                                                    E0 M0,t
                                             t=1


The foreign swap rate CM S obtains a similar expression. That is, CM S = CM T
and CM S = CM T in Equation (6).

Full collateralization, which was prevalent by the late 1990s, led market participants
to use the OIS rates instead of the LIBOR rates for discounting starting in 2007, and,
by the end of 2008, the whole industry had switched to OIS (e.g., Hull and White,
2013, Cameron, 2013, Spears, 2019). That would immediately imply a non-zero X.
The advantage of our valuation via the SDF is that we do not have to take a stand
on a specific reference rate to obtain the discount factor. The empirical question is
whether an estimate of X implied by (5) is quantitatively similar to the observed one.


2.3.3   Back to forward rates

Our general multi-horizon framework allows us to revisit the original case of the for-
ward rates. We show that if the xccy is a one-period instrument, then it collapses
to the short-term basis. To see, this, assume that T = 1, where 1 refers to absence
of interim payments between 0 and T . Then, using the relation between the for-
ward premium and SDFs in Equation (2), the floating-for-floating xccy expression in
Equation (4) simplifies to:
                           -1                                                     T
   X0,T =      E0 M0,T          S0 E0 M0,T (1 + i0,T )T - S0 E0 M0,T   1 + i0,T

                           T       F0,T (1 + i0,T )T
         = F0,T (1 + i0,T )     1-                   .
                                    S0 (1 + i0,T )T


The last expression can be re-written in terms of LIBOR basis (in levels):

                     F0,T (1 + i0,T )T       X0,T
                                       = 1 -      (1 + i0,T )-T .
                      S0 (1 + i0,T )T        F0,T

If E0 [M0,T ] = (1 + i0,T )-T , then the LIBOR basis is equal to 1, and X0,T = 0, as in
the previous subsection where we explored discounting at LIBOR. Otherwise, the log

                                           13
LIBOR basis is equal to:
                            X0,T
        bi = T -1 log 1 -        (1 + i0,T )-T     c - a[T -1 (x0,T - f0,T ) - i0,T ],
                            F0,T
where a = eT x
             ¯          ¯
               /(1 - eT x    ¯ = E [T -1 (x0,T - f0,T ) - i0,T ], c = T -1 log(1 - eT x
                          ), x                                                        ¯
                                                                                        )+ ax
                                                                                            ¯. Thus,
a non-zero LIBOR basis does not necessarily contradict no-arbitrage. Unfortunately,
this expression is not testable because liquid xccy and forwards overlap only at a
1-year horizon. Even then a forward contract has a single cash flow, while xccy has
four quarterly payments.


2.4      Empirical strategy

In order to evaluate the quantitative success of our view of forward premiums and
xccy rates, we need to obtain estimates of collateral-adjusted SDFs M and M . Our
strategy is to infer these objects from prices of domestic and foreign IRS. We do so,
on a country-by-country basis, by estimating an affine term structure model designed
to fit the interbank rates and the corresponding IRS curve of a given country. Having
obtained a collection of M and M , we can evaluate expressions in Equations (3) and
(5) and compare them to the observed forward premiums and xccy rates, respectively.
Importantly, we are not using the data on X0,T for the estimation. We exploit the
identity br0,T = 0 to identify foreign rates r via the observed forward premiums.



2.4.1     A model

We describe our model for the U.S. only. All other countries have the same notations
but with augmented with hats, ·. We assume that the unobservable state is captured
by a vector zt that follows a VAR(1):
                                    zt+1 = zt + t+1 .
The spot interest rate is rt = r,0 + r zt , and the SDF is
                          - log Mt,t+1 = rt + t t /2 + t t+1 ,
where the conditional volatility of the log SDF, t = -1 (0 +  · zt ), is often referred
to as the price of risk. We assume that the opportunity cost of collateral is t =
,0 +  zt . As a result we can construct the discount factor:
                                                          T -1
                   E0 M0,T = E0 [M0,T e0,T ] = E0                Mt,t+1 et .
                                                           t=0


                                                 14
While we are using the interest rate rt in the same way as a risk-free rate appears
in a classical framework, we have to be careful with its interpretation. We cannot
estimate the true risk-free rate using the data on OTC interest rate derivatives alone.
What we estimate is the effective funding rate in these markets. It is reasonable
to think of this rate as risk-free because the specific instruments that we are using
are fully collateralized. A different effective funding rate could be associated with
different markets. See, for example, Binsbergen, Diamond, and Grotteria (2019) for
equity options, and Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2018) for Treasury note futures. We
refer to rt as the risk-free rate and emphasize its interpretation when appropriate.

We further assume that the observable one-month LIBOR rate is given by it =
rt + i,0 + i zt . This assumption is consistent with the intensity-based approach to
modeling credit risk (e.g., Duffie and Singleton, 1999). We connect it to LIBOR rates
corresponding to longer horizons via hypothetical LIBOR bonds L0,T discounted at
the continuously compounded yield i0,T = T -1 log(1 + iq                            q
                                                           0,T · T · 30/360) where i0,T
denotes a quoted LIBOR rate and T  12 corresponds to maturities of up to 12
months.3 As a result,
                                                              T -1
                L0,T  exp (-i0,T · T ) = E0 M0,T e-           t=0 (i,0 +i   zt )
                                                                                   .

We are not using the cost of collateral  here because LIBOR represents uncollater-
alized lending.

Now we can use the 3-month LIBOR rates for the computation of the IRS. Here we
discount all cash flows accounting for the cost of collateral t . The standard argument
then implies:
                                           T
                                                E0 M0,t (eit-1,t - 1)
                                          t=1
                          CM S0,T =                  T
                                                                        .                    (9)
                                                         E0 M0,t
                                                  t=1

This representation of the IRS is stylized to conserve on notation. In the implemen-
tation, we account for the actual payment frequencies of the contracts. We discuss
institutional details in the online appendix.


2.4.2    Identification

As specified, the model is under-identified. We adopt the canonical form used by
Joslin, Le, and Singleton (2013) and choose the latent state zt so that the matrix  - 
   3
    The day count convention for LIBOR rates is act/360. We use 30/360 as the daycount convention
given that it is numerically close to act/360, and it simplifies the implementation.

                                                15
governing the dynamics under the risk-adjusted distribution is diagonal. Further,
because both loadings r and covariance matrix  control the scale of rt , we set the
former to unity. All other parameters are free.

We have an unusual situation in that we have two reference interest rates in the
model, and one of them is not observable. Furthermore, the cost of collateral is
not observable either. We rely on three observations to identify r and  . First, as
highlighted earlier, bi  0 before the crisis. Second, by assumption, br = 0. Third,
the cost of collateral appears in the valuation of IRS, but not LIBOR.
                                                                            2
We rely on the first observation and assume that rt = it + ut , ut  (0, u     ) before
the crisis (December 2007). The variance of the observation noise ut is selected to
be 1% of the variance of 1-month LIBOR. This approach is also consistent with the
widespread view, both in academia and industry, that i is a better proxy for r than a
Treasury yield y , because of the convenience premium present in Treasuries and the
"refreshed AA" quality of banks in the LIBOR panel. This assumption allows us to
pin down  (because r is set to 1 for identification purposes). Thus, once the scale
of the state variables is fixed, we can identify r and i separately in the post-crisis
period.

We rely on the second observation and set r0,T = r0,T - 0,T for T = 3 months.
In combination with the previous identifying assumption, this helps in identifying
the connection between the domestic and foreign interest rates. It also helps with
separating r and r , or, equivalently,  in each country. Finally, the third observation,
in combination with the other two assumptions, identifies r and  separately.



3       Evidence

We first discuss the data, and then present the model's implications for the forward
basis, xccy rates, and swap rates.


3.1     Data

We use a panel data set on interest and exchange rates for G11 countries from January
2000 to December 2019. G11 currencies include the USD, JPY, GBP, CAD, EUR,
AUD, CHF, NZD, SEK, DKK, NOK.4 Specifically, we obtain information on spot
    4
    DKK is pegged to EUR, but we are not duplicating the analysis because of our focus on the
valuation of forward and xccy contracts rather than their realized payoffs. As we have shown, the
valuation primarily depends on the local interest rates.

                                               16
and forward exchange rates with maturities of 1, 3, 6, and 12 months. We adopt the
convention of measuring exchange rates as the USD price per units of foreign currency.
We also source closing prices for cross-currency basis swap rates with maturities of
1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 15, 20, and 30 years. In addition to data on exchange rates, we
source country-specific information on Treasury yields, interbank rates (LIBOR), and
interest swap rates with matching maturities. For comparability, our data set is
similar to that in Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018). All data are sourced from
Bloomberg. Details about data sources are discussed in the online appendix.

The black lines in Figure 2 display the 3-month and 6-month LIBOR bases, bi          0,T ,
display cross-currency basis swap rates X0,T for the 5-year and 20-year contracts,
for selected currencies, NZD, EUR, and JPY. The full set is provided in the online
appendix. Consistent with previous evidence, we observe negative rates, during and
post-crisis, for all countries except for AUD, CAD, and NZD, which become positive
during the same time period. The set of left columns in Figure 3 provide the corre-
sponding summary statistics. Tables supporting this figure are provided in the online
appendix. The magnitudes are largely consistent with Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan
(2018) with a proviso that we have a longer sample, and a slightly different delineation
between the pre-, during, and post-crisis periods. Table 2A displays the results from
a principal component analysis (PCA) of xccy rates by currency. The rates exhibit
a clear factor structure with three factors explaining most of the variation in their
term structure.

The black lines in Figure 4 show spreads between IRS and constant maturity Trea-
suries (CM T ) of matching maturities at the 20-year horizon (NOK and NZD are
not available, AUD and SEK have only partial data, and, thus, not reported). The
USD pattern is prominently discussed in the literature. We observe interesting cross-
country variation in these spreads.


3.2    Results

Fitting a term structure model to a swap curve is a standard exercise that is not
expected to yield any surprises. Table 2B shows that the LIBOR-IRS curves exhibit
a three-factor structure. Thus, we choose the dimension of the state vector zt to
be 3 in our model. We set the cost of collateral to a constant ,0 in each country,
as we faced difficulties in detecting statistically significant variation in this variable.
It ranges between 2 and 5 bps (annualized) for most countries, and clusters around
15-20 bps for AUD, CAD, and NOK. Each country-specific model fits the respective
IRS curves well.


                                            17
3.2.1    Forward bases

As one measure of fit, we report a dimension of the model that is particularly relevant
for us. The first row of Figure 2 displays the time-series of the theoretical 3-month
basis br
       0,0.25 (blue line). The column labeled `Model' in Panel A of Figure show the
summary statistics. Overall, the basis is close to zero in contrast to LIBOR basis.
The second row of Figure 2 and the column labeled `Model' in Panel B of Figure
3 report similar information for the 6-month basis br 0,0.5 . The 6-month forward rates
were not used for estimation, so this is a first glimpse of our model's extrapolation
ability. While the fit is not as good as at the 3-month horizon, br is much closer to
zero and less volatile than the companion LIBOR basis bi .


3.2.2    Xccy rates

We use the estimated SDFs M and M to construct xccy rates using Equation (5).
The third and fourth rows of Figure 2 and the column labeled `Model' in Panels C
and D of Figure 3 display the results for 5-year and 20-year contracts, respectively.
The averages implied by the model are consistent with the evidence. Nevertheless,
there are departures between the model and the data in the time-series.
Before the crisis, the observed and theoretical xccy rates are visually similar. During
the crisis, we see a broad switch in the level of X . For some currencies, like CHF,
DKK, or EUR, the switch is broadly consistent with the evidence. In some cases, like
AUD, or CAD, it is more muddled. Mechanically, the model generates the change
because our identifying assumptions allow for departures between r and i. The eco-
nomic interpretation of the specific quantitative effect is straightforward: LIBOR has
adjusted to reflect the riskiness of the banking sector. After the crisis, the relation
between the observed and the theoretical X is weaker, reflecting the fact that the
model can match the general trend in xccy rates, but not the local deviations. These
local deviations probably reflect various constraints faced by the market participants
that are not accounted for in our framework. We investigate this possibility in the
subsequent analysis.


3.2.3    Swap spreads

Figure 4 shows that swap spreads are no longer negative if Treasuries, CM T , are re-
placed by the hypothetical ones computed from our advocated discount rates, CM T .5
   5
    Although there little to no data for NOK, NZD, AUD, and SEK, we can compute the theoretical
spreads relative to CM T . All of them are positive. The DKK observed and theoretical spreads look

                                               18
Augustin, Chernov, Schmid, and Song (2020) also use a no-arbitrage model to ex-
plain negative U.S. swap spreads. Their explanation is based on credit risk of the
U.S. Treasury. Our explanation is silent about this specific channel because we are
sidestepping the modeling of government bonds. Nevertheless, we can explore the role
of credit risk by connecting yields on the hypothetical bonds to the ones on actual
bonds.

Figure 5 explores the cross-sectional impact of swap spreads on xccy rates via Equa-
tion (7). The two top panels plot the relation between the xccy rate and the spread
in swap spreads when CM T is the benchmark for 5 and 20-year maturities. We see
that the relation is weak to negative. However, when we replace CM T with CM T ,
as our framework requires, we get a strong positive relation between the two. Thus,
the differences in xccy rates are indeed determined by the "spread in spreads", i.e.,
cross-country differences in how swap rates differ from their riskless counterparts.



4     Interpretation of the evidence

This section has two main objectives. First, we relate the estimated risk-free rate to
observable variables. Second, we evaluate economic sources of xccy pricing errors.

The first objective has a dual purpose: investigating the source of the empirical
success of our model and developing economic intuition for the estimated risk-free
rate. One might worry that our results are driven by the latent cost of collateral
 , which mechanically adjusts LIBOR, as a proxy for r, so that r = r -  prices
assets correctly. That we set  to a constant should alleviate this concern as r rather
than r is doing all the work in our model. Nevertheless, we can explicitly verify if the
estimated r is closely associated with LIBOR. More broadly, it is useful to understand
the structure of effective funding rates in the fixed-income swap markets. Thus, one
would want to evaluate which variables r is related to. For that purpose, we use panel
regressions that are informative about which variables correlate contemporaneously
most strongly with r.

The second objective parallels our discussion of the Treasury basis and negative swap
spreads. While our model does not speak to these concepts directly, it makes it
easier to understand the economic sources behind these phenomena. Likewise, we
interpret xccy pricing errors as a manifestation of economic phenomena not explicitly
accounted for by our model.
very similar to the EUR ones.



                                          19
4.1     Risk-free rate

What would be an appropriate observable proxy for the effective funding rate r?
We use two approaches to address this question. First, we construct such a proxy by
theorizing about the relation between various observable rates. Second, we implement
a panel regression that allows us to consider a large number of possibly relevant
variables, and select the ones that co-move with r in a significant fashion.

Yields on Treasury bonds, y0,T , continue to serve as a natural starting point to think
about risk-free rates. We know three reasons for why that may not be a good proxy.
Dealers cannot fund themselves at government rates. Next, Treasury yields reflect a
convenience premium (e.g., Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012). Lastly, in
the post-crisis environment, Treasury yields reflect credit risk (e.g., Chernov, Schmid,
and Schneider, 2020).

With these considerations in mind, we study the following proxy for the risk free rate:

                                r0,T  y0,T + 0,T - CDS0,T ,

where  is the convenience premium and CDS is a premium on a sovereign credit
default swap. The yield and CDS information are readily available. We use the U.S.
Refcorp - Treasury spread to estimate  in the U.S. (Longstaff, 2004; Li and Song,
2019).6 Having obtained the U.S. convenience premium , we obtain the foreign 
from the Treasury basis via

                0,T = 0,T - by
                             0,T + (CDS 0,T - CDS0,T ) + (0,T - 0,T ).

As mentioned earlier, the last term is small and constant in our model. Du, Im, and
Schreger (2018) and Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig (2018, 2019) work through
similar computations in their empirical work. The key difference is that they do not
estimate country-specific  separately.

Because reliable CDS information is available only at maturities starting at 1 year,
the shortest interest rate that we can evaluate is for T = 1 year. Figure 6 plots
r0,T and its proxy r0,T . We see that the proxy is tracking the risk-free rate quite
well, but there are also evident departures. Japan is the strongest example of large
discrepancies, and Sweden is one of the better fitting ones. While there is a reasonably
close association between r and the model-implied interest rate, differences between
them are not surprising. Even if there is no noise associated with the ingredients of
   6
    The bonds of the Resolution Funding Corporation (Refcorp) are as safe as U.S. Treasuries
because its debt is effectively guaranteed by the U.S. government. The Refcorp bonds also have the
same tax treatment.

                                               20
r, it does not account for risk associated with the interbank market, and so it may
not be capturing the effective funding rates of dealers.

As the relation between the observable, the theorized, and the estimated risk-free rates
is not perfect, we investigate whether other variables are worth considering. Our can-
didates are the ingredients of r taken separately: Treasury yields, CDS premiums, and
liquidity proxies. We also consider their combinations: y +  (convenience-adjusted
Treasury), y - CDS (credit-risk-adjusted Treasury), and r itself. Furthermore, we
consider rates at which banks can fund themselves on an uncollateralized basis. This
includes LIBOR as a pre-GFC reference rate, and OIS as a post-GFC reference rate
for swap contracts. Finally, we consider a set of U.S - only variables: the effective
Federal Funds rate (EFFR) as another measure of near-money rates, the certificate
of deposit - Treasury spread as a measure of the opportunity cost of collateral (Nagel,
2016), and the interest rates implicit in S&P 500 option box spreads (Binsbergen,
Diamond, and Grotteria, 2019). We provide a detailed overview of all data sources
in the online appendix.

Table 3 provides evidence regarding the relation between changes in r and changes
in candidate variables by regressing the former on the latter at a monthly frequency.
We run regressions for individual variables and for all of them taken together. Not
all of them are available at each horizon. We focus on tenors T of 3 months and
1 year. The row MAT reflects which horizon is used for a specific regression. The
two multivariate regressions in columns (12) and (13) include all the variables that
are available at the two horizons, respectively. We run panel regressions and add
currency fixed effects to focus on the within currency variation. We add month fixed
effects to absorb common variation across currencies. The common U.S. variables are
not compatible with month fixed effects as they are absorbed by them. Thus, U.S.
variables do not appear in the multivariate regressions, and we do not use month
fixed effects in the corresponding univariate regressions.

When evaluating the univariate regressions, we focus on the magnitude of the esti-
mated coefficient (the closer to 1 the better) and the within R2 . The leading vari-
ables here are LIBOR and the convenience-adjusted Treasury with coefficients around
0.6, and R2 around 0.5. The weakest variables are the U.S.-only ones: EFFR, CD-
Treasury spread, and the option box spread with coefficients below 0.2 and R2 below
0.06. Our initial proxy for the risk free rate r occupies an intermediate position with
the coefficient of 0.48 and R2 of 0.33.

Moving to multivariate regressions, we find that, at the 3-month horizon, LIBOR and
convenience-adjusted Treasury rates are the two variables that remain significant.
This finding is supportive of our prior that interbank funding costs should also be
related to effective funding rates in swap markets. Initially, we have allowed y and 

                                          21
to appear separately, but the estimated coefficients were nearly identical, so we have
combined them into one intuitive variable with no loss in R2 . We had also included the
other candidate variables in the multivariate regression, but we subsequently removed
them because they turned out to be statistically insignificant.

At the 1-year horizon, the CDS premium emerges as a variable that is statistically
important in addition to LIBOR and the convenience-adjusted Treasury rates. The
negative coefficient is intuitive, as it implicitly adjusts Treasuries for credit risk. Re-
call, that we did not use CDS information in the 3-month regression because 3-month
CDS rates are not available. Thus, the best fit uses the same ingredients as our
theoretical proxy r, but with somewhat different weights.

It is interesting that OIS is not significant in multivariate regressions. Some might
view this as surprising in the context of common wisdom that the right discount rate
for swaps must be OIS because of collateralization. Our evidence is consistent with
Rime, Schrimpf, and Syrstad (2019) who argue that OIS contracts, being derivatives,
are not well suited for raising funds.

Figures 6 and 7 compare the estimated r with the best prediction according to the
multivariate regressions presented in columns (12) and (13) in Table 3. The pre-
dictions are for the changes, so we obtain predictions for levels by cumulating the
changes. At the 1-year horizon, the predicted r is more accurate than r and, in fact,
is very close to r. At the 3-month horizon, the prediction tracks r almost perfectly.

Evidently, the credit risk adjustment via CDS should not be one-for-one with the
Treasury yield itself. Furthermore, LIBOR is the missing ingredient in the theoretical
proxy r. One explanation for that is that the proxy is noisy and the adjustments in
CDS and LIBOR happen to soak up these errors. Alternatively, a smaller adjustment
via CDS is consistent with a view that sovereign credit risk is not the only risk
reflected in CDS premiums. Consistent with the notion of dealers' effective funding
rate, mixing in some LIBOR risk could indicate that sovereign CDS premiums also
reflect bank risk due to the two-way feedback effects between sovereign and financial
risk (Acharya, Drechsler, and Schnabl, 2014).


4.2    Is the risk-free rate different from LIBOR?

As mentioned earlier, one concern could be that LIBOR is in fact a good proxy for
the effective funding rate and, thus, all the explanatory power in the model is driven
by the latent cost of collateral. First, we can see from column (3) of Table 3 that the
regression coefficient of r on i is significantly different from one. Next, Figure 7

                                            22
compares explicitly our risk-free rate with LIBOR. It is evident that i is substantively
different from r during the post-crisis period (we set them to be similar before the
crisis as part of our identification strategy). Thus, the difference in forward basis and
xccy valuation comes from a different funding rate.

As a further characterization of the difference between the two rates, we consider
theoretical connection between this difference and swap rates X . The no-arbitrage
framework suggests that xccy rates are zero only under the strong assumption that
risk-free rates are identical to LIBOR. Thus, under the null of our model, xccy rate
deviations from zero should be positively related to the differences between observed
LIBOR rates and our model-implied effective funding rates.

We test this hypothesis by projecting in a pooled cross-section the absolute values of
the observed 5-year xccy rates on the 3-month i - r spread. We cluster standard errors
by month to account for cross-sectional dependence in the residuals. The results are
reported in Table 4.

In column (1), we find that xccy rates deviate on average about 5 bps more from
the zero benchmark when the i - r spread is greater by one percentage point. In
column (2), we add monthly time fixed effects to provide a fairer comparison across
time periods. That specification suggests a 21 bps xccy rate in absolute value for a
100 bps spread between LIBOR and r. This is economically significant, as 21 bps
corresponds approximately to the average cross-country xccy rate in the post-crisis
period.

In columns (3) and (4), we add those variables that are significant in explaining the
dynamics of model-implied interest rates, the convenience-adjusted Treasury rates
and the CDS premium. As we do not have CDS rates with a 3-month maturity, we
use the 6-month rate instead. Neither of those two variables significantly changes the
magnitude or the significance of the relation between xccy rates and i - r spreads. In
the specification in column (5), we further add currency fixed effects to soak up the
average difference in cross-country xccy rates. Even in that case, we find a positive
and statistically significant relation between xccy rates and i - r spreads.


4.3    Xccy pricing errors

We have proposed a descriptive model that does not account for any frictions. While
our fit of xccy rates is reasonable, there are pricing errors. We interpret the xccy
pricing errors as potential components of risk premiums associated with intermediary
constraints or other frictions that could be reflected in asset prices. This motivates us

                                           23
to investigate whether there is a covariation between xccy pricing errors and various
measures of financial frictions that have been developed in the literature.

We consider three broad groups of variables. First, we measure intermediary con-
straints using leverage of security broker-dealers (Adrian, Etula, and Muir, 2014,
AEM) and of bank holding companies (He, Kelly, and Manela, 2017, HKM), the
trade-weighted U.S. dollar index, which proxies for the limited willingness of interme-
diaries to provide USD funding and demand for USD associated with the convenience
of USD assets (Avdjiev, Du, Koch, and Shin, 2019; Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig,
2018), and total dealers' cash balances with the Federal Reserve. We do not report
results for the latter variable because it turns out that their coefficients are statisti-
cally insignificant. Second, we use a number of measures of uncertainty: the Jurado,
Ludvigson, and Ng (2015) real uncertainty, macroeconomic uncertainty, and financial
uncertainty measures; the Bekaert and Hoerova (2014) uncertainty and risk aversion
measures; and the CBOE VIX index. We also examine country-specific measures of
uncertainty, including the Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016) economic policy uncer-
tainty indices, implied volatility from 5x10-year swaptions, and xccy bid-ask spreads.
As none of these country-specific measures are significant, we do not report their re-
sults. Third, we use indicators of distress in the banking sector via the U.S. Treasury
over Eurodollar (TED) spread, and the LIBOR-OIS spread. The latter is available
for all countries. Details on all data sources are available in the online appendix.

Table 5 summarizes the relation between changes in xccy pricing errors and changes
in candidate variables by regressing the former on the latter at the monthly frequency.
The AEM is an exception as it is available at the quarterly frequency only. We run
panel regressions and examine the connection of changes in xccy pricing errors to the
individual variables, and to all of them together in a multivariate setting (with the
exception of AEM). We add currency fixed effects to focus on the within variation at
the exchange rate level.

Many of the variables are significant individually. Only three variables remain sig-
nificant in the multivariate regression: the HKM intermediary leverage ratio, the
U.S. dollar index, and LIBOR-OIS spread. We report our final specification of the
multivariate regression where we exclude the insignificant variables. While many of
the uncertainty measures are individually significant in univariate regressions, their
significance is soaked up by the measure of intermediary leverage and the strength of
the U.S. dollar. We check if they indeed capture the risk premiums by implement-
ing cross-sectional regressions of expected changes in the xccy pricing errors on the
beta exposures to the candidate risk factors. Specifically, we first estimate for each
currency the exposure (i.e., betas) of changes in xccy pricing errors to changes in the
intermediary leverage ratio and the U.S. dollar index. We then relate the average


                                           24
xccy pricing errors to these betas and estimate, with some abuse of language, the
"price of risk" associated with the pricing errors.

We plot the average realized changes in pricing errors against their predicted coun-
terparts based on factor exposures and risk prices in Figure 8. The predicted pricing
errors line up with xccy "returns" quite well. The estimated risk prices are statisti-
cally significant. Our cross-section is small, so the evidence is merely suggestive. The
evidence is consistent with the view that our model omits important sources of risk
premiums in these markets.

Haddad and Muir (2018) caution that a cross-sectional relation between excess returns
and factor exposures to intermediary leverage may simply reflect high excess returns
in times when dealers also happen to be constrained. They suggest to overcome this
interpretation by focusing on a cross-section of asset classes. Evidence in favor of
intermediary-based asset pricing is tied to a positive cross-sectional relation between
the cost of intermediation for a given asset class and its exposure to intermediary risk
aversion. Thus, in a last step, we conduct similar cross-sectional tests for the pricing
errors of both 5-year xccy swap rates and 6-month forward premiums.

We regress changes in pricing errors on the Haddad and Muir (2018) intermediary risk
aversion factor to estimate the exposure to intermediary risk. We then relate these
beta exposures to the proportion of turnover that is intermediated through dealers in
each corresponding market. In its 2019 triennial survey on OTC derivative products,
the Bank for International Settlement reports, by currency, how much dealers account
for the turnover in forward and swap markets, respectively.

The results in Figure 9 convey two messages. First, for all currencies, FX swaps
are on average more intermediated through dealers than FX forwards. Second, there
appears to be a positive link between the amount of dealer activity and exposure
to intermediary risk aversion for xccy swaps, while that relation is much noisier for
forward premiums. Remember that our fit of forward premiums was tight, and that
we matched the broad pattern of xccy swap rates. However, our model is not able
to eliminate all pricing errors for xccy swaps. Overall, this evidence further supports
that we omit intermediation risk premiums in our framework.


4.4    Variance decomposition

We use the results from Table 5 to better understand the relative contribution of our
model and intermediary risks to the variation in xccy rates. The pricing errors xccy
are defined as the difference between the observed (xccy d ) and model-implied (xccy m )

                                          25
xccy rates. According to column (12) in Table 5, we have that changes in the xccy
pricing errors are approximately a linear combination of changes in the intermediary
capital ratio (ICR) and changes in the level of the USD factor (U SD), with loadings
of 180.49 and -0.44, respectively.
We use these loadings to decompose the variance of xccy rates into contributions from
xccy m , ICR, and U SD. We follow Campbell and Ammer (1993), and split pairwise
covariances between the respective factors equally. We report in the first row of Table
6 the fraction of the variance of the observed xccy rate levels explained by the total
variance derived from all components. On average the three factors capture about
95.21% of the observed xccy rate variance, with some variation across currencies.
The last three rows in Table 5 provide a decomposition of the total variance into
the respective components. The contribution to the total variance from the model-
implied xccy rate is 68.33%, on average, and represents, therefore, the bulk of the
variation. The contribution of the ICR and USD represent, on average, 11.40% and
20.28% of the total variance.
Our decomposition is consistent with our earlier evidence that the model captures the
magnitudes of xccy rates reasonably well (about two thirds, to be specific), but that
there are departures from the data which can be connected to factors associated with
financial intermediary health (Adrian, Etula, and Muir, 2014; He, Kelly, and Manela,
2017; Haddad and Muir, 2018) and balance sheet costs (Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan,
2018; Andersen, Duffie, and Song, 2019; Fleckenstein and Longstaff, 2018).



5    Conclusion

In the era following the global financial crisis, prices in fixed income and exchange
rate markets have exhibited patterns that are unusual from the perspective of classical
textbook theories, and are, therefore, considered to be anomalies. Covered interest
parity has been violated, cross-currency basis swaps have traded at non-zero prices,
and swap spreads have turned negative. We examine the dynamics of all three asset
classes across G11 currencies in a unifying way using a no-arbitrage framework.
First, we assume that true risk-free rates are unobserved and latent. Second, we
assume the existence of a latent pricing kernel, implying that traded prices are con-
sistent with no-arbitrage. Third, we assume that OTC derivatives transactions are
fully collateralized and that collateral is costly.
Under these assumptions, we proceed and back out the true unobserved discount
rates from plain vanilla interest rate swap contracts. We show that the collateral-
adjusted implied discount rates consistently price forward and exchange rates and

                                          26
cross-currency basis swaps across all ten currencies. Thus, true discount rates consis-
tent with no-arbitrage can jointly reconcile CIP deviations, non-zero cross-currency
basis swap prices, and negative swap spreads.

There remain non-trivial pricing errors in xccy rates. We relate the cross-section of
these pricing errors to measures of intermediaries' leverage and their willingness to
provide USD funding. The evidence suggests that the law of one price still holds to
a first order, but that there are departures due to the constraints faced by market
participants.




                                          27
References
Acharya, Viral V., Itamar Drechsler, and Philipp Schnabl, 2014, A pyrrhic victory?
  - Bank bailouts and sovereign credit risk, The Journal of Finance 69, 2689­2739.

Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir, 2014, Financial Intermediaries and the
 Cross-Section of Asset Returns, Journal of Finance 69, 2557­2596.

Akram, Q. Farooq, Dagfinn Rime, and Lucio Sarno, 2008, Arbitrage in the foreign
 exchange market: Turning on the microscope, 76, 237­253.

Alfred Wong, Jiayue Zhang, 2018, Breakdown of covered interest parity: mystery or
  myth?, SSRN Working Paper 3146652.

Andersen, Leif, Darrell Duffie, and Yang Song, 2019, Funding Value Adjustments,
 Journal of Finance 74, 145­192.

Anderson, Alyssa, Wenxin Du, and Bernd Schlusche, 2019, Arbitrage Capital of
 Global Banks, Working Paper University of Chicago.

Augustin, Patrick, Mikhail Chernov, Lukas Schmid, and Dongho Song, 2020, Bench-
 mark interest rates when the government is risky, Journal of Financial Economics,
 forthcoming.

Avdjiev, Stefan, Wenxin Du, Cath´
                                erine Koch, and Hyun Song Shin, 2019, The Dollar,
 Bank Leverage, and Deviations from Covered Interest Parity, American Economic
 Review: Insights pp. 193­208.

Baba, Naohiko, and Frank Packer, 2009, Interpreting deviations from covered interest
  parity during the financial market turmoil of 2007-08, Journal of Banking and
  Finance pp. 1953­1962.

Baba, Naohiko, Frank Packer, and Teppei Nagano, 2008, The spillover of money
  market turbulence to FX swap and cross-currency swap markets, BIS Quarterly
  Review.

Backus, David K., Silverio Foresi, and Chris I. Telmer, 2001, Affine term structure
  models and the forward premium anomaly, The Journal of Finance 56, 279­304.

Bahaj, Saleem, and Ricardo Reis, 2018, Central Bank Swap Lines, CEPR Discussion
  Paper No. DP13003.

Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, 2016, Measuring Economic
  Policy Uncertainty, Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, 1593­1636.


                                        28
Bansal, Ravi, and Wilbur John Coleman, 1996, A Monetary Explanation of the Eq-
  uity Premium, Term Premium, and Risk-Free Rate Puzzles, Journal of Political
  Economy 104, 1135­1171.

Bekaert, Geert, and Marie Hoerova, 2014, The VIX, the Variance Premium and Stock
  Market Volatility, Journal of Econometrics 183, 181­192.

Bianchi, Javier, Juan Carlos Hatchondo, and Leonardo Martinez, 2018, International
  Reserves and Rollover Risk, American Economic Review 108, 2629­2670.

Binsbergen, Jules van, William Diamond, and Marco Grotteria, 2019, Risk free in-
  terest rates, working paper.

BIS, 2019, Global foreign exchange market turnover in 2019, Bank for International
  Settlements.

Borio, Claudio, Robert McCauley, Patrick McGuire, and Vladyslav Sushko, 2016,
  Covered interest parity lost: understanding the cross-currency basis, BIS Quarterly
  Review.

Bottazzi, Jean-Marc, Jaime Luque, Mario Pascoa, and Suresh M. Sundaresan, 2012,
  Dollar Shortage, Central Bank Actions, and the Cross Currency Basis, SSRN Work-
  ing Paper 2167716.

Boyarchenko, Nina, Pooja Gupta, Nick Steele, and Jacqueline Yen, 2018, Negative
  Swap Spreads, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 24.

Cameron, Matt, 2013, Goldman and the OIS Gold Rush, Risk Magazine June, 15­19.

Campbell, John Y, and John Ammer, 1993, What moves stock and bond markets? A
  variance decomposition for long-term asset returns, Journal of Finance 48, 3­37.

Cenedese, Gino, Pasquale Della Corte, and Tianyu Wang, 2020, Currency Mispricing
  and Dealer Balance Sheets, SSRN Working Paper 3327088.

Chernov, Mikhail, Lukas Schmid, and Andres Schneider, 2020, A macrofinance view
 of US Sovereign CDS premiums, Journal of Finance Forthcoming.

Coffey, Niall, Warren Hrung, and Asani Sarkar, 2009, Capital Constraints, Coun-
  terparty Risk, and Deviations from Covered Interest Rate Parity, Federal Reserve
  Bank of New York Staff Reports 393.

Csavas, Csaba, 2016, Covered interest parity with default risk, European Journal of
  Finance pp. 1130­1144.



                                         29
Dooley, M. P., and P. Isard, 1980, Capital Controls, Political Risk, and Deviations
 from Interest-Rate Parity, Journal of Political Economy pp. 370­384.

Du, Wenxin, Benjamin Hebert, and Amy Wang, 2019, Are Intermediary Constraints
 Priced?, Working Paper University of Chicago.

Du, Wenxin, Joanne Im, and Jesse Schreger, 2018, The U.S. Treasury Premium,
 Journal of International Economics 112, 167­181.

Du, Wenxin, and Jesse Schreger, 2016, Local Currency Sovereign Risk, The Journal
 of Finance 71, 1027­1070.

Du, Wenxin, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2018, Deviations from Cov-
 ered Interest Rate Parity, The Journal of Finance 73, 915­957.

Duffie, Darrell, 2001, Dynamic Asset Pricing Theory. (Princeton University Press).

Duffie, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1997, An Econometric Model of the Term
 Structure of Interest-Rate Swap Yields, The Journal of Finance 52, 1287­1321.

Duffie, Darrel, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1999, Modeling Term Structures of Default-
 able Bonds, Review of Financial Studies 12, 687­720.

Engel, Charles, 2016, Exchange Rates, Interest Rates, and the Risk Premium, Amer-
  ican Economic Review 106, 436­474.

Fleckenstein, Matthias, and Francis Longstaff, 2018, Shadow Funding Costs: Measur-
  ing the Cost of Balance Sheet Constraints, Working Paper University of California
  Los Angeles.

Fleckenstein, Matthias, and Francis Longstaff, 2020, Renting Balance Sheet Space:
  Intermediary Balance Sheet Rental Costs and the Valuation of Derivatives, Review
  of Financial Studies Forthcoming.

Fletcher, Donna J., and Larry W. Taylor, 1994, A Nonparametric Analysis of Covered
  Interest Parity in Long-Date Capital Markets, Journal of International Money and
  Finance pp. 459­475.

Fletcher, Donna J., and Larry W. Taylor, 1996, "Swap" Covered Interest Parity in
  Long-Date Capital Markets, The Review of Economics and Statistics pp. 530­538.

Fong, Wai-Ming, Giorgio Valente, and Joseph K.W. Fung, 2010, Covered interest
  arbitrage profits: The role of liquidity and credit risk, Journal of Banking and
  Finance.



                                        30
Frenkel, Jacob A., and Richard M. Levich, 1975, Covered Interest Arbitrage: Unex-
  ploited Profits?, Journal of Political Economy pp. 325­338.
Garleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2011, Margin-based Asset Pricing and
 Deviations from the Law of One Price, Review of Financial Studies 24, 1980­2022.
Goldberg, Linda S., Craig Kennedy, and Jason Miu, 2010, Central Bank Dollar Swap
 Lines and Overseas Dollar Funding Costs, NBER Working Paper No. 15763.
Gopinath, Gita, Emine Boz, Camila Casas, Federico J. Diez, Pierre-Olivier Gourin-
 chas, and Mikkel Plagborg-Moeller, 2020, Dominant Currency Paradigm, American
 Economic Review 110, 677­719.
Goyenko, Ruslan, Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, and Andrey Ukhov, 2011, The Term
 Structure of Bond Market Liquidity and Its Implications for Expected Bond Re-
 turns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46, 111­139.
Griffolli, Tommaso Mancini, and Angelo Ranaldo, 2011, Limits to Arbitrage dur-
  ing the Crisis: Funding Liquidity Constraints and Covered Interest Parity, Swiss
  National Bank Working Paper.
Grinblatt, Mark, 2001, An analytic solution for interest rate swap spreads, Interna-
  tional Review of Finance 2, 113­149.
Gurkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, 2007, The U.S. Treasury
 yield curve: 1961 to the present, Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2291­2304.
Haddad, Valentin, and Tyler Muir, 2018, Do Intermediaries Matter for Aggregate
  Asset Prices?, Working Paper.
Hazelkorn, Todd M., Tobias J. Moskowitz, and Kaushik Vasudevan, 2020, Beyond
  Basis Basics: Leverage Demand and Deviations from the Law of One Price, NBER
  Working Paper No. 26773.
He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, 2017, Intermediary asset pricing: New
  evidence from many asset classes, Journal of Financial Economics 126, 1­35.
He, Zhigui, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Konstantin Milbradt, 2019, A Model of Safe
  Asset Determination, American Economic Review 103, 732­770.
Hull, John, and Alan White, 2013, LIBOR vs. OIS: The Derivatives Discounting
 Dilemma, Journal Of Investment Management 11, 14­27.
Iida, Tomoyuki, Takeshi Kimura, and Nao Sudo, 2016, Regulatory Reforms and the
   Dollar Funding of Global Banks: Evidence from the Impact of Monetary Policy
   Divergence, Bank of Japan Working Paper Series No.16-E-14.

                                        31
Ivashina, Victoria, David S. Scharftstein, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2015, Dollar Funding
  and the Lending Behavior of Global Banks, Quarterly Journal of Economics 130,
  1241­1281.

Jermann, Urban J., 2020, Negative Swap Spreads and Limited Arbitrage, Review of
  Financial Studies 33, 212­238.

Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig, 2018, Foreign Safe
  Asset Demand for US Treasurys and the Dollar, American Economic Review P&P
  108, 537­541.

Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig, 2019, Foreign Safe
  Asset Demand and the Dollar Exchange Rate, Working Paper Stanford University.

Johannes, Michael, and Suresh M. Sundaresan, 2007, The Impact of Collateralization
  on Swap Rates, The Journal of Finance 62, 383­410.

Joslin, Scott, Anh Le, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2013, Why Gaussian macro-finance
  term structure models are (nearly) unconstrained factor-VARs, Journal of Finan-
  cial Economics 109, 604 ­ 622.

Jurado, Kyle, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Serena Ng, 2015, Measuring Uncertainty,
  American Economic Review 105, 1177­1216.

Keynes, John Maynard, 1923, A tract on monetary reform. (MacMillan and Co., Ltd.,
  London).

Klingler, Sven, and Suresh M. Sundaresan, 2018, How Safe Are Safe Havens?, Working
  Paper Columbia University.

Klingler, Sven, and Suresh M. Sundaresan, 2019, An Explanation of Negative Swap
  Spreads: Demand for Duration from Underfunded Pension Plans, The Journal of
  Finance 74, 675­710.

Kremens, Lukas, and Ian Martin, 2019, The Quanto Theory of Exchange Rates,
  American Economic Review 109, 810­843.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2002, The bond/old-bond spread, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 66, 463­506.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2012, The Aggregate De-
  mand for Treasury Debt, Journal of Political Economy 120, 233­267.

Levich, Richard, 2012, FX Counterparty Risk and Trading Activity in Currency For-
  ward and Future Markets, Review of Financial Economics 21, 102­110.

                                        32
Li, Wenhao, and Yang Song, 2019, The Term Structure of Liquidity Premium, working
  paper.

Liao, G., 2016, Credit migration and covered interest parity, Harvrad University
  mimeo.

Longstaff, Francis A., 2004, The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury Bond
  Prices, Journal of Business 77, 511­526.

Lou, Wujiang, 2009, On asymmetric funding of swaps and derivatives-a funding cost
  explanation of negative swap spreads, SSRN Working Paper 1610338.

Lustig, Hanno, Andreas Stathopoulos, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2019, The Term Struc-
  ture of Currency Carry Trade Risk Premia, American Economic Review 119, 4142­
  4177.

Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2019, Does Incomplete Spanning in Interna-
  tional Financial Markets Help to Explain Exchange Rates?, American Economic
  Review 109, 2208­2244.

Maggiori, Matteo, 2017, Financial Intermediation, International Risk Sharing, and
 Reserve Currencies, American Economic Review 107, 3038­3071.

McGuire, Patrick, and Goetz von Peter, 2012, The Dollar Shortage in Global Banking
 and the International Policy Response, International Finance 15, 155­178.

Na, S., S. Schmitt-Groh´
                       e, M. Uribe, and V. Yue, 2018, The Twin Ds: Optimal Default
  and Devaluation, American Economic Review 108, 1773­1819.

Nagel, Stefan, 2016, The Liquidity Premium of Near-Money Assets, Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 131, 1927­1971.

Pasquariello, Paolo, 2014, Financial Market Dislocations, Review of Financial Studies
  27, 1868­1914.

Popper, Helen, 1993, Long-term covered interest parity: evidence from currency
  swaps, Journal of International Money and Finance pp. 439­448.

Rime, Dagfinn, Andreas Schrimpf, and Olav Syrstad, 2019, Covered Interest Parity
  Arbitrage, Working Paper.

Skinner, Frank S., and Andrew Mason, 2011, Covered interest rate parity in emerging
  markets, International Review of Financial Analysis.




                                         33
Spears, Taylor, 2019, Discounting collateral: quants, derivatives and the reconstruc-
  tion of the `risk-free rate' after the financial crisis, Economy and Society, forthcom-
  ing.

Taylor, M., 1987, COvered Interest Rate Parity: A high-frequency, high-quality data
  study, Econometrica pp. 429­438.

Taylor, M. P., 1989, Covered Interest Arbitrage and Market Turbulence, Economic
  Journal pp. 376­391.

Tuckman, Bruce, and Pedro Porfirio, 2003, Interest Rate Parity, Money Market Basis
  Swaps, and Cross-Currency Basis Swaps, Lehman Brothers: Fixed Income Liquid
  Markets Research.

Wong, Alfred, David Leung, and Calvin Ng, 2016, Risk-Adjusted Covered Interest
 Parity: Theory and Evidence, SSRN Working Paper 2834798.




                                           34
Figure 1: CIP deviations for the Euro. We display the log three-month LIBOR
basis, defined as the difference between the forward-spot exchange rate premium and
the LIBOR interest rate differential in the corresponding currencies, f - s - (i$ - ie ),
and the 5-year cross-currency basis swap rate for the Euro vs. the U.S. dollar. The
swap exchanges interest payments reflecting LIBOR rates in the two countries. The
swap rate is quoted as the spread over the EURIBOR-based interest payments. The
sample period is January 2000 to December 2019. Source: Bloomberg.



   1.5
             Libor basis 3m
             Xccy 5y
      1

   0.5

      0

  -0.5

     2000             2005              2010             2015             2020




                                           35
Figure 2: Time-series of forward basis and xccy for NZD, EUR, and JPY.
In these figures, we report the time series of the forward basis (3 and 6 months, based
on LIBOR in the data and on risk-free rate in the model) or xccy rates (5 and 20
years) implied from the model and compare it with the data. The sample period is
January 2000 to December 2019. Source: Bloomberg. Similar results for other G11
currencies are provided in the online appendix.


                        (A) Forward basis 3-month maturity

             NZD                        EUR                           JPY
    1                           1                          1

    0                           0                          0

   -1                          -1                          -1
   2000       2010      2020   2000      2010      2020    2000       2010    2020

                        (B) Forward basis 6-month maturity

             NZD                        EUR                           JPY
    1                           1                          1

    0                           0                          0

   -1                          -1                          -1
   2000       2010      2020   2000      2010      2020    2000       2010    2020

                               (C) xccy 5-year maturity

             NZD                        EUR                           JPY
    0.5                         0.5                        0.5

        0                           0                          0

   -0.5                        -0.5                        -0.5

     2000     2010      2020     2000     2010     2020      2000     2010     2020

                               (D) xccy 20-year maturity

             NZD                        EUR                           JPY
    0.5                         0.5                         0.5

        0                           0                          0

   -0.5                        -0.5                        -0.5
                                          36
     2000     2010      2020     2000     2010     2020        2000    2010    2020
Figure 3: Forward basis and xccy rate. We report the mean of the forward basis
(based on LIBOR in the data and on risk-free rate in the model) and the cross-currency
basis swap rate (in bps). We also report the cross-sectional average of absolute rates,
AVG. All exchange rates are expressed as the USD price per unit of foreign currency. We
report statistics for the G10 currencies. The countries and currencies are denoted by their
usual abbreviations: Australian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF),
Danish krone (DKK), Euro (EUR), British pound (GBP), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian
krone (NOK), New Zealand dollar (NZD), and Swedish krona (SEK). The sample period is
January 2000 to December 2019. Source: Bloomberg. Tables with supporting numbers are
provided in the online appendix.


                         (A) Forward basis 3-month maturity

                                                        00-07
                                                        08-12
                                                        13-19




                         (B) Forward basis 6-month maturity




                                (C) xccy 5-year maturity




                               (D) xccy 20-year maturity



                                            37
Figure 4: Swap spread 20-year maturity. In these figures, we report the time
series of the swap spread from the model and compare it with the data. The sam-
ple is for selected G11 currencies:Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), Euro
(EUR), British pound (GBP), Japanese yen (JPY), abd U.S. dollar (USD). Because
of availability of Treasury data, Norwegian krone (NOK), and New Zealand dollar
(NZD) have no swap spread data. For the same reason, Australian dollar (AUD) and
Swedish krona (SEK) have very limited data. Danish krone (DKK) is very similar
to EUR and, thus, not displayed. The sample period is January 2000 to December
2019. Source: Bloomberg.


            CAD                        CHF                             EUR
    1.5                        1.5                      1.5     data   model
      1                          1                        1
    0.5                        0.5                      0.5
      0                          0                        0
   -0.5                       -0.5                     -0.5
     2000    2010      2020     2000   2010     2020     2000            2010   2020

            GBP                        JPY                             USD
    1.5                        1.5                      1.5
      1                          1                        1
    0.5                        0.5                      0.5
      0                          0                        0
   -0.5                       -0.5                     -0.5
     2000    2010      2020     2000   2010     2020     2000            2010   2020




                                        38
Figure 5: Cross-sectional variation in Xccy. In these figures, we report the
scatter plot corresponding to Equation (7). For each country, we remove the top and
bottom 1% for both the left-side and the right-side of the Equation and take their
respective time-series averages. "xccy rate" refers to 1 + X0,T /CM S 0,T . In Panel (A),
                                                                                      -1
"spread in swap spread" is computed by CM S 0,T /CM T 0,T · CM S 0,T /CM T 0,T
                                                         -1
whereas it is CM S 0,T /CM T 0,T · CM S 0,T /CM T 0,T  in Panel (B). The sample
is for the G11 currencies: Australian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss
franc (CHF), Danish krone (DKK), Euro (EUR), British pound (GBP), Japanese
yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), New Zealand dollar (NZD), and Swedish krona
(SEK). The sample period is January 2000 to December 2019. Source: Bloomberg.


                                       (A) Data




                                       (B) Model




                                           39
Figure 6: Comparison of 1Y Interest Rate Proxies. Each figure compares the
model-implied 1-year interest rate to the predicted one and given by r = -0.01 +
0.17 · LIBOR+0.40 · (Treasury+) - 0.24 · CDS, where LIBOR corresponds to the
country-specific Libor/interbank rate, Treasury corresponds to the country-specific
Treasury rate, and  refers to the country-specific convenience yield, computed as the
Treasury basis plus the U.S. Refcorp-Treasury spread, and CDS corresponds to the
country-specific 1-year local currency denominated CDS premium (we use the USD
denomination if the local currency CDS is not available). We use G11 currencies,
i.e., USD, JPY, GBP, CAD, EUR, AUD, CHF, NZD, SEK, DKK, and NOK. We use
Libor rates for USD, JPY, GBP, CHF, Cdor rates for Canada, Euribor rates for EUR,
BBSW rates for AUD, BKBM rates for NZD, Stibor rates for SEK, Cibor rates for
DKK, Nibor rates for NOK. The sample period is January 2000 to December 2019.
Source: Bloomberg.


               AUD                         CAD                         CHF
                                  6
   6
                                  4                          2
   4
                                  2                          0
   2
                                  0
                                                             -2
    2000 2005 2010 2015 2020      2000 2005 2010 2015 2020     2000 2005 2010 2015 2020

               DKK                         EUR                         GBP
   6                                                         6
                                  4
   4
                                                             4
   2                              2
                                                             2
   0                              0
                                                             0
    2000 2005 2010 2015 2020      2000 2005 2010 2015 2020    2000 2005 2010 2015 2020

                JPY                        NOK                         NZD
                                                             8
    1                             6
                                                             6
    0                             4
                                                             4
   -1                             2
                                                             2
       2000 2005 2010 2015 2020   2000 2005 2010 2015 2020   2000 2005 2010 2015 2020

                                           SEK                          USD
                                  4                          6
                                                             4
                                  2
                                                             2
                                  0          40
                                                             0
                                  2000 2005 2010 2015 2020    2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Figure 7: Comparison of 3M Interest Rate Proxies. Each figure compares
the model-implied 3-month interest rate to the predicted one and given by r =
-0.01 + 0.31 · LIBOR+0.38 · (Treasury+), where LIBOR corresponds to the
country-specific Libor/interbank rate, Treasury corresponds to the country-specific
Treasury rate, and  refers to the country-specific convenience yield, computed as
the Treasury basis plus the U.S. Refcorp-Treasury spread. We use G11 currencies,
i.e., USD, JPY, GBP, CAD, EUR, AUD, CHF, NZD, SEK, DKK, and NOK. We use
Libor rates for USD, JPY, GBP, CHF, Cdor rates for Canada, Euribor rates for EUR,
BBSW rates for AUD, BKBM rates for NZD, Stibor rates for SEK, Cibor rates for
DKK, Nibor rates for NOK. The sample period is January 2000 to December 2019.
Source: Bloomberg.


             AUD                         CAD                            CHF
                                                                                 Model
   6
                                4                          2                     Fitted
                                                                                 Libor
   4                            2                          0
   2                            0
                                                           -2
    2000 2005 2010 2015 2020    2000 2005 2010 2015 2020     2000 2005 2010 2015 2020

             DKK                         EUR                            GBP
    6                                                      6
                                4
    4                                                      4
    2                           2
                                                           2
    0                           0
                                                           0
   -2
     2000 2005 2010 2015 2020   2000 2005 2010 2015 2020   2000 2005 2010 2015 2020

             JPY                         NOK                            NZD
    1                                                      8
                                6
    0                                                      6
                                4
                                                           4
   -1
                                2
                                                           2
   -2
     2000 2005 2010 2015 2020   2000 2005 2010 2015 2020   2000 2005 2010 2015 2020

                                         SEK                            USD
                                4                          6
                                                           4
                                2
                                                           2
                                0
                                                           0

                                2000 2005 2010 2015 2020       2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
                                           41
Figure 8: Factor Exposure of Xccy Basis Swap Spread Deviations. For each
of JPY, GBP, CAD, EUR, AUD, CHF, NZD, SEK, DKK, we regress changes in the
spread between the observed and model-implied 5-year xccy basis swap rate on a risk
factor, i.e., xccy spreadt =  +  · RFt + t . We then project the average level of
the xccy spread on the estimated betas  . We use two risk factors: changes in the
He, Kelly, and Manela (2017) intermediary capital ratio ( HKM-ICR); changes in
the trade-weighted U.S. dollar index ( USD Factor). The sample period is January
2000 to December 2019.




                                        42
Figure 9: Factor Exposure of Xccy Basis Swap Spread and Forward Pre-
mium Deviations. For each of JPY, GBP, CAD, EUR, AUD, CHF, NZD, SEK,
DKK, we regress changes in the spread between the observed and model-implied (i)
5-year xccy basis swap rate and (ii) the 6-month forward premium on the Haddad and
Muir (2018) intermediary risk aversion factor, i.e., xccy spreadt+1 =  + RFt + t .
We then project the estimated raw betas   ^ on the fraction of foreign exchange turnover
accounted for by intermediaries. In its 2019 triennial Central Bank survey on for-
eign exchange turnover, the BIS provides information on the fraction of turnover
acccounted for by intermediaries for FX forwards and FX swaps, respectively. The
sample period is 2000Q1 to 2017Q3.




                                          43
Table 1: Cash flows from a plain vanilla and fixed-for-fixed cross-currency basis swap
Panel A in this table illustrates the cash flows generated by a stylized cross-currency basis
swap that receives the floating interest rate of it on the USD leg at each date t + 1, and pays
the floating interest rates it + X on the EUR leg at each date t + 1. The price of the cross-
currency basis swap is given by X . S indicates the USD value per unit of foreign currency.
Panel B transforms the plain vanilla cross-currency basis swap into a stylized fixed-for-fixed
cross-currency basis swap, constructed as a package of a standard cross-currency basis swap
that receives the floating interest rate of it on the USD leg at each date t + 1, and pays
the floating interest rates it + X on the EUR leg at each date t + 1. The notional face
values of the domestic and foreign legs are matched using the spot exchange rate S0 , where
S indicates the USD value per unit of foreign currency. The floating payments in each
currency are converted into fixed payments using plain vanilla interest rate swaps at prices
CM S and CM S respectively.


                          S = $1/e1                          Cash flows at time
                          XC Basis Swap        0                     t                       T



   Panel A    XC Swap     EUR Leg          + e1        - e it-1 + X      - e iT -1 + X - e1
                          USD Leg          - $S0           + $S0 it-1         + $S0 iT -1 + $S0



               e IRS      Fix Leg                          - eCM S                  - eCM S
                          Float Leg                           + eit-1                  + eiT -1
   Panel B

                $ IRS     Float Leg                         - $S0 it-1             - $S0 iT -1
                          Fix Leg                         + $S0 CM S               + $S0 CM S




                                              44
         Table 2: Factor Structure in International Anomalies - By Currency
This table reports the results from a principal component analysis (PCA). We report the cumulative
proportion of variance explained by the five first principal components (PC1 to PC5). We use G11
currencies, i.e., USD, JPY, GBP, CAD, EUR, AUD, CHF, NZD, SEK, DKK, and NOK. In Panel A,
we focus on the term structure of cross-currency basis swaps using maturities of 1y, 3y, 5y, 7y, 10y,
15y, 30y, except for NZD, which omits 30y. In Panel B, we examine the factor structure across all
interbank (LIBOR) and IRS rates. For the former we use maturities of 1m, 3m, 6m, and 1y, except
for NOK, which omits 1y. We use Libor rates for USD, JPY, GBP, CHF, Cdor rates for Canada,
Euribor rates for EUR, BBSW rates for AUD, BKBM rates for NZD, Stibor rates for SEK, Cibor
rates for DKK, Nibor rates for NOK. For the latter we use maturities of 1y, 3y, 5y, 7y, 10y, 15y, 30y.
The sample period is January 2000 to December 2019. Source: Bloomberg


   (A) XCCY           USD    JPY     GBP     CAD      EUR     AUD     CHF     NZD     SEK     DKK     NOK

   PC1                 ­     87.78   79.40   72.07    87.43   81.56   89.60   93.72   69.45   88.44   88.49
   PC2                 ­     96.30   95.94   91.13    98.01   95.17   97.74   98.12   95.13   98.29   96.45
   PC3                 ­     99.71   98.56   97.93    99.37   98.88   99.44   99.72   98.62   99.44   99.07
   PC4                 ­     99.95   99.51   99.35    99.89   99.61   99.87   99.86   99.70   99.79   99.50
   PC5                 ­     99.99   99.89   99.76    99.97   99.88   99.94   99.95   99.84   99.90   99.72

   (B) LIBOR+IRS     USD     JPY     GBP     CAD      EUR     AUD     CHF     NZD     SEK DKK         NOK
   PC1               88.89   79.30   94.24   87.65    96.26   96.31   94.52   88.85   82.17 95.22     93.03
   PC2               99.31   96.41   99.45   99.24    99.62   99.52   99.53   99.60   98.84 99.60     99.30
   PC3               99.81   98.44   99.84   99.78    99.87   99.82   99.83   99.83   99.72 99.84     99.83
   PC4               99.93   99.66   99.92   99.91    99.96   99.91   99.92   99.90   99.88 99.95     99.93
   PC5               99.98   99.83   99.98   99.96    99.99   99.97   99.98   99.95   99.96 99.98     99.97




                                                     45
                                     Table 3: Model-implied Interest Rates and Candidate Proxies
     In this table, we report results from the panel regressions where we project changes in the model-implied interest rates on changes in
     proxy candidates at matching maturities. At the country level, we use the Treasury yield, the OIS rate, the interbank rate (LIBOR),
     the Treasury convenience yield  (computed as the Treasury basis plus the U.S. Refcorp-Treasury spread), the sum of Treasury and
     convenience yield, the IRS rate, the CDS premium, the difference between the Treasury yield and CDS premium (Treasury-CDS), a
     linear combination of the Treasury yield, convenience yield, CDS premium (Treasury+-CDS). We also use common variables, namely
     the effective federal funds rate (EFFR), the certificate of deposit rate over Treasury yield spread (CD-Treasury), and the option-implied
     box spread (BOX). We use either the 3-month or the 1-year maturity. The data frequency is monthly based on the last available monthly
     information. Standard errors are robust and adjusted for heteroscedasticity. All regressions contain currency fixed effects and time fixed
     effects, and we report the within and adjusted R2 values from the panel regressions. We use the G11 currencies: USD, JPY, GBP, CAD,
     EUR, AUD, CHF, NZD, SEK, DKK, and NOK. For NOK, we lack data on OIS rates and 1y NIBOR rates. The sample period is January
     2000 to December 2019.


                           (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)      (8)       (9)      (10)     (11)     (12)      (13)
       VARIABLES           r         r         r         r         r         r         r        r         r         r        r        r         r

       Treasury          0.38***
                          (0.04)
       OIS                         0.50***
                                    (0.11)
       LIBOR                                 0.65***                                                                                0.31***   0.17**
                                              (0.05)                                                                                 (0.06)   (0.07)
                                                       0.25***




46
                                                        (0.03)
       Treasury+                                                 0.57***                                                            0.38***   0.40***
                                                                  (0.03)                                                             (0.04)    (0.05)
       EFFR                                                                0.14***
                                                                            (0.03)
       CD-Treasury                                                                   0.13***
                                                                                      (0.04)
       CDS                                                                                      0.03                                          -0.24**
                                                                                               (0.09)                                          (0.10)
       Treasury-CDS                                                                                     0.31***
                                                                                                         (0.04)
       Treasury+-CDS                                                                                              0.47***
                                                                                                                   (0.05)
       BOX                                                                                                         0.19***
                                                                                                                    (0.06)
       Constant          -0.01*** -0.01*** -0.01*** -0.02*** -0.01*** -0.02*** -0.02*** -0.02*** -0.02*** -0.02*** -0.02*** -0.01*** -0.01***
                          (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)   (0.00)

       OBSERVATIONS       2,640     2,024     2,640     2,640     2,640     2,640     2,640    1,812     1,812     1,812    1,870    2,640     1,550
       CCY Groups           11        10        11        11        11       11        11        11        11        11       11       11        10
       CCY FE             YES       YES       YES       YES       YES       YES       YES       YES      YES       YES      YES      YES       YES
       MONTH FE           YES       YES       YES       YES       YES        NO        NO       YES      YES       YES       NO      YES       YES
       MAT                 3M        3M        3M        3M        3M        3M        3M        1Y       1Y        1Y       1Y       3M        1Y
       w.R2               0.218     0.261     0.466     0.089     0.527     0.049     0.040    -0.001    0.143     0.333    0.051    0.575     0.391
       adj.R2             0.607     0.646     0.732     0.543     0.763     0.048     0.040    0.495     0.568     0.663    0.051    0.787     0.679
Table 4: Xccy Rates and Spreads between LIBOR and Model-Implied Interest Rates
In this table, we report results from the panel regressions where we project the absolute values of the
observed 5-year xccy rates ( xccy 5y D ) on the spread between LIBOR and model-implied interest
rates at the 3-month maturity (3M(i-3)). At the country level, we control for the Treasury yield
adjusted for the convenience premium (Treasury +), and the CDS premium. The data frequency is
monthly based on the last available monthly information. Standard errors are clustered by month.
We indicate whether regressions contain currency or monthly time fixed effects, and we report the
adjusted R2 values from the panel regressions. We use the G11 currencies except for the USD: JPY,
GBP, CAD, EUR, AUD, CHF, NZD, SEK, DKK, and NOK. For NOK, we lack data on OIS rates
and 1y NIBOR rates. The sample period is January 2008 to December 2019.

                                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)
         VARIABLES              xccy 5y D    xccy 5y D    xccy 5y D    xccy 5y D     xccy 5y D

         3M(i-r)                4.75***      21.10***     17.89***     18.66***      10.08***
                                 (0.85)       (1.70)       (1.54)       (1.70)        (2.65)
         Treasury+                                        -1.65***     -2.04***      2.16***
                                                           (0.31)       (0.33)        (0.80)
         CDS                                                             10.70         7.90
                                                                        (6.51)        (4.98)
         Constant               20.81***     7.84***      12.33***     12.66***      14.82***
                                 (0.81)       (1.35)       (1.38)       (1.66)        (2.33)

         OBSERVATIONS            1,405         1,405        1,405        1,269        1,269
         CCY GROUPS                10           10            10           10           10
         CCY FE                   NO            NO           NO           NO          YES
         MONTH FE                 NO           YES          YES          YES          YES
         adj.R2                  0.017         0.139        0.151        0.174        0.721




                                                  47
                         Table 5: Spread between Model-implied and Observed 5y-Xccy Basis Swap Rates
     In this table, we report results from the panel regressions where we project changes in the spread between the model-implied and the
     observed 5-year xccy basis swap rates (xccy ) on changes in proxy candidates for explanatory variables. We use the following common
     factors: the Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014) dealer leverage factor (AEM-LV2); the He, Kelly, and Manela (2017) intermediary capital
     ration factor (HKM-ICR); the trade-weighted U.S. dollar index (USD Factor); the Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015) real uncertainty
     (JNL-RU12), macroeconomic uncertainty (JNL-MU12), and financial uncertainty (JNL-FU12); the Bekaert-Horeova uncertainty (BH-
     UC) and risk aversion (BH-RA) measures; the CBOE VIX index (VIX); the Ted rate (TED). At the country level, we use the Libor-Ois
     spreads. All tenors are 5 year contracts. The data frequency is monthly based on the last available monthly information, except for
     the regression in column (1), which uses quarterly data. Standard errors are robust and adjusted for heteroscedasticity. All regressions
     contain currency fixed effects and column (11) contains time fixed effects, and we report the within and adjusted R2 values from the
     panel regressions. We use the G11 currencies excluding the USD: JPY, GBP, CAD, EUR, AUD, CHF, NZD, SEK, DKK, and NOK. The
     sample period is January 2000 to December 2019.


                          (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)        (10)       (11)      (12)
       VARIABLES          xccy      xccy       xccy        xccy         xccy       xccy       xccy       xccy      xccy       xccy       xccy      xccy

       AEM-LV2             -0.01
                          (0.08)
       HKM-ICR                     137.98***                                                                                                      180.49***
                                    (24.92)                                                                                                         (54.24)
       USD FACTOR                              -0.64***                                                                                            -0.44***
                                                (0.10)                                                                                               (0.12)
       JNL-RU12                                           -115.03***




48
                                                            (40.25)
       JNL-FMU12                                                       -61.75***
                                                                        (21.16)
       JNL-FU12                                                                    -39.92**
                                                                                    (18.39)
       BH-UC                                                                                  -0.05***
                                                                                               (0.01)
       BH-RA                                                                                             -0.03**
                                                                                                          (0.01)
       VIX                                                                                                         -0.13***
                                                                                                                    (0.03)
       TED                                                                                                                    -1.77***
                                                                                                                               (0.66)
       LIBOR-OIS                                                                                                                         -4.67*   -7.02***
                                                                                                                                         (2.61)    (2.65)
       Constant            -0.01     0.12        0.11        0.06        0.05        0.04       0.05      0.06       0.05       0.06      0.04      0.16
                          (0.26)    (0.09)      (0.12)      (0.09)      (0.09)      (0.09)     (0.09)    (0.09)     (0.09)     (0.09)    (0.10)    (0.14)

       OBSERVATIONS        691       2,228      1,635       2,354        2,354       2,354     2,344     2,344      2,354      2,354     1,773      1,301
       CCY Groups           10         10         10         10            10         10         10        10         10         10        10         10
       CCY FE              YES       YES        YES         YES          YES         YES       YES       YES        YES        YES       YES        YES
       MONTH FE            NO         NO         NO          NO           NO          NO        NO        NO         NO         NO       YES         NO
       MAT                  5Y        5Y         5Y          5Y           5Y          5Y        5Y        5Y         5Y         5Y        5Y         5Y
       w.R2               -0.001     0.015      0.047       0.009        0.009      0.003      0.021     0.005      0.016      0.008     0.010      0.084
       adj.R2             -0.014     0.012      0.042       0.006        0.006      -0.000     0.018     0.001      0.012      0.004     0.227      0.079
                          Table 6: Model-implied Variance Decomposition
This table reports the model-implied variance decomposition for the levels of 5-year xccy swaps.
Define xccy d to be the observed 5-year xccy rate in the data, xccy m to be the 5-year xccy rate
implied by the no-arbitrage model, ICR to be the He, Kelly, and Manela intermediary capital ratio
(ICR), U SD to be the USD factor in levels (USD), and var(·) refers to their variances. According
to column (12) in Table 5, we have xccy d  xccy m + 180.49 · ICR - 0.44 · U SD. We use
this expression to infer a variance decomposition for the level of 5-year xccy rates. We equally split
pairwise covariances between the corresponding factors. All ratios are reported in %. We report the
average ratios across currencies and all ratios at the currency level. We use G11 currencies excluding
USD, i.e., JPY, GBP, CAD, EUR, AUD, CHF, NZD, SEK, DKK, and NOK. The sample period is
January 2000 to December 2019.

                                         MEAN   JPY   GBP      CAD   EUR   AUD   CHF   NZD     SEK   DKK     NOK


  var(xccy m , ICR, U SD)/var(xccy d )    95.21 55.25 91.59 109.53 90.50 46.41 146.37  43.76 171.11 119.24   78.37
  var(xccy m )/var(xccy m , ICR, U SD)    68.33 79.78 57.34  55.62 71.28 48.48  79.91 100.50  53.89  83.10   53.36
  var(ICR)/var(xccy m , ICR, U SD )       11.40  9.55 18.07  14.73 11.90 39.79   8.52  -2.14   6.22   7.66   -0.32
  ar(U SD )/var(xccy m , ICR, U SD)       20.28 10.67 24.58  29.64 16.82 11.73  11.56   1.65  39.89   9.23   46.96




                                                          49
